Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -50% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P502.SGM (19-Dec-2005) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\d4rfb\documents\Epicfiles\2005\P502.SGM
Page 1 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ContentsDepartment of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service What’s New ............................... 1
Reminder ................................. 1
Publication 502 Introduction.............................. 2
Cat. No. 15002Q
What Are Medical Expenses? ................ 2
What Expenses Can You Include This
Year? ................................. 2Medical and
How Much of the Expenses Can You
Deduct? .............................. 3Dental
Whose Medical Expenses Can You
Include? .............................. 3
Expenses What Medical Expenses Are Includible?........ 5
What Expenses Are Not Includible?........... 13(Including the Health
How Do You Treat Reimbursements? .......... 15Coverage Tax Credit)
How Do You Figure and Report the
Deduction on Your Tax Return?........... 18
For use in preparing Sale of Medical Equipment or Property......... 19
Damages for Personal Injuries................ 212005 Returns
Impairment-Related Work Expenses........... 22
Health Insurance Costs for Self-Employed
Persons ............................... 22
Health Coverage Tax Credit.................. 22
How To Get Tax Help....................... 26
Index .................................... 28
What’s New
Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate al-
lowed for operating expenses for a car when you use it for
medical reasons is:
• 15 cents a mile from January 1 to August 31, 2005,
and
• 22 cents a mile from September 1 to December 31,
2005.
See Transportation under What Medical Expenses Are
Includible.
Dependent. Beginning in 2005, you will use new rules to
determine if a person qualifies as your dependent. See
Dependent under Whose Medical Expenses Can You In-
clude.
ReminderGet forms and other information
faster and easier by: Photographs of missing children.The Internal Reve-
nue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for
Internet • www.irs.gov Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missing
children selected by the Center may appear in this publica-

Page 2 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tion on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can helpUseful Items
bring these children home by looking at the photographsYou may want to see:and calling 1-800-THE-LOST (1-800-843-5678) if you rec-
ognize a child. Publication
❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
Introduction
Forms (and Instructions)This publication explains the itemized deduction for medi-
cal and dental expenses that you claim on Schedule A❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
(Form 1040). It discusses what expenses, and whose ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductionsexpenses, you can and cannot include in figuring the
deduction. It explains how to treat reimbursements and❏ 8853 Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance
how to figure the deduction. It also tells you how to reportContracts
the deduction and what to do if you sell medical property or❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Creditreceive damages for a personal injury.
Medical expenses include dental expenses, and in this
publication, the term “medical expenses” is often used to
refer to medical and dental expenses. What Are Medical Expenses?
You can deduct only the part of your medical and dental
expenses that is more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, cure, mitiga-
tion, treatment, or prevention of disease, and the costs forincome. If your medical and dental expenses are not more
treatments affecting any part or function of the body. Theythan 7.5% of your adjusted gross income, you cannot claim
include the costs of equipment, supplies, and diagnostica deduction.
devices needed for these purposes. They also includeAfter discussing the medical and dental expenses de-dental expenses.duction, this publication explains how to treat
Medical care expenses must be primarily to alleviate orimpairment-related work expenses, health insurance pre-
prevent a physical or mental defect or illness. They do notmiums if you are self-employed, and the health coverage
include expenses that are merely beneficial to generaltax credit that is available to certain individuals.
health, such as vitamins or a vacation.See How To Get Tax Help near the end of this publica-
Medical expenses include the premiums you pay fortion for information about getting publications and forms.
insurance that covers the expenses of medical care, and
the amounts you pay for transportation to get medical care.Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com- Medical expenses also include amounts paid for qualifiedments about this publication and your suggestions forlong-term care services and limited amounts paid for anyfuture editions. qualified long-term care insurance contract.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service What Expenses Can YouIndividual Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I Include This Year?
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406
Washington, DC 20224 You can include only the medical and dental expenses you
paid this year, regardless of when the services were pro-
vided. (But see Decedent under Whose Medical Expenses
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, itCan You Include, later, for an exception.) If you pay medi-
would be helpful if you would include your daytime phonecal expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver the
number, including the area code, in your correspondence.check generally is the date of payment. If you use a
“pay-by-phone” or “online” account to pay your medicalYou can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
expenses, the date reported on the statement of the finan-must be included in the address.) Please put “Publications
cial institution showing when payment was made is theComment” on the subject line. Although we cannot re-
date of payment. If you use a credit card, include medicalspond individually to each email, we do appreciate your
expenses you charge to your credit card in the year thefeedback and will consider your comments as we revise
charge is made, not when you actually pay the amountour tax products.
charged.Tax questions. If you have a tax question, visit If you did not claim a medical or dental expense thatwww.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answerwould have been deductible in an earlier year, you can filetax questions at either of the addresses listed above.Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-
Ordering forms and publications.Visit www.irs.gov/ turn, for the year in which you overlooked the expense. Do
formspubs to download forms and publications, callnot claim the expense on this year’s return. Generally, an
1-800-829-3676, or write to the National Distributionamended return must be filed within 3 years from the date
Center at the address shown under How To Get Tax Help the original return was filed or within 2 years from the time
in the back of this publication. the tax was paid, whichever is later.
Page 2

Page 3 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot include medical expenses that were paid bySpouse
an insurance company or other sources. This is true
whether the payments were made directly to you, to theYou can include medical expenses you paid for your
spouse. To include these expenses, you must have beenpatient, or to the provider of the medical services.
married either at the time your spouse received the medi-
cal services or at the time you paid the medical expenses.Separate returns.If you and your spouse live in a non-
community property state and file separate returns, each of
Example 1. Mary received medical treatment beforeyou can include only the medical expenses each actually
she married Bill. Bill paid for the treatment after theypaid. Any medical expenses paid out of a joint checking
married. Bill can include these expenses in figuring hisaccount in which you and your spouse have the same
medical expense deduction even if Bill and Mary file sepa-interest are considered to have been paid equally by eachrate returns.of you, unless you can show otherwise.
If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could not includeCommunity property states.If you and your spouseMary’s expenses in his separate return. Mary would in-live in a community property state and file separate re-clude the amounts she paid during the year in her separateturns, any medical expenses paid out of community fundsreturn. If they filed a joint return, the medical expenses
are divided equally. Each of you should include half theboth paid during the year would be used to figure their
expenses. If medical expenses are paid out of the separatemedical expense deduction.
funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paid the medical
expenses can include them. If you live in a communityExample 2. This year, John paid medical expenses for
property state, are married, and file a separate return, seehis wife Louise, who died last year. John married Belle this
Publication 555, Community Property. year and they file a joint return. Because John was married
to Louise when she received the medical services, he can
include those expenses in figuring his medical deduction
for this year.
How Much of the Expenses
Can You Deduct? Dependent
You can include medical expenses you paid for your de-You can deduct only the amount of your medical and
pendent. For you to include these expenses, the persondental expenses that is more than 7.5% of your adjusted
must have been your dependent either at the time thegross income (Form 1040, line 38).
medical services were provided or at the time you paid theIn this publication, the term “7.5% limit” is used to referexpenses. A person generally qualifies as your dependentto 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. The phrase “sub-for purposes of the medical expense deduction if both ofject to the 7.5% limit” is also used. This phrase means thatthe following requirements are met.you must subtract 7.5% (.075) of your adjusted gross
income from your medical expenses to figure your medical1. The person was a qualifying child or a qualifyingexpense deduction. relative, and
2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national or a resi-Example. Your adjusted gross income is $40,000,
dent of the United States, Canada, or Mexico. If your7.5% of which is $3,000. You paid medical expenses of
qualifying child was adopted, see Exception for$2,500. You cannot deduct any of your medical expenses
adopted child.because they are not more than 7.5% of your adjusted
gross income.
Exception for adopted child.If you are a U.S. citizen or
national and your adopted child lived with you as a mem-
ber of your household for 2005, that child does not have toWhose Medical Expenses be a U.S. citizen or national, or a resident of the United
States, Canada, or Mexico.
Can You Include?
You can generally include medical expenses you pay forQualifying Childyourself as well as those you pay for someone who was
your spouse or your dependent either when the servicesA qualifying child is a child who:
were provided or when you paid for them. There are
different rules for decedents and for individuals who are1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother,
the subject of multiple support agreements. sister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of any
of them (for example, your grandchild, niece, or
What if you are claimed as a dependent on someone nephew),
else’s return?Even if you, or your spouse if you are filing2. At the end of 2005 was:a joint return, are claimed as a dependent on someone
else’s return, you can include the medical expenses of anya. Under age 19,
person you could have claimed as a dependent if you, orb. Under age 24 and a full-time student, oryour spouse if filing jointly, were not being claimed as a
dependent on someone else’s return. c. Permanently and totally disabled,
Page 3

Page 4 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Lived with you for more than half of 2005, and d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, stepmother,
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law,4. Did not provide over half of his or her own support formother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, or2005.
e. Any other person (other than your spouse) who
Adopted child.A legally adopted child is treated as yourlived with you all year as a member of your
own child. This child includes a child lawfully placed withhousehold if your relationship does not violate lo-
you for legal adoption. cal law,
You can include medical expenses that you paid for a
child before adoption, if the child qualified as your depen-2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Qualifying child
dent when the medical services were provided or when theabove) of any other person for 2005, and
expenses were paid. 3. For whom you provided over half of the support inIf you pay back an adoption agency or other persons for2005. But see Children of divorced or separated par-medical expenses they paid under an agreement with you,
ents and Support claimed under a multiple supportyou are treated as having paid those expenses provided
agreement, later.you clearly substantiate that the payment is directly attribu-
table to the medical care of the child.
But if you pay the agency or other person for medicalSupport claimed under a multiple support agreement.care that was provided and paid for before adoption negoti-If you are considered to have provided more than half of aations began, you cannot include them as medical ex-qualifying relative’s support under a multiple supportpenses. agreement, you can include medical expenses you pay for
You may be able to take a credit or exclusion forthat person. A multiple support agreement is used when
other expenses related to adoption. See the In- two or more people provide more than half of a person’s
structions for Form 8839, for more information.support, but no one alone provides more than half.
TIP
For rules regarding what expenses you can include this
year, see What Expenses Can You Include This Year,Child of divorced or separated parents.For purposes
earlier.of the medical and dental expenses deduction, a child of
Any medical expenses paid by others who joined you indivorced or separated parents can be treated as a depen-
the agreement cannot be included as medical expenses bydent of both parents. Each parent can include the medical
anyone. However, you can include the entire un-expenses he or she pays for the child, even if the other
parent claims the child’s dependency exemption, if:reimbursed amount you paid for medical expenses.
1. The child is in the custody of one or both parents forExample. You and your three brothers each providemore than half the year, one-fourth of your mother’s total support. Under a multiple
support agreement, you treat your mother as your depen-2. The child receives over half of his or her support
dent. You paid all of her medical expenses. Your brothersduring the year from his or her parents, and
repaid you for three-fourths of these expenses. In figuring3. The child’s parents: your medical expense deduction, you can include only
one-fourth of your mother’s medical expenses. Your broth-a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree
ers cannot include any part of the expenses. However, ifof divorce or separate maintenance,
you and your brothers share the nonmedical support itemsb. Are separated under a written separation agree-and you separately pay all of your mother’s medical ex-ment, or penses, you can include the amount you paid for her
c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 months ofmedical expenses in your medical expenses.
the year.
DecedentThis does not apply if the child’s exemption is being
claimed under a multiple support agreement. Medical expenses paid before death by the decedent are
included in figuring any deduction for medical and dental
expenses on the decedent’s final income tax return. This
Qualifying Relative includes expenses for the decedent’s spouse and depen-
dents as well as for the decedent.A qualifying relative is a person:
The survivor or personal representative of a decedent1. Who is your: can choose to treat certain expenses paid by the
decedent’s estate for the decedent’s medical care as paida. Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a de-by the decedent at the time the medical services werescendant of any of them (for example, your
provided. The expenses must be paid within the 1-yeargrandchild),
period beginning with the day after the date of death. If youb. Brother, sister, or a son or daughter of either ofare the survivor or personal representative making thisthem, choice, you must attach a statement to the decedent’s
Form 1040 (or the decedent’s amended return, Formc. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sibling of either
1040X) saying that the expenses have not been and willof them (for example, your grandmother, grandfa-
not be claimed on the estate tax return.ther, aunt, or uncle),
Page 4

Page 5 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
 Qualified medical expenses paid before deathAmbulanceby the decedent are not deductible if paid with a
tax-free distribution from any Archer MSA orYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forCAUTION
!
health savings account. ambulance service.
What if the decedent’s return had been filed and theArtificial Limbmedical expenses were not included?Form 1040X can
be filed for the year or years the expenses are treated asYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
paid, unless the period for filing an amended return for thatfor an artificial limb.
year has passed. Generally, an amended return must be
filed within 3 years of the date the original return was filed,Artificial Teethor within 2 years from the time the tax was paid, whichever
date is later. You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for artificial teeth.Example. John properly filed his 2004 income tax re-
turn. He died in 2005 with unpaid medical expenses of
Autoette$1,500 from 2004 and $1,800 in 2005. His survivor or
personal representative can file an amended return forSee Wheelchair, later.2004 claiming a deduction based on the $1,500 medical
expenses. The $1,800 of medical expenses from 2005 can
Bandagesbe included on the decedent’s final return for 2005.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of medicalWhat if you pay medical expenses of a deceased supplies such as bandages used to cover torn skin.spouse or dependent?If you paid medical expenses for
your deceased spouse or dependent, include them as
medical expenses on your Form 1040 in the year paid,
Breast Reconstruction Surgery
whether they are paid before or after the decedent’s death.
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you payThe expenses can be included if the person was your
for breast reconstruction surgery following a mastectomyspouse or dependent either at the time the medical serv-
for cancer.ices were provided or at the time you paid the expenses.
Birth Control Pills
What Medical Expenses Are You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for birth control pills prescribed by a doctor.Includible?
Following is a list of items that you can include in figuringBraille Books and Magazines
your medical expense deduction. The items are listed in
You can include in medical expenses the part of the cost ofalphabetical order.
Braille books and magazines for use by a visually impaired
person that is more than the cost of regular printed edi-Abortion tions.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for a legal abortion. Capital Expenses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forAcupuncture special equipment installed in a home, or for improve-
ments, if their main purpose is medical care for you, yourYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
spouse, or your dependent. The cost of permanent im-for acupuncture.
provements that increase the value of your property may
be partly included as a medical expense. The cost of the
Alcoholism improvement is reduced by the increase in the value of
your property. The difference is a medical expense. If theYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forvalue of your property is not increased by the improve-an inpatient’s treatment at a therapeutic center for alcoholment, the entire cost is included as a medical expense.addiction. This includes meals and lodging provided by theCertain improvements made to accommodate a homecenter during treatment. to your disabled condition, or that of your spouse or yourYou can also include in medical expenses amounts youdependents who live with you, do not usually increase thepay for transportation to and from Alcoholics Anonymousvalue of the home and the cost can be included in full asmeetings in your community if the attendance is pursuantmedical expenses. These improvements include, but areto medical advice that membership in Alcoholics Anony-not limited to, the following items.mous is necessary for the treatment of a disease involving
the excessive use of alcoholic liquors.
• Constructing entrance or exit ramps for your home.
Page 5

Page 6 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Widening doorways at entrances or exits to your not have to climb stairs. The elevator costs $8,000. An
home. appraisal shows that the elevator increases the value of
your home by $4,400. You figure your medical expense as• Widening or otherwise modifying hallways and inte-shown in the filled-in example of Worksheet A.rior doorways.
• Installing railings, support bars, or other modifica-Worksheet A. Capital Expense
tions to bathrooms. Worksheet—Illustrated
• Lowering or modifying kitchen cabinets and equip-Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any,ment. of your medical expenses due to a home improvement.
• Moving or modifying electrical outlets and fixtures.
1.Enter the amount you paid for the home• Installing porch lifts and other forms of lifts (but ele-improvement..................... 1. 8,000vators generally add value to the house).
2.Enter the value of your• Modifying fire alarms, smoke detectors, and otherhome immediately after thewarning systems. improvement............ 2. 124,400
• Modifying stairways. 3.Enter the value of your
home immediately before• Adding handrails or grab bars anywhere (whether orthe improvement......... 3. 120,000not in bathrooms).
4.Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the• Modifying hardware on doors. increase in the value of your home due to
• Modifying areas in front of entrance and exit door-the improvement.................. 4. 4,400
ways.
• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1,
• Grading the ground to provide access to the resi-you have no medical expenses due to
dence. the home improvement; stop here.
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.Only reasonable costs to accommodate a home to a
disabled condition are considered medical care. Additional5.Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are
costs for personal motives, such as for architectural oryour medical expenses due to the home
aesthetic reasons, are not medical expenses. improvement ..................... 5. 3,600
Capital expense worksheet.Use Worksheet A to figure
Operation and upkeep.Amounts you pay for operationthe amount of your capital expense to include in your
and upkeep of a capital asset qualify as medical expenses,medical expenses.
as long as the main reason for them is medical care. ThisWorksheet A. Capital Expense Worksheet
rule applies even if none or only part of the original cost of
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any,the capital asset qualified as a medical care expense.
of your medical expenses due to a home improvement.
Example. If, in the previous example, the elevator in-
1.Enter the amount you paid for the home creased the value of your home by $8,000, you would have
improvement..................... 1. no medical expense for the cost of the elevator. However,
the cost of electricity to operate the elevator and any costs2.Enter the value of your to maintain it are medical expenses as long as the medicalhome immediately after the
reason for the elevator exists.improvement............ 2.
3.Enter the value of your Improvements to property rented by a person with ahome immediately before disability.Amounts paid to buy and install special plumb-the improvement......... 3. ing fixtures for a person with a disability, mainly for medical
4.Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the reasons, in a rented house are medical expenses.
increase in the value of your home due to
the improvement.................. 4. Example. John has arthritis and a heart condition. He
cannot climb stairs or get into a bathtub. On his doctor’s• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1, advice, he installs a bathroom with a shower stall on theyou have no medical expenses due to first floor of his two-story rented house. The landlord didthe home improvement; stop here.
not pay any of the cost of buying and installing the special
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5. plumbing and did not lower the rent. John can include in
medical expenses the entire amount he paid.5.Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are
your medical expenses due to the home
improvement..................... 5.
Car
You can include in medical expenses the cost of special
Example. You have a heart ailment. On your doctor’s hand controls and other special equipment installed in a
advice, you install an elevator in your home so that you will car for the use of a person with a disability.
Page 6

Page 7 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Special design.You can include in medical expenses theDrug Addictiondifference between the cost of a regular car and a car
specially designed to hold a wheelchair. You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
an inpatient’s treatment at a therapeutic center for drugCost of operation.You cannot deduct the cost of operat-addiction. This includes meals and lodging at the centering a specially equipped car, except as discussed underduring treatment.Transportation, later.
DrugsChiropractor
See Medicines, later.You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to a
chiropractor for medical care.
Eyeglasses
Christian Science Practitioner You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
eyeglasses and contact lenses needed for medical rea-You can include in medical expenses fees you pay tosons. You can also include fees paid for eye examinations.Christian Science practitioners for medical care.
Eye SurgeryContact Lenses
You can include in medical expenses the amount you payYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forfor eye surgery to treat defective vision, such as laser eyecontact lenses needed for medical reasons. You can alsosurgery or radial keratotomy.include the cost of equipment and materials required for
using contact lenses, such as saline solution and enzyme
Fertility Enhancementcleaner. See Eyeglasses and Eye Surgery, later.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of theCrutches following procedures to overcome an inability to have chil-
dren.You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
to buy or rent crutches. • Procedures such as in vitro fertilization (including
temporary storage of eggs or sperm).
Dental Treatment • Surgery, including an operation to reverse prior sur-
gery that prevented the person operated on fromYou can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay
having children.for dental treatment. This includes fees paid to dentists for
X-rays, fillings, braces, extractions, dentures, etc. But see
Teeth Whitening under What Expenses Are Not Includible,
later.
Founder’s Fee
See Lifetime Care—Advance Payments, later.Diagnostic Devices
You can include in medical expenses the cost of devicesGuide Dog or Other Animal
used in diagnosing and treating illness and disease.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a guide
dog or other animal to be used by a visually impaired orExample. You have diabetes and use a blood sugar
hearing-impaired person. You can also include the cost oftest kit to monitor your blood sugar level. You can include
a dog or other animal trained to assist persons with otherthe cost of the blood sugar test kit in your medical ex-
physical disabilities. Amounts you pay for the care of thesepenses.
specially trained animals are also medical expenses.
Disabled Dependent Care Expenses Health Institute
Some disabled dependent care expenses may qualify as
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay foreither:
treatment at a health institute only if the treatment is pre-• Medical expenses, or scribed by a physician and the physician issues a state-
ment that the treatment is necessary to alleviate a physical• Work-related expenses for purposes of taking a
or mental defect or illness of the individual receiving thecredit for dependent care.
treatment.You can choose to apply them either way as long as you do
not use the same expenses to claim both a credit and a
Health Maintenancemedical expense deduction.
Organization (HMO)
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
entitle you, or your spouse or a dependent to receive
Page 7

Page 8 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
medical care from a health maintenance organization. premiums are included in box 1 of your Form W-2. Also, do
These amounts are treated as medical insurance premi- not include on Schedule A (Form 1040) any other medical
ums. See Insurance Premiums, later. and dental expenses paid by the plan unless the amount
paid is included in box 1 of your Form W-2.
Hearing Aids Example. You are a federal employee participating in
the premium conversion plan of the Federal EmployeeYou can include in medical expenses the cost of a hearing
Health Benefits (FEHB) program. Your share of the FEHBaid and the batteries you buy to operate it.
premium is paid by making a pre-tax reduction in your
salary. Because you are an employee whose insuranceHome Care premiums are paid with money that is never included in
your gross income, you cannot deduct the premiums paidSee Nursing Services, later. with that money.
Home Improvements Long-term care services.Contributions made by your
employer to provide coverage for qualified long-term care
See Capital Expenses, earlier. services under a flexible spending or similar arrangement
must be included in your income. This amount will be
reported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.
Hospital Services
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).If you haveYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
medical expenses that are reimbursed by a health reim-the cost of inpatient care at a hospital or similar institution if
bursement arrangement, you cannot include those ex-a principal reason for being there is to receive medical
penses in your medical expenses. This is because an HRAcare. This includes amounts paid for meals and lodging.
is funded solely by the employer.Also see Lodging, later.
Insurance Premiums Medicare A
You can include in medical expenses insurance premiumsIf you are covered under social security (or if you are a
you pay for policies that cover medical care. Policies cangovernment employee who paid Medicare tax), you are
provide payment for: enrolled in Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare A
is not a medical expense. If you are not covered under• Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays, etc., social security (or were not a government employee who
paid Medicare tax), you can voluntarily enroll in Medicare• Prescription drugs,
A. In this situation you can include the premiums you paid• Replacement of lost or damaged contact lenses,for Medicare A as a medical expense.
• Membership in an association that gives cooperative
or so-called “free-choice” medical service, or groupMedicare Bhospitalization and clinical care, or
Medicare B is a supplemental medical insurance. Premi-• Qualified long-term care insurance contracts (subject
ums you pay for Medicare B are a medical expense. If youto additional limitations). See Qualified Long-Term
applied for it at age 65 or after you became disabled, youCare Insurance Contracts under Long-Term Care,
can include in medical expenses the monthly premiumslater.
you paid. If you were over age 65 or disabled when you first
enrolled, check the information you received from the So-If you have a policy that provides more than one kind of
cial Security Administration to find out your premium.payment, you can include the premiums for the medical
care part of the policy if the charge for the medical part is
reasonable. The cost of the medical part must be sepa-
Prepaid Insurance Premiumsrately stated in the insurance contract or given to you in a
separate statement. Premiums you pay before you are age 65 for insurance for
medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your dependentsNote. When figuring the amount of insurance premiumsafter you reach age 65 are medical care expenses in theyou can deduct on Schedule A, do not include any healthyear paid if they are:coverage tax credit advance payments shown in box 1 of
Form 1099-H. Also, if you are claiming the health coverage1. Payable in equal yearly installments or more often,
tax credit, subtract the amount shown on Form 8885, line 4and
(reduced by any advance payments shown on line 6 of that2. Payable for at least 10 years, or until you reach ageform), from the total insurance premiums you paid. 65 (but not for less than 5 years).
Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Plan
Unused Sick Leave Used To Pay Premiums
Do not include in your medical and dental expenses on
Schedule A (Form 1040) any insurance premiums paid by You must include in gross income cash payments you
an employer-sponsored health insurance plan unless the receive at the time of retirement for unused sick leave. You
Page 8

Page 9 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
also must include in gross income the value of unused sickLifetime Care—Advance Paymentsleave that, at your option, your employer applies to the cost
of your continuing participation in your employer’s healthYou can include in medical expenses a part of a life-care
plan after you retire. You can include this cost of continuingfee or “founder’s fee” you pay either monthly or as a lump
sum under an agreement with a retirement home. The partparticipation in the health plan as a medical expense.
of the payment you include is the amount properly alloca-If you participate in a health plan where your employer
ble to medical care. The agreement must require that youautomatically applies the value of unused sick leave to the
pay a specific fee as a condition for the home’s promise tocost of your continuing participation in the health plan (and
provide lifetime care that includes medical care. You canyou do not have the option to receive cash), do not includeuse a statement from the retirement home to prove thethe value of the unused sick leave in gross income. Youamount properly allocable to medical care. The statementcannot include this cost of continuing participation in thatmust be based either on the home’s prior experience or onhealth plan as a medical expense. information from a comparable home.
Dependents with disabilities.You can include in medi-Insurance Premiums You Cannot Include
cal expenses advance payments to a private institution for
You cannot include premiums you pay for: lifetime care, treatment, and training of your physically or
mentally impaired child upon your death or when you• Life insurance policies, become unable to provide care. The payments must be a
• Policies providing payment for loss of earnings,condition for the institution’s future acceptance of your
child and must not be refundable.• Policies for loss of life, limb, sight, etc.,
• Policies that pay you a guaranteed amount eachPayments for future medical care.Generally, you can-
week for a stated number of weeks if you are hospi-not include in medical expenses current payments for
talized for sickness or injury, or medical care (including medical insurance) to be provided
substantially beyond the end of the year. This rule does not• The part of your car insurance premiums that pro-apply in situations where the future care is purchased invides medical insurance coverage for all personsconnection with obtaining lifetime care of the type de-injured in or by your car because the part of thescribed earlier.premium for you, your spouse, and your dependents
is not stated separately from the part of the premiumLodgingfor medical care for others.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals and
lodging at a hospital or similar institution if a principal
Laboratory Fees reason for being there is to receive medical care. See
Nursing Home, later.You can include in medical expenses the amounts you payYou may be able to include in medical expenses thefor laboratory fees that are part of medical care.cost of lodging not provided in a hospital or similar institu-
tion. You can include the cost of such lodging while away
from home if all of the following requirements are met.
Lead-Based Paint Removal
1. The lodging is primarily for and essential to medicalYou can include in medical expenses the cost of removing
care.lead-based paints from surfaces in your home to prevent a
child who has or has had lead poisoning from eating the2. The medical care is provided by a doctor in a li-paint. These surfaces must be in poor repair (peeling orcensed hospital or in a medical care facility related
cracking) or within the child’s reach. The cost of repaintingto, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital.
the scraped area is not a medical expense. 3. The lodging is not lavish or extravagant under theIf, instead of removing the paint, you cover the area withcircumstances.wallboard or paneling, treat these items as capital ex-
penses. See Capital Expenses, earlier. Do not include the4. There is no significant element of personal pleasure,
recreation, or vacation in the travel away from home.cost of painting the wallboard as a medical expense.
The amount you include in medical expenses for lodg-
Learning Disability ing cannot be more than $50 for each night for each
person. You can include lodging for a person traveling withSee Special Education, later. the person receiving the medical care. For example, if a
parent is traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per night
can be included as a medical expense for lodging. Meals
Legal Fees
are not included.
You can include in medical expenses legal fees you paidDo not include the cost of lodging while away from home
that are necessary to authorize treatment for mental ill-for medical treatment if that treatment is not received from
ness. However, you cannot include in medical expensesa doctor in a licensed hospital or in a medical care facility
fees for the management of a guardianship estate, fees forrelated to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital or if that
conducting the affairs of the person being treated, or otherlodging is not primarily for or essential to the medical care
fees that are not necessary for medical care. received.
Page 9

Page 10 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The amount of qualified long-term care premiums youLong-Term Care can include is limited. You can include the following as
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040).You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for
qualified long-term care services and premiums paid for1. Qualified long-term care premiums up to thequalified long-term care insurance contracts. amounts shown below.
a. Age 40 or under – $270.Qualified Long-Term Care Services
b. Age 41 to 50 – $510.Qualified long-term care services are necessary diagnos-
c. Age 51 to 60 – $1,020.tic, preventive, therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, re-
habilitative services, and maintenance and personal cared. Age 61 to 70 – $2,720.services (defined later) that are:
e. Age 71 or over – $3,400.
1. Required by a chronically ill individual, and
2. Unreimbursed expenses for qualified long-term care2. Provided pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by aservices.licensed health care practitioner.
Note. The limit on premiums is for each person.
Chronically ill individual.An individual is chronically ill if,Mealswithin the previous 12 months, a licensed health care
practitioner has certified that the individual meets either ofYou can include in medical expenses the cost of meals at athe following descriptions. hospital or similar institution if a principal reason for being
there is to get medical care.1. He or she is unable to perform at least two activitiesYou cannot include in medical expenses the cost ofof daily living without substantial assistance from an-meals that are not part of inpatient care.other individual for at least 90 days, due to a loss of
functional capacity. Activities of daily living are eat-Medical Conferencesing, toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing, and con-
tinence. You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for
admission and transportation to a medical conference if2. He or she requires substantial supervision to be pro-
the medical conference concerns the chronic illness oftected from threats to health and safety due to se-
yourself, your spouse, or your dependent. The costs of thevere cognitive impairment.
medical conference must be primarily for and necessary to
the medical care of you, your spouse, or your dependent.Maintenance and personal care services. Mainte- The majority of the time spent at the conference must benance or personal care services is care which has as itsspent attending sessions on medical information.primary purpose the providing of a chronically ill individual
The cost of meals and lodging while attendingwith needed assistance with his or her disabilities (includ-
the conference is not deductible as a medicaling protection from threats to health and safety due to
expense.severe cognitive impairment).
CAUTION
!
Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance Medical Information PlanContracts
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid to aA qualified long-term care insurance contract is an insur-plan that keeps medical information in a computer dataance contract that provides only coverage of qualifiedbank and retrieves and furnishes the information uponlong-term care services. The contract must: request to an attending physician.
1. Be guaranteed renewable, Medical Services
2. Not provide for a cash surrender value or other
money that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or bor-You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
rowed, legal medical services provided by:
3. Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the death• Physicians,
of the insured or complete surrender or cancellation• Surgeons,of the contract, and dividends under the contract
must be used only to reduce future premiums or • Specialists, or
increase future benefits, and • Other medical practitioners.
4. Generally not pay or reimburse expenses incurred
for services or items that would be reimbursed under
Medicare, except where Medicare is a secondary
payer, or the contract makes per diem or other peri-
odic payments without regard to expenses.
Page 10

Page 11 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
incurred to allow you to work may qualify for the child andMedicines dependent care credit. See Publication 503, Child and
Dependent Care Expenses.You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
prescribed medicines and drugs. A prescribed drug is oneYou can also include in medical expenses part of the
that requires a prescription by a doctor for its use by anamount you pay for that attendant’s meals. Divide the food
individual. You can also include amounts you pay forexpense among the household members to find the cost of
insulin. Except for insulin, you cannot include in medicalthe attendant’s food. Then divide that cost in the same
expenses amounts you pay for a drug that is not pre-manner as in the preceding paragraph. If you had to pay
scribed. additional amounts for household upkeep because of the
attendant, you can include the extra amounts with your
Note. This rule applies only to the deduction for medicalmedical expenses. This includes extra rent or utilities you
expenses. It does not limit reimbursements of medicalpay because you moved to a larger apartment to provide
expenses by employer-sponsored health plans that reim-space for the attendant.
burse the cost of both prescription and nonprescription
medicines. Employment taxes. You can include as a medical ex-
pense social security tax, FUTA, Medicare tax, and stateImported medicines and drugs. If you imported employment taxes you pay for a nurse, attendant, or othermedicines or drugs from other countries, see Medicines person who provides medical care. If the attendant alsoand Drugs From Other Countries, under What Expenses provides personal and household services, you can in-Are Not Includible, later. clude as a medical expense only the amount of employ-
ment taxes paid for medical services as explained earlierMentally Retarded, under Nursing Services. For information on employment
tax responsibilities of household employers, see Publica-Special Home for
tion 926, Household Employer’s Tax Guide.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of keeping a
mentally retarded person in a special home, not the homeOperationsof a relative, on the recommendation of a psychiatrist to
help the person adjust from life in a mental hospital toYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forcommunity living. legal operations that are not for unnecessary cosmetic
surgery. See Cosmetic Surgery under What Expenses Are
Not Includible, later.
Nursing Home
You can include in medical expenses the cost of medicalOptometristcare in a nursing home, home for the aged, or similar
institution, for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents.See Eyeglasses, earlier.This includes the cost of meals and lodging in the home if a
principal reason for being there is to get medical care.Organ DonorsDo not include the cost of meals and lodging if the
reason for being in the home is personal. You can, how-See Transplants, later.ever, include in medical expenses the part of the cost that
is for medical or nursing care.
Osteopath
Nursing Services You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
an osteopath for medical care.You can include in medical expenses wages and other
amounts you pay for nursing services. The services need
Oxygennot be performed by a nurse as long as the services are of
a kind generally performed by a nurse. This includes serv-You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forices connected with caring for the patient’s condition, suchoxygen and oxygen equipment to relieve breathingas giving medication or changing dressings, as well asproblems caused by a medical condition.bathing and grooming the patient. These services can be
provided in your home or another care facility.
Generally, only the amount spent for nursing services is
Prosthesis
a medical expense. If the attendant also provides personal
See Artificial Limb, earlier.and household services, amounts paid to the attendant
must be divided between the time spent performing house-
hold and personal services and the time spent for nursing
Psychiatric Care
services. However, certain maintenance or personal care
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forservices provided for qualified long-term care can be in-
psychiatric care. This includes the cost of supporting acluded in medical expenses. See Maintenance and per-
mentally ill dependent at a specially equipped medicalsonal care services under Qualified Long-Term Care
center where the dependent receives medical care. SeeServices, earlier. Additionally, certain expenses for house-
Psychoanalysis, next, and Transportation, later.hold services or for the care of a qualifying individual
Page 11

Page 12 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
communicate over a regular telephone. You can also in-Psychoanalysis clude the cost of repairing the equipment.
You can include in medical expenses payments for psy-
choanalysis. However, you cannot include payments forTelevisionpsychoanalysis that is part of required training to be a
psychoanalyst. You can include in medical expenses the cost of equip-
ment that displays the audio part of television programs as
subtitles for hearing-impaired persons. This may be the
Psychologist
cost of an adapter that attaches to a regular set. It also may
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay tobe the part of the cost of a specially equipped television
a psychologist for medical care. that exceeds the cost of the same model regular television
set.
Special Education
TherapyYou can include in medical expenses fees you pay on a
doctor’s recommendation for a child’s tutoring by a teacherYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
who is specially trained and qualified to work with childrentherapy received as medical treatment.
who have learning disabilities caused by mental or physi-“Patterning” exercises.You can include in medicalcal impairments, including nervous system disorders.expenses amounts you pay to an individual for givingYou can include in medical expenses the cost (tuition,“patterning” exercises to a mentally retarded child. Thesemeals, and lodging) of attending a school that furnishesexercises consist mainly of coordinated physical manipula-special education to help a child to overcome learningtion of the child’s arms and legs to imitate crawling anddisabilities. A doctor must recommend that the child attendother normal movements.the school. Overcoming the learning disabilities must be a
principal reason for attending the school, and any ordinary
Transplantseducation received must be incidental to the special edu-
cation provided. Special education includes:
You can include any expenses you pay for medical care
• Teaching Braille to a visually impaired person,you receive because you are a donor or a possible donor of
a kidney or other organ. This includes transportation.• Teaching lip reading to a hearing-impaired person,
You can include any expenses you pay for the medicalor
care of a donor in connection with the donating of an organ.• Giving remedial language training to correct a condi-This includes transportation.tion caused by a birth defect.
TransportationYou cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
sending a problem child to a school where the course ofYou can include in medical expenses amounts paid forstudy and the disciplinary methods have a beneficial effecttransportation primarily for, and essential to, medical care.on the child’s attitude if the availability of medical care in
the school is not a principal reason for sending the student
there. You can include:
• Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares or ambulance service,Sterilization
• Transportation expenses of a parent who must go
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a legalwith a child who needs medical care,sterilization (a legally performed operation to make a per-
• Transportation expenses of a nurse or other personson unable to have children).
who can give injections, medications, or other treat-
ment required by a patient who is traveling to getStop-Smoking Programs medical care and is unable to travel alone, and
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for• Transportation expenses for regular visits to see a
a program to stop smoking. However, you cannot includementally ill dependent, if these visits are recom-
in medical expenses amounts you pay for drugs that do notmended as a part of treatment.require a prescription, such as nicotine gum or patches,
that are designed to help stop smoking.
Car expenses.You can include out-of-pocket expenses,
such as the cost of gas and oil, when you use a car forSurgery medical reasons. You cannot include depreciation, insur-
ance, general repair, or maintenance expenses.See Operations, earlier.
If you do not want to use your actual expenses, for 2005
you can use a standard rate of 15 cents a mile for use of a
Telephone car for medical reasons before September 1, 2005. The
standard rate allowed for use of a car when you use it forYou can include in medical expenses the cost of special
medical reasons after August 31, 2005, is 22 cents a mile.telephone equipment that lets a hearing-impaired person
Page 12

Page 13 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
 You can also include parking fees and tolls. You canVision Correction Surgeryadd these fees and tolls to your medical expenses whether
you use actual expenses or use the standard mileage rate.See Eye Surgery, earlier.
Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for medical rea-Weight-Loss Programsons during the year (2,200 miles from January 1 through
August 31 and 600 miles from September 1 through De-You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay tocember 31). He spent $250 for gas, $5 for oil, and $50 forlose weight if it is a treatment for a specific disease diag-tolls and parking. He wants to figure the amount he cannosed by a physician (such as obesity, hypertension, orinclude in medical expenses both ways to see which givesheart disease). This includes fees you pay for membershiphim the greater deduction. in a weight reduction group and attendance at periodicHe figures the actual expenses first. He adds the $250meetings. You cannot include membership dues in a gym,for gas, the $5 for oil, and the $50 for tolls and parking for ahealth club, or spa as medical expenses, but you cantotal of $305. include separate fees charged there for weight loss activi-He then figures the standard mileage amount. He multi-ties.plies the 2,200 miles by 15 cents a mile for a total of $330,You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages inand the 600 miles by 22 cents a mile for a total of $132. His
medical expenses because the diet food and beveragesstandard mileage amount is $462 ($330 + $132). He then
substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-adds the $50 tolls and parking for a total of $512.
tional needs. You can include the cost of special food inBill includes the $512 of car expenses with his other
medical expenses only if:medical expenses for the year because the $512 is more
than the $305 he figured using actual expenses.
1. The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs,
Transportation expenses you cannot include.You
2. The food alleviates or treats an illness, andcannot include in medical expenses the cost of transporta-
tion in the following situations. 3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physi-
cian.• Going to and from work, even if your condition re-
quires an unusual means of transportation. The amount you can include in medical expenses is limited
to the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-• Travel for purely personal reasons to another city for
ceeds the cost of a normal diet. See also Weight-Lossan operation or other medical care.
Program under What Expenses Are Not Includible, later.• Travel that is merely for the general improvement of
one’s health.
Wheelchair
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
Trips an autoette or a wheelchair used mainly for the relief of
sickness or disability, and not just to provide transportationYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forto and from work. The cost of operating and keeping up thetransportation to another city if the trip is primarily for, andautoette or wheelchair is also a medical expense.essential to, receiving medical services. You may be able
to include up to $50 per night for lodging. See Lodging,
Wigearlier.
You cannot include in medical expenses a trip or vaca-You can include in medical expenses the cost of a wigtion taken merely for a change in environment, improve-purchased upon the advice of a physician for the mentalment of morale, or general improvement of health, even if
health of a patient who has lost all of his or her hair fromthe trip is made on the advice of a doctor. However, see
disease.Medical Conferences, earlier.
X-rayTuition
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forUnder special circumstances, you can include charges for
X-rays for medical reasons.tuition in medical expenses. See Special Education, ear-
lier.
You can include charges for a health plan included in a
lump-sum tuition fee if the charges are separately stated orWhat Expenses Are Notcan easily be obtained from the school.
Includible?
Vasectomy
Following is a list of some items that you cannot include in
figuring your medical expense deduction. The items areYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
listed in alphabetical order.for a vasectomy.
Page 13

Page 14 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Baby Sitting, Childcare, and Nursing Funeral Expenses
Services for a Normal, Healthy BabyYou cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for funerals. However, funeral expenses may be deducti-You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you payble on the decedent’s federal estate tax return.for the care of children, even if the expenses enable you,
your spouse, or your dependent to get medical or dental
treatment. Also, any expense allowed as a childcare credit
Future Medical Care
cannot be treated as an expense paid for medical care.
Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses current
payments for medical care (including medical insurance)Controlled Substances to be provided substantially beyond the end of the year.
This rule does not apply in situations where the future careYou cannot include in medical expenses amounts you payis purchased in connection with obtaining lifetime care offor controlled substances (such as marijuana, laetrile,the type described under Long-Term Care, earlier.etc.), in violation of federal law.
Hair TransplantCosmetic Surgery
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses the
amount you pay for unnecessary cosmetic surgery. This
includes any procedure that is directed at improving the
Health Club Dues
patient’s appearance and does not meaningfully promote
You cannot include in medical expenses health club dues,the proper function of the body or prevent or treat illness or
or amounts paid to improve one’s general health or todisease. You generally cannot include in medical ex-
relieve physical or mental discomfort not related to a partic-penses the amount you pay for procedures such as face
ular medical condition.lifts, hair transplants, hair removal (electrolysis), teeth whit-
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost ofening, and liposuction.
membership in any club organized for business, pleasure,You can include in medical expenses the amount you
recreation, or other social purpose.pay for cosmetic surgery if it is necessary to improve a
deformity arising from, or directly related to, a congenital
abnormality, a personal injury resulting from an accident or
Health Coverage Tax Credittrauma, or a disfiguring disease.
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
Example. An individual undergoes surgery that for health insurance that you use in figuring your health
removes a breast as part of treatment for cancer. She payscoverage tax credit. For more information, see Health
a surgeon to reconstruct the breast. The surgery to recon-Coverage Tax Credit, later.
struct the breast corrects a deformity directly related to the
disease. The cost of the surgery is includible in her medicalHealth Savings Accountsexpenses.
You cannot include in medical expenses any payment or
distribution for medical expenses out of a health savingsDancing Lessons
account.
You cannot include the cost of dancing lessons, swimming
lessons, etc., even if they are recommended by a doctor, ifHousehold Helpthey are only for the improvement of general health.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of house-
hold help, even if such help is recommended by a doctor.Diaper Service
This is a personal expense that is not deductible. However,
You cannot include in medical expenses the amount youyou may be able to include certain expenses paid to a
pay for diapers or diaper services, unless they are neededperson providing nursing-type services. For more informa-
to relieve the effects of a particular disease. tion, see Nursing Services, earlier. Also, certain mainte-
nance or personal care services provided for qualified
long-term care can be included in medical expenses. For
Electrolysis or Hair Removal
more information, see Qualified Long-Term Care Services,
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier. earlier.
Flexible Spending Account Illegal Operations and Treatments
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts for You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
which you are fully reimbursed by your flexible spending for illegal operations, treatments, or controlled substances
account if you contribute a part of your income on a pre-tax whether rendered or prescribed by licensed or unlicensed
basis to pay for the qualified benefit. practitioners.
Page 14

Page 15 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where an item purchased in a special form primarily toInsurance Premiums
alleviate a physical defect is one that in normal form is
ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposes, theSee Insurance Premiums under What Medical Expenses
Are Includible, earlier. excess of the cost of the special form over the cost of the
normal form is a medical expense (see Braille Books and
Magazines under What Medical Expenses Are Includible,Maternity Clothes
earlier).
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for maternity clothes. Swimming Lessons
See Dancing Lessons, earlier.Medical Savings Account (MSA)
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts youTeeth Whiteningcontribute to an Archer MSA. You cannot include medical
expenses you pay for with a tax-free distribution from yourYou cannot include in medical expenses amounts paid to
Archer MSA. You also cannot use other funds equal to thewhiten teeth that are discolored as a result of age. Seeamount of the distribution and include the expenses. ForCosmetic Surgery, earlier.more information on Archer MSAs, see Publication 969,
Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored HealthVeterinary FeesPlans.
Except for the care of guide dogs for the seeing-impaired
Medicines and Drugs From Other or hearing-impaired, or for other animals specially trained
to assist persons with physical disabilities, you cannotCountries
include veterinary fees in your medical expenses.
In general, you cannot include in your medical expenses
the cost of a prescribed drug brought in (or orderedWeight-Loss Programshipped) from another country, because you can only
include the cost of a drug that was imported legally. (YouYou cannot include in medical expenses the cost of acan include the cost of a prescribed drug the Food andweight-loss program if the purpose of the weight loss is theDrug Administration announces can be legally imported byimprovement of appearance, general health, or sense ofindividuals.) However, you can include the cost of a pre-well-being. You cannot include amounts you pay to losescribed drug you purchase and consume in another coun-weight unless the weight loss is a treatment for a specifictry if the drug is legal in both the other country and thedisease diagnosed by a physician (such as obesity, hyper-United States. tension, or heart disease). This includes fees you pay for
membership in a weight reduction group and attendance at
Nonprescription Drugs and Medicinesperiodic meetings. Also, you cannot include membership
dues in a gym, health club, or spa.Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical expenses
You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages inamounts you pay for a drug that is not prescribed.
medical expenses because the diet food and beverages
Example. Your doctor recommends that you take aspi-substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
rin. Because aspirin is a drug that does not require ational needs. You cannot include the cost of special food in
physician’s prescription, you cannot include its cost in yourmedical expenses unless all three of the following require-
medical expenses. But, see Note under Medicines, earlier.ments are met.
1. The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs.
Nutritional Supplements
2. The food alleviates or treats an illness.You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of nutri-
3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physi-tional supplements, vitamins, herbal supplements, “natural
medicines,” etc. unless they are recommended by a medi-cian.
cal practitioner as treatment for a specific medical condi-The amount you can include in medical expenses is limitedtion diagnosed by a physician. Otherwise, these items areto the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-taken to maintain your ordinary good health, and are notceeds the cost of a normal diet.for medical care.
Personal Use Items How Do You Treat
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of an
Reimbursements?item ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposes
unless it is used primarily to prevent or alleviate a physical
You can include in medical expenses only those amountsor mental defect or illness. For example, the cost of a
paid during the tax year for which you received no insur-toothbrush and toothpaste is a nondeductible personal
expense. ance or other reimbursement.
Page 15

Page 16 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Insurance Reimbursement
You must reduce your total medical expenses for the year
by all reimbursements for medical expenses that you re-
ceive from insurance or other sources during the year. This
includes payments from Medicare.
Even if a policy provides reimbursement only for certain
specific medical expenses, you must use amounts you
receive from that policy to reduce your total medical ex-
penses, including those it does not provide reimbursement
for.
Example. You have insurance policies which cover
your hospital and doctors’ bills but not your nursing bills.
The insurance you receive for the hospital and doctors’
bills is more than their charges. In figuring your medical
deduction, you must reduce the total amount you spent for
medical care by the total amount of insurance you received
even if the policies do not cover some of your medical
expenses.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).A health
reimbursement arrangement is an employer-funded plan
that reimburses employees for medical care expenses and
allows unused amounts to be carried forward. An HRA is
funded solely by the employer and the reimbursements for
medical expenses, up to a maximum dollar amount for a
coverage period, are not included in your income.
Other reimbursements.Generally, you do not reduce
medical expenses by payments you receive for:
• Permanent loss or loss of use of a member or func-
tion of the body (loss of limb, sight, hearing, etc.) or
disfigurement to the extent the payment is based on
the nature of the injury without regard to the amount
of time lost from work, or
Figure 1.
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this publication.
Was any part of
your premiums
paid by your
employer?
Were your
employer’s
contributions to
your premiums
included in your
income?
Did you pay any
part of the
premiums?
NONE of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Is Your Excess Medical
Reimbursement Taxable?
• Loss of earnings. Premiums paid by you.If you pay the entire premium for
your medical insurance or all the costs of a plan similar to
You must, however, reduce your medical expenses bymedical insurance, and your insurance payments or other
any part of these payments that is designated for medicalreimbursements are more than your total medical ex-
costs. See How Do You Figure and Report the Deductionpenses for the year, you have excess reimbursement.
on Your Tax Return, later. Generally, you do not include the excess reimbursement in
For how to treat damages received for personal injury oryour gross income. However, gross income does include
sickness, see Damages for Personal Injuries, later. total payments in excess of $240 a day ($87,600 for 2005)
for qualified long-term care services.
Premiums paid by you and your employer.If both youWhat If Your Insurance Reimbursement Is
and your employer contribute to your medical insuranceMore Than Your Medical Expenses?
plan and your employer’s contributions are not included in
If you are reimbursed more than your medical expenses, your gross income, you must include in your gross income
you may have to include the excess in income. You may the part of your excess reimbursement that is from your
want to use Figure 1 to help you decide if any of your employer’s contribution.
reimbursement is taxable. You can figure the amount of the excess reimbursement
you must include in gross income using Worksheet B.
Page 16

Page 17 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Premiums paid by your employer.If your employer orWorksheet B. Excess Reimbursement
your former employer pays the total cost of your medicalIncludible in Income When
insurance plan and your employer’s contributions are notYou Have Only One Policy included in your income, you must report all of your excess
reimbursement as other income.Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of
excess reimbursement you must include in income when More than one policy.If you are covered under moreboth you and your employer contributed to your medical
than one policy, the cost of at least one of which is paid byinsurance and your employer’s contributions are not included
both you and your employer, you must first divide thein your gross income.
medical expenses among the policies to figure the excess
1. Enter the amount contributed to your reimbursement from each policy. Then divide the policy
medical insurance for the year by costs to figure the part of any excess reimbursement that is
your employer................ 1. from your employer’s contribution. Any excess reimburse-
ment that is due to your employer’s contributions is includi-2. Enter the total annual cost of the ble in your income.policy....................... 2. You can figure the part of the excess reimbursement
3. Divide line 1 by line 2........... 3. that is from your employer’s contribution by using Work-
sheet C. Use Worksheet C only if both you and your4. Enter the amount of excess employer paid part of the cost of at least one policy. If youreimbursement................ 4. had more than one policy, but you did not share in the cost
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the of at least one policy, do not use Worksheet C.
amount of the excess reimburse-
ment you must include as other Worksheet C. Excess Reimbursementincome on Form 1040, line 21.... 5. Includible in Income When
You Have More Than One
Policy
Example. You are covered by your employer’s medical
insurance policy. The annual premium is $2,000. YourInstructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount ofemployer pays $600 of that amount, which is not includedexcess reimbursement you must include as income on yourin your gross income, and the balance of $1,400 is takentax return when a) you are reimbursed under two or moreout of your wages. You receive $500 excess reimburse-health insurance policies, b) at least one of which is paid for
ment for your medical expenses. The part of the excessby both you and your employer, and c) your employer’s
contributions are not included in your gross income. If youreimbursement you receive under the policy that is from
and your employer did not share in the cost of at least oneyour employer’s contributions is figured as follows.
policy, do not use this worksheet.
Worksheet B. Excess Reimbursement 1. Enter the reimbursement from yourIncludible in Income When employer’s policy................ 1.You Have Only One Policy—
2. Enter the reimbursement from yourIllustrated own policy..................... 2.
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of 3. Add lines 1 and 2............... 3.excess reimbursement you must include in income when
both you and your employer contributed to your medical 4. Divide line 1 by line 3............. 4.
insurance and your employer’s contributions are not included
5. Enter the total medical expenses youin your gross income.
paid during the year. If this amount is
at least as much as the amount on line1.Enter the amount contributed to your
3, stop here because there is nomedical insurance for the year by
excess reimbursement............ 5.your employer................. 1. 600
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5........... 6.2.Enter the total annual cost of the
policy....................... 2. 2,000 7. Subtract line 6 from line 1......... 7.
3.Divide line 1 by line 2........... 3. .30 8. Enter employer’s contribution to the
annual cost of the employer’s policy8.4.Enter the amount of excess
reimbursement................ 4. 500 9. Enter total annual cost of the
employer’s policy................ 9.5.Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the
amount of the excess reimburse- 10.Divide line 8 by line 9. This is thement you must include as other percentage of your total excessincome on Form 1040, line 21..... 5. 150 reimbursement you must report as
other income................... 10.You must include in your gross income 30% (.30) of
11.Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the$500, or $150, of the excess reimbursement you received
amount of your total excessfor medical expenses under the policy. reimbursement you must report as
other income on Form 1040, line 2111.
Page 17

Page 18 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are covered by your employer’s health However, you do not report as income the amount of
insurance policy. The annual premium is $1,200. Your reimbursement you received up to the amount of your
employer pays $300 and the balance of $900 is deducted medical deductions that did not reduce your tax for the
from your wages. You also paid the entire premium ($250) earlier year.
for a personal health insurance policy. For more information about the recovery of an amount
During the year, you paid medical expenses of $3,600. that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier
In the same year, you were reimbursed $2,400 under your year, see Recoveries in Publication 525, Taxable and
employer’s policy and $1,600 under your own personal Nontaxable Income.
policy. The amount you must report as other income is
figured as follows.
What If You Are Reimbursed for Medical
Expenses You Did Not Deduct?Worksheet C. Excess Reimbursement
Includible in Income When If you did not deduct a medical expense in the year you
You Have More Than One paid it because your medical expenses were not more than
Policy—Illustrated 7.5% of your adjusted gross income, or because you did
not itemize deductions, do not include the reimbursement,
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount ofup to the amount of the expense, in income. However, ifexcess reimbursement you must include as income on yourthe reimbursement is more than the expense, see What Iftax return when a) you are reimbursed under two or moreYour Insurance Reimbursement Is More Than Your Medi-health insurance policies, b) at least one of which is paid for
cal Expenses, earlier.by both you and your employer, and c) your employer’s
contributions are not included in your gross income. If you
and your employer did not share in the cost of at least one
Example. Last year, you had $500 of medical ex-
policy, do not use this worksheet. penses. You cannot deduct the $500 because it is less
than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. If, in a later year,
1. Enter the reimbursement from your you are reimbursed for any of the $500 of medical ex-employer’s policy................ 1. 2,400 penses, you do not include that amount in your gross
income.2. Enter the reimbursement from your
own policy...................... 2. 1,600
3. Add lines 1 and 2................ 3. 4,000 How Do You Figure and Report
4. Divide line 1 by line 3............. 4. .60
the Deduction on Your Tax5. Enter the total medical expenses you
paid during the year. If this amount is at Return?least as much as the amount on line 3,
stop here because there is no excess Once you have determined which medical care expensesreimbursement................... 5. 3,600 you can include, figure and report the deduction on your
tax return.6. Multiply line 4 by line 5............ 6. 2,160
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1.......... 7. 240
What Tax Form Do You Use?
8. Enter employer’s contribution to the
annual cost of the employer’s policy . .8. 300 You report your medical expense deduction on Schedule
A, Form 1040. You cannot claim medical expenses on9. Enter total annual cost of the Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. An example of a filled-inemployer’s policy................ 9. 1,200 medical and dental expense part of Schedule A is shown.
10.Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the
percentage of your total excess How Do You Figure Your Deduction?reimbursement you must report as
other income.................... 10. .25 To figure your medical and dental expense deduction,
complete lines 1–4 of Schedule A, Form 1040, as follows:11.Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the
amount of your total excess Line 1.Enter the amount you paid for medical expensesreimbursement you must report as after reducing the amount by payments you received fromother income on Form 1040, line 21 . .11. 60 insurance and other sources.
Line 2.Enter your adjusted gross income from Form
1040, line 38.
What If You Receive Insurance
Reimbursement in a Later Year? Line 3.Multiply the amount on line 2 (adjusted gross
income) by 7.5% (.075) and enter the result.If you are reimbursed in a later year for medical expenses
you deducted in an earlier year, you generally must reportLine 4.If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-. Otherwise,
the reimbursement as income up to the amount you previ- subtract the amount on line 3 from the amount on line 1.
ously deducted as medical expenses. This is your deduction for medical and dental expenses.
Page 18

Page 19 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Bill and Helen Jones belong to a group medi- 3. For Betty Jones (Bill’s dependent sister), they paid
$450 for doctors and $350 for prescription medicinescal plan and part of their insurance is paid by Bill’s em-
and drugs, which totals $800.ployer. They file a joint return, and their adjusted gross
income is $33,004. The following list shows the net Bill and Helen add all their medical and dental expensesamounts, after insurance reimbursements, that Bill andtogether ($1,859 + $775 + $800 = $3,434). They figureHelen paid this year for medical expenses. their deduction on the medical and dental expenses part of
Schedule A, Form 1040, as shown.1. For themselves, Bill and Helen paid $375 for pre-
scription medicines and drugs, $337 for hospital bills,Recordkeeping. For each medical expense,
$439 for doctor bills, $295 for hospitalization insur-you should keep a record of:
ance, $380 for medical and surgical insurance, andRECORDS
$33 for transportation for medical treatment, which
totals $1,859. • The name and address of each person you paid,
and2. For Grace Taylor (Helen’s dependent mother), they
• The amount and date of each payment.paid $300 for doctors, $300 for insulin, and $175 for
eyeglasses, which totals $775. You can keep a record like the following.
000 00 0000
3,434
2,475
33,004
959
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-2)1
22
3Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38
(99) /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A&B (Form 1040).
2005
Bill and Helen Jones
Record of medical expenses
Name of each person Address of each Amount paid Date paid Transportation
you paid person you paid (mileage, taxi, etc.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
You should also keep a statement or itemized invoice
showing the following. Sale of Medical Equipment or
• What medical care was received. Property
• Who received the care.
If you deduct the cost of medical equipment or property in• The nature and purpose of any other medical ex-one year and sell it in a later year, you may have a taxablepenses. gain. The taxable gain is the amount of the selling price
that is more than the adjusted basis of the equipment or• Who the other medical expenses were for.
property.• The amount of the other medical expenses and theThe adjusted basis is the portion of the cost of thedate of payment. equipment or property that you could not deduct because
Do not send these records with your return. of the 7.5% limit used to compute the medical deduction.
Page 19

Page 20 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use Worksheet D, later, to figure the adjusted basis of theWorksheet E. Gain or Loss On the Sale of
equipment or property. Medical Equipment or
PropertyWorksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical
Equipment or Property Sold Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure total gain
or loss on the sale of medical equipment or property that you
deducted in an earlier year.Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of
medical equipment or property in one year and sold the
equipment or property in a later year. This worksheet will give
1.Enter the amount that the medical
you the adjusted basis of the equipment or property you sold.equipment or property sold for.....1.
2.Enter your selling expenses....... 2.1. Enter the cost of the equipment
or property................. 1. 3.Subtract line 2 from line 1......... 3.
2. Enter your total includible 4.Enter the adjusted basis of themedical expenses for the year equipment or property from line 5 oryou included the cost in your Worksheet D, line 12............ 4.medical expenses........... 2.
5.Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the3. Divide line 1 by line 2......... 3. total gain or loss from the sale of the
medical equipment or property......5.4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the
year the cost was included in
your medical expenses....... 4. If you have a loss, it is not deductible. If you have a gain,
it is includible in your income. The part of the gain that is a5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your
recovery of an amount you previously deducted is taxableallowable itemized deductions for
the year you purchased the as ordinary income. Enter it on Form 1040, line 21. Any
equipment or property were not part of the gain that is more than the recovery of an amount
more than your AGI for that year, you previously deducted, is taxable as a capital gain. Enterstop here. This is the adjusted it on Schedule D (Form 1040).basis of the equipment or
For more information about the recovery of an amountproperty. If your allowable
itemized deductions for the year that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier
you purchased the equipment or year, see Recoveries in Publication 525.
property were more than your
AGI for that year, complete lines Example. You have a heart condition and difficulty6 through 11............... 5. breathing. Your doctor prescribed oxygen equipment to
help you breathe. Last year, you bought the oxygen equip-6. Subtract line 5 from line 1..... 6.
ment for $3,000. You itemized deductions and included it7. Enter your total allowable in your medical expense deduction.itemized deductions for the year
the cost was included in your Last year you also paid $10,750 for deductible medical
medical expenses........... 7. services and $6,400 for other itemized deductions. Your
adjusted gross income (AGI) was $15,000.8. Divide line 6 by line 7......... 8.
Taking into account the 7.5% limit on medical expenses,9. Enter your AGI for the year the your allowable itemized deductions totaled $19,025, fig-cost was included in your medical
ured as follows:expenses.................. 9.
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7..... 10. Oxygen equipment..................... 3,000
Medical services....................... 10,75011. Multiply line 8 by line 10....... 11. Total medical expenses................. 13,750
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your 7.5% of AGI (.075 × $15,000)............. −1,125
allowable itemized deductions for Allowable medical expense deduction....... 12,625
the year you purchased the Other itemized deductions............... 6,400
equipment or property were more
than your AGI for that year, this is Allowable itemized deductions............ 19,025
the adjusted basis of the
equipment or property........ 12.
You figure your adjusted basis as shown on the filled-inNext, use Worksheet E to figure the total gain or loss on
Worksheet D.the sale of the medical equipment or property.
Page 20

Page 21 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical Worksheet E. Gain or Loss On the Sale of
Equipment or Property Medical Equipment or
Sold—Illustrated Property—Illustrated
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost ofInstructions: Use the following worksheet to figure gain or
medical equipment or property in one year and sold the loss on the sale of medical equipment or property that you
equipment or property in a later year. This worksheet will give deducted in an earlier year.
you the adjusted basis of the equipment or property you sold.
1. Enter the amount that the medical
1. Enter the cost of the equipment equipment or property sold for.....1. 2,025
or property................. 1. 3,000 2. Enter your selling expenses....... 2. 25
2. Enter your total includible 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1......... 3. 2,000medical expenses for the year
you included the cost in your 4. Enter the adjusted basis of themedical expenses........... 2. 13,750 equipment or property from line 5 or
Worksheet D, line 12............ 4. 8293. Divide line 1 by line 2......... 3. .218
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the total gain or loss from the sale of theyear the cost was included in medical equipment or property......5. 1,171your medical expenses....... 4. 1,125
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your Determining gain.The taxable gain is the amount ofallowable itemized deductions for the selling price that is more than the equipment’s adjustedthe year you purchased the
basis. You realized a gain of $1,171. In this case, the entireequipment or property were not
amount represents the recovery of an amount previouslymore than your AGI for that year,
deducted for federal income tax purposes and is taxable asstop here. This is the adjusted
ordinary income.basis of the equipment or
property. If your allowable
itemized deductions for the year
you purchased the equipment or
Damages for Personal Injuriesproperty were more than your
AGI for that year, complete lines If you receive an amount in settlement of a personal injury6 through 11............... 5. 245 suit, part of that award may be for medical expenses that
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1..... 6. 2,755 you deducted in an earlier year. If it is, you must include
that part in your income in the year you receive it to the7. Enter your total allowable extent it reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.itemized deductions for the year See What If You Receive Insurance Reimbursement in athe cost was included in your Later Year, discussed earlier.medical expenses........... 7. 19,025
8. Divide line 6 by line 7......... 8. .145 Example. You sued this year for injuries you suffered in
an accident last year. You sought $10,000 for your injuries9. Enter your AGI for the year the and did not itemize your damages. Last year, you paidcost was included in your $500 for medical expenses for your injuries. You deductedmedical expenses........... 9. 15,000 those expenses on last year’s tax return. This year you
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7..... 10. 4,025 settled your lawsuit for $2,000. Your settlement did not
itemize or allocate the damages. The $2,000 is first pre-11. Multiply line 8 by line 10....... 11. 584 sumed to be for the medical expenses that you deducted.
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your The $500 is includible in your income this year because the
allowable itemized deductions for entire $500 was allowed as a medical expense deduction
the year you purchased the last year.equipment or property were
Future medical expenses.If you receive an amount inmore than your AGI for that year,
settlement of a damage suit for personal injuries, part ofthis is the adjusted basis of the
that award may be for future medical expenses. If it is, youequipment or property......... 12. 829
must reduce any future medical expenses for these injuries
until the amount you received has been completely used.This year you sold the oxygen equipment for $2,025 and
you had selling expenses of $25. You must report on this
Example. You were injured in an accident. You suedyear’s tax return part of the $2,000 as ordinary income. To
and sought a judgment of $50,000 for your injuries. Youcompute the part of the sales price that is taxable, you
settled the suit for $45,000. The settlement provided thatmust determine the gain by subtracting the total adjusted
$10,000 of the $45,000 was for future medical expensesbasis from the selling price.
for your injuries. You cannot include the first $10,000 that
you pay for medical expenses for those injuries.
Page 21

Page 22 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Workers’ compensation.If you received workers’ com-
pensation and you deducted medical expenses related toHealth Insurance Costs for
that injury, you must include the workers’ compensation in
Self-Employed Personsincome up to the amount you deducted. If you received
workers’ compensation, but did not deduct medical ex-
If you were self-employed and had a net profit for the year,penses related to that injury, no workers’ compensation iswere a general partner (or a limited partner receivingincludible in your income. guaranteed payments), or received wages from an S cor-
poration in which you were a more than 2% shareholder
(who is treated as a partner), you may be able to deduct, as
Impairment-Related Work an adjustment to income, all of the amount paid for medical
and qualified long-term care insurance on behalf of your-
Expenses self, your spouse, and dependents.
The insurance plan must be established under yourIf you are disabled, you can take a business deduction fortrade or business, and you cannot take this deduction to
expenses that are necessary for you to be able to work. Ifthe extent that the amount of the deduction is more than
you take a business deduction for these impairment-re-your earned income from that trade or business.
lated work expenses, they are not subject to the 7.5% limitYou cannot take this deduction for any month in which
that applies to medical expenses. you were eligible to participate in any subsidized health
plan maintained by your employer or your spouse’s em-You are disabled if you have:
ployer. This rule is applied separately to plans that provide
• A physical or mental disability (for example, blind-long-term care insurance and plans that do not provide
ness or deafness) that functionally limits your beinglong-term care insurance.
employed, or If you qualify to take the deduction, use the Self-Em-
ployed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in the Form• A physical or mental impairment (for example, a1040 instructions to figure the amount you can deduct. Butsight or hearing impairment) that substantially limitsif any of the following applies, do not use the worksheet.one or more of your major life activities, such as
performing manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-• You had more than one source of income subject to
self-employment tax.ing, learning, or working.
• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or
Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.Impairment-related expenses defined.Impairment-re-
lated expenses are those ordinary and necessary busi-• You are using amounts paid for qualified long-termness expenses that are: care insurance to figure the deduction.
• Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily,If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-
tions, use the worksheet in Publication 535, Business• For goods and services not required or used, otherExpenses, to figure your deduction.than incidentally, in your personal activities, and
• Not specifically covered under other income taxNote. When figuring the amount you can deduct forlaws. insurance premiums, do not include any advance pay-
ments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H, Health Coverage
Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance Payments. Also, if you areWhere to report.If you are self-employed, deduct the
claiming the health coverage tax credit, subtract thebusiness expenses on the appropriate form (Schedule C,
amount shown on Form 8885, line 4 (reduced by anyC-EZ, E, or F) used to report your business income and
advance payments shown on line 6 of that form), from theexpenses.
total insurance premiums you paid.If you are an employee, complete Form 2106, Employee
Business Expenses, or Form 2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Em-Where to report.You take this deduction on Form 1040,ployee Business Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Formline 29. If you itemize your deductions and do not claim
1040), line 27, that part of the amount on Form 2106, line100% of your self-employed health insurance on line 29,
10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is related to your impair-include any remaining premiums with all other medical
ment. Enter the amount that is unrelated to your impair-care expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to the
ment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. Your 7.5% limit.
impairment-related work expenses are not subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies to other
employee business expenses. Health Coverage Tax Credit
Example. You are blind. You must use a reader to doThe health coverage tax credit is available to certain indi-
your work. You use the reader both during your regularviduals who receive a pension benefit from the Pension
working hours at your place of work and outside yourBenefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) or are eligible trade
regular working hours away from your place of work. Theadjustment assistance (TAA) recipients or eligible alterna-
reader’s services are only for your work. You can deducttive trade adjustment assistance (alternative TAA) recipi-
your expenses for the reader as business expenses. ents.
Page 22

Page 23 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Are reemployed not more than 26 weeks after theWho Can Take This Credit? date of separation from the adversely affected em-
ployment,You can take this credit for any month in which all of the
following were true on the first day of the month.3. Are at least 50 years of age,
4. Do not earn more than $50,000 a year in wages from1. You were an eligible:
reemployment,
a. Trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient,5. Are employed on a full-time basis, and
b. Alternative TAA recipient, or 6. Do not return to the employment from which you
c. Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) were separated.
pension recipient.
2. You paid the premium for qualified health insurancePBGC Pension Recipientcoverage for yourself. See Qualified Health Insur-
ance, later. You were an eligible PBGC pension recipient on the first
day of the month, if both of the following apply.3. You were not imprisoned under federal, state, or
local authority. 1. You were age 55 or older on the first day of the
4. You did not have other specified coverage. See month.
Other Specified Coverage, later. 2. You received a benefit for that month that was paid
by the PBGC under title IV of the Employee Retire-
ment Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA).No credit if exemption claimed by another taxpayer.
You cannot take this credit if you can be claimed as an
exemption on someone else’s tax return. Lump-sum payment. Item (2) above will also apply if you
received a lump-sum payment from the PBGC after August
5, 2002, for any month that you would have received a
TAA Recipient PBGC benefit if you had not received a lump-sum pay-
ment.You were an eligible TAA recipient on the first day of the
month if, for any day in that month or the prior month, you:
Qualifying Family Member• Received a trade readjustment allowance, or
You can include the premiums you pay for qualified health• Would have been entitled to receive such an allow-insurance for qualifying family members in figuring yourance except that you had not exhausted all rights tocredit. A qualifying family member is:any unemployment insurance (except additional
compensation that is funded by a state and is not• Your spouse (but see Married persons filing sepa-reimbursed from any federal funds) to which you rate returns below), orwere entitled (or would be entitled if you applied).
• Anyone whom you can claim as a dependent on
your tax return. (For children whose parents are di-Example. You received a trade readjustment allow- vorced, see Children of divorced parents, later.)ance for January 2005. You were an eligible TAA recipient
However, if any otherwise qualifying family member hason the first day of January and February.
other specified coverage (defined later), then that person is
not a qualifying family member.
Alternative TAA Recipient
Married persons filing separate returns.Your spouse isYou were an eligible alternative TAA recipient on the firstnot treated as a qualifying family member if:day of the month if, for that month or the prior month, you
received benefits under an alternative trade adjustment• You are married on the last day of the year,
assistance program for older workers established by the• Your spouse was an eligible TAA recipient, alterna-Department of Labor. tive TAA recipient, or PBGC pension recipient during
the year, andExample. You received benefits under an alternative
trade adjustment assistance program for older workers for• You file a separate return for the year.
October 2005. The program was established by the De-
partment of Labor. You were an eligible alternative TAAMarried and living apart.You are not considered mar-
recipient on the first day of October and November.ried on the last day of the year if all of the following apply.
• You file a separate return.Alternative TAA workers.If you are an eligible alterna-
tive TAA recipient, you are eligible for this credit for a• Your home is the home for more than half the year
period up to 2 years if you: of a dependent under age 13 or a dependent who is
physically or mentally not able to care for himself or
1. Are covered by a qualifying certification, herself.
Page 23

Page 24 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You pay more than half the cost of keeping up your benefit as an eligible individual (defined earlier). For
home for the year. this purpose, coverage under an individual health
insurance policy includes medical insurance offered• Your spouse does not live in your home for the last 6to individuals and their families, but does not includemonths of the year. coverage under a federal, state, or other group
health insurance policy.Legally separated.You are not considered married if
you are legally separated from your spouse under a decree
of divorce or separate maintenance. You can claim theState-qualified health insurance.The following health
credit on a separate return. insurance qualifies for the credit to the extent the sponsor-
ing state elects to have it apply.Children of divorced parents.You may be able to take
• State-based continuation coverage provided by thethe credit based on amounts paid for qualified health insur-
state under a state law that requires such coverage.ance expenses of your child even if the child is not your
dependent. If your child is not your dependent, he or she is• Coverage offered through a qualified state high-riska qualifying family member only if all of the following apply.pool.
• The parents are divorced or legally separated or• Coverage under a health insurance program offeredlived apart at all times during the last 6 months of theto state employees or a similar state-based healthyear. insurance program.
• The child received over half of his or her support for• Coverage through an arrangement entered into bythe year from the parents (without regard to the rulesthe state and a group health plan, an issuer of healthon multiple support agreements). See Support insurance coverage, an administrator, or an em-claimed under a multiple support agreement earlier. ployer.
• The child is in custody of one or both of the parents• Coverage offered through a state arrangement withfor more than half of the year. a private sector health care coverage purchasing
• A decree of divorce or separate maintenance or writ-pool.
ten separation agreement that applies to 2005 pro-• Coverage under a state-operated health plan thatvides that (a) the noncustodial parent can claim thedoes not receive any federal financial participation.exemption for the child, or (b) the custodial parent
will sign a written declaration that he or she will notTo find out which plans are qualified for your state, youclaim the child as a dependent for 2005. If the di-can:vorce or separation agreement went into effect
before 1985, this requirement is met if the noncus-• Visit the website, www.irs.gov, type “hctc” in the IRS
todial parent provides at least $600 for the support ofkeyword box, click on “go,” and then under Re-
the child for the year. sources, click on A list of Qualified Health Plans
organized by state, orThe noncustodial parent is the parent with whom the
• You can call 1-866-628-4282 (tollfree) (or TDD/TTYchild lived for the lesser portion of the year.
1-866-626-4282) between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.If this exception applies, the other parent cannot treat
central time, Monday through Friday.the child as a qualifying family member for purposes of the
HCTC, even though that parent claims the child as a
dependent.
If you can treat the child as a qualifying family member
Nonqualified Health Insurance
for purposes of the HCTC, even though you do not claim
The following health insurance does not qualify for thethe child as your dependent, the child must also meet all of
credit.the other conditions of a qualifying family member.
1. Medicare supplemental (Medigap) insurance, TricareQualified Health Insurance supplemental insurance, or similar supplemental in-
surance to an employer-sponsored group healthThe following health insurance qualifies for the credit.
plan.
• COBRA continuation coverage. (This is coverage
2. Any insurance if substantially all of the coverage is:that employers with 20 or more employees must
offer to employees or former employees and their a. Coverage for on-site medical clinics,beneficiaries who have lost coverage because of
b. Hospital indemnity or other fixed indemnity insur-certain events.)
ance,• Coverage under a group health plan that is available
c. Accident or disability income insurance (or a com-through the employment of your spouse. (But see
Other Specified Coverage, later.) bination of the two),
• Coverage under an individual health insurance pol-d. Liability insurance,
icy if you were covered during the entire 30-day e. A supplement to liability insurance,period that ends on the date you separated from the
employment which qualified you for the allowance or f. Workers’ compensation or similar insurance,
Page 24

Page 25 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
g. Automobile medical payment insurance, listed earlier under (1) or (2) under Nonqualified
Health Insurance) if at least 50% of the cost of theh. Credit-only insurance, coverage is paid by an employer (or former em-
i. Limited scope dental or vision benefits, ployer) of you or your spouse.
j. Benefits for long-term care, nursing home care,2. Any of the following government health programs:
home health care, community-based care (or any
a. Medicare Part A or Part B,combination), or
b. Medicaid, or the State Children’s Health Insur-k. Coverage for only a specified disease or illness.
ance Program (SCHIP),
3. Coverage under a flexible spending or similar ar-c. The Federal Employees Health Benefit Plan
rangement. (FEHBP), or
d. Tricare, the medical and dental care program forInsurance that covers other individuals.If you have members and certain former members of the uni-qualified health insurance that covers anyone besides formed services and their dependents.yourself and your qualifying family member(s), (defined
earlier), you may not be able to take into account all of your
payments. You cannot treat an amount as paid for insur-Benefits from the Veterans Administration.Entitle-
ance for yourself and qualifying family members unless allment to or receipt of benefits from the Veterans Adminis-
of the following requirements are met. tration is not other specified coverage.
• The charge for insurance for yourself and qualifying Two important points here are that you are not
family members is either separately stated in the entitled to the credit for a month, if on the first day
contract or furnished to you by the insurance com- of that month, you are either:CAUTION
!
pany in a separate statement.
• The amount you paid for insurance for yourself and1. Covered by Medicare, or
qualifying family members is not more than the 2. Covered by a group health plan available throughcharge that is stated in the contract or furnished byyour or your spouse’s employer and the em-the insurance company. ployer contributes 50% or more of the premium.
• The amount stated in the contract or furnished by
the insurance company is not unreasonably large in
relation to the total charges under the contract.
How To Report
To claim the credit, complete Form 8885, Health Coverage
Eligible Coverage Month Tax Credit, and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form
1040NR. Report the credit on Form 1040, line 70, or FormEligibility for the credit is determined on a monthly basis.1040NR, line 64, and check box c. You cannot claim theAn eligible coverage month is any month in which, as of thecredit on Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.first day of the month, you: You must attach invoices and proof of payment for any
amounts you include on Form 8885, line 2, for which you1. Are an eligible TAA recipient, eligible alternative TAAdid not receive an advance payment. If you file your returnrecipient, or eligible PBGC recipient (see TAA Recip- electronically, attach the invoices and proof of payment toient, Alternative TAA Recipient or PBGC Pension your Form 8453 or 8453-OL. Proof of payment may includeRecipient earlier), a pay stub if insurance is through a spouse’s employment,
2. Are covered by qualified health insurance (defineda bank check, or bank statement for premiums that are
earlier) that you pay for, automatically deducted from your account.
If you claim this credit, you cannot take the same ex-3. Do not have other specified coverage (defined later),penses that you use to figure your health coverage taxand credit into account in determining your:
4. Are not imprisoned under federal, state, or local au-
• Medical and dental expenses on Schedule A (Formthority.
1040),If you file a joint return, only one spouse has to satisfy the
• Self-employed health insurance deduction, orrequirements.
• Archer Medical Savings Account (MSA) distributions.
Other Specified Coverage
Even if you are otherwise eligible, you are not eligible forRefundable Credit
the credit for a month if, as of the first day of the month, you
The HCTC credit is refundable. You may claim the fullhave other specified coverage. Other specified coverage is
credit even if you do not owe any taxes or earn any income.coverage under the following.
To get the credit, you must:
1. Any insurance which constitutes medical care (un-
less substantially all of that insurance is for benefits 1. Qualify for the credit, and
Page 25

Page 26 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. File a tax return, even if you: Free tax services.To find out what services are avail-
able, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Services.a. Do not owe any tax, It contains a list of free tax publications and an index of tax
topics. It also describes other free tax information services,b. Did not earn enough money to file a return, or
including tax education and assistance programs and a listc. Did not have income taxes withheld from yourof TeleTax topics.pay.
Internet. You can access the IRS website 24
hours a day, 7 days a week, at www.irs.gov to:See How To Report earlier for instructions on how to
claim this credit.
• E-file your return. Find out about commercial taxAdvance Payments
preparation and e-file services available free to eli-
You can either take this credit on your tax return or have itgible taxpayers.
paid on your behalf in advance to your insurance company.• Check the status of your 2005 refund. Click on
Your payments and any payments paid on your behalf in Where’s My Refund. Be sure to wait at least 6
advance are treated as having been made on the first dayweeks from the date you filed your return (3 weeks
of the month for which they are made. if you filed electronically). Have your 2005 tax re-You can get your credit in advance by calling the HCTCturn available because you will need to know yourcustomer contact center at 1-866-628-4282 (tollfree) (orsocial security number, your filing status, and theTDD/TTY 1-866-626-4282) between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 exact whole dollar amount of your refund.p.m. central time, Monday through Friday, to register. The• Download forms, instructions, and publications.Treasury Department will pay your insurer 65% of your
• Order IRS products online.health insurance premiums as you pay the remaining 35%.
• Research your tax questions online.The amount of credit you can claim on your tax return
will be reduced by the amount of any credit paid in advance• Search publications online by topic or keyword.
on your behalf. If you received National Emergency Grant• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published in(NEG) payments during 2005 for qualified health insur-the last few years.ance, those payments will also reduce the amount of the• Figure your withholding allowances using our Formcredit you can claim. W-4 calculator.
• Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
email.How To Get Tax Help • Get information on starting and operating a small
business.You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa-Phone. Many services are available by phone.
tion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method
that is best for you, you will have quick and easy access to
tax help.
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. CallContacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you have at- 1-800-829-3676 to order current-year forms, in-tempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully, youstructions, and publications and prior-year formsshould contact your Taxpayer Advocate. and instructions. You should receive your orderThe Taxpayer Advocate independently represents your within 10 days.interests and concerns within the IRS by protecting your
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your taxrights and resolving problems that have not been fixed
questions at 1-800-829-1040.through normal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-
not change the tax law or make a technical tax decision,• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help
they can clear up problems that resulted from previoussolving tax problems every business day in IRS
contacts and ensure that your case is given a completeTaxpayer Assistance Centers. An employee can
and impartial review. explain IRS letters, request adjustments to your ac-
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate: count, or help you set up a payment plan. Call your
local Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appoint-• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at ment. To find the number, go to www.irs.gov/local-1-877-777-4778. contacts or look in the phone book under United
• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office inStates Government, Internal Revenue Service.your area. • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/
TDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a TTY/TDD user.
questions or to order forms and publications.• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 and press 2 to
listen to pre-recorded messages covering variousFor more information, see Publication 1546, How To Get
tax topics.Help With Unresolved Tax Problems (now available in
• Refund information. If you would like to check theChinese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese, in addition to
English and Spanish). status of your 2005 refund, call 1-800-829-4477
Page 26

Page 27 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and press 1 for automated refund information or
call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6 National Distribution Center
weeks from the date you filed your return (3 weeks P.O. Box 8903
if you filed electronically). Have your 2005 tax re- Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
turn available because you will need to know your CD-ROM for tax products. You can order Pub-social security number, your filing status, and the lication 1796, IRS Tax Products CD-ROM, andexact whole dollar amount of your refund. obtain:
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To • A CD that is released twice so you have the latestensure that IRS representatives give accurate, courteous,products. The first release ships in late Decemberand professional answers, we use several methods to and the final release ships in late February.evaluate the quality of our telephone services. One method
• Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.is for a second IRS representative to sometimes listen in
on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.
to complete a short survey at the end of the call. • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding
aid.Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-
• Tax law frequently asked questions (FAQs).able on a walk-in basis.
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys-
tem.
• Products. You can walk in to many post offices, • Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,• Internal Revenue Bulletins.instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices,• Toll-free and email technical support.libraries, grocery stores, copy centers, city andBuy the CD-ROM from National Technical Informationcounty government offices, credit unions, and officeService (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $25 (no han-supply stores have a collection of products avail-dling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy theable to print from a CD-ROM or photocopy fromCD-ROM for $25 (plus a $5 handling fee).reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS offices and
libraries have the Internal Revenue Code, regula- CD-ROM for small businesses. Publication
tions, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative 3207, The Small Business Resource Guide
Bulletins available for research purposes. CD-ROM for 2005, has a new look and en-
hanced navigation features. This year’s CD includes:• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer
Assistance Center every business day for personal,• Helpful information, such as how to prepare a busi-
face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRSness plan, find financing for your business, and
letters, request adjustments to your tax account, ormuch more.
help you set up a payment plan. If you need to • All the business tax forms, instructions, and publi-
resolve a tax problem, have questions about how cations needed to successfully manage a business.
the tax law applies to your individual tax return, or• Tax law changes for 2005.you’re more comfortable talking with someone in• IRS Tax Map to help you find forms, instructions,person, visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Centerand publications by searching on a keyword orwhere you can spread out your records and talk topic.with an IRS representative face-to-face. No ap-
• Web links to various government agencies, busi-pointment is necessary, but if you prefer, you can
ness associations, and IRS organizations.call your local Center and leave a message re-
questing an appointment to resolve a tax account• “Rate the Product” survey—your opportunity to
issue. A representative will call you back within 2 suggest changes for future editions.
business days to schedule an in-person appoint- An updated version of this CD is available each year in
ment at your convenience. To find the number, goearly April. You can get a free copy by calling
to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
book under United States Government, Internal
Revenue Service.
Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
tions, and publications to the address below and
receive a response within 10 business days after
your request is received.
Page 27

Page 28 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Community property states...... 3 Excess reimbursements (SeeA
Reimbursements)Computer data banks to trackAbortion........................... 5
medical information........... 1 0Excluded expenses:Acupuncture ...................... 5
Insurance premiums............. 9Contact lenses.................... 7Adopted child’s medical
Eye surgery....................... 7Controlled substances.......... 1 4expenses ....................... 4
Eyeglasses........................ 7Cosmetic surgery................ 1 4AGI limitation...................2 ,  3
Credit (See Health coverage taxAlcoholism........................ 5
credit) FAlternative trade adjustment
Crutches .......................... 7assistance recipient: Fertility enhancement............ 7
Health coverage tax credit...... 2 3 Figuring the deduction.......18-19
Ambulances ...................... 5 Final return for decedent:DArcher MSAs: Medical expenses paid.......... 4Damages, personal injury....... 2 1Health coverage tax credit...... 2 5 Flexible spending account...... 1 4Dancing lessons................. 1 4Medical expenses paid for Food  (See Weight-loss programs)Decedents:decedent from................. 5 Form 1040:Medical and dentalArtificial limbs.................... 5 Health coverage tax credit...... 2 5expenses....................4 ,  5Artificial teeth..................... 5 Self-employed persons, healthDeductible amount............... 3Aspirin........................... 1 5 insurance costs.............. 2 2Deductible expenses..........3-13Assistance (See Tax help) Form 1040, Schedule A:Definition of medical Impairment-related workAssisted living homes........... 1 1expenses ....................... 2expenses..................... 2 2Athletic club dues............... 1 4Dental treatment.................. 7Medical and dentalAutoettes......................... 1 3Artificial teeth.................... 5 expenses.................. 2 ,  1 8Automobiles (See Cars) Teeth whitening................. 1 5Self-employed persons, healthDentures .......................... 5insurance costs.............. 2 2
Dependents:B Form 1040, Schedule C:
Adopted child.................... 4Baby sitting...................... 1 4 Impairment-related work
Claimed as a dependent on expenses..................... 2 2Bandages ......................... 5
someone else’s return......... 3Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:Basis:
Disabled dependent care......7 ,  9Impairment-related workMedical equipment or property
Medical expenses............... 3 expenses..................... 2 2(Worksheet D)................ 2 0
Multiple support agreement...... 4 Form 1040, Schedule E:Birth control pills................. 5
Qualifying child.................. 3Impairment-related workBraille books and magazines.... 5
Qualifying relative............... 3 expenses..................... 2 2Breast reconstruction
Diagnostic devices............... 7Form 1040, Schedule F:surgery ......................... 5
Diaper services.................. 1 4Impairment-related work
expenses..................... 2 2Disabilities, persons with:C Dependent care expenses.....7 ,  9Form 1040NR:
Calculation of deduction........ 1 8 Health coverage tax credit...... 2 5Improvements to property rented
Capital expenses................. 5 b y ............................. 6Form 1040X:
Improvements to property rented Special education............... 1 2Amended individual return....... 2
by disabled persons........... 6 Deceased taxpayer.............. 5Divorced taxpayers:Operation and upkeep........... 6 Form 1099-H:Health coverage tax credit forWorksheet A..................... 6 Self-employed persons, healthchildren....................... 2 4
Cars ............................... 6 insurance costs.............. 2 2Medical expenses of child....... 4
Out-of-pocket expenses........ 1 2 Form 2106:Drug addiction.................... 7
Child care........................ 1 4 Impairment-related workDrugs (See Medicines)
Children’s medical expenses: expenses..................... 2 2Dues:Adopted child.................... 4 Form 2106-EZ:Health club..................... 1 4Dependents ..................... 3 Impairment-related work
Health coverage tax credit...... 2 4 expenses..................... 2 2
EChildren, missing: Form 2555:
Education, special............... 1 2Photographs of, included in IRS Self-employed persons, health
publications................... 1Electrolysis...................... 1 4insurance costs.............. 2 2
Chiropractors..................... 7Employer-sponsored health Form 2555-EZ:
insurance plans................ 8Christian Science Self-employed persons, health
practitioners.................... 7Employment taxes ............... 1 1 insurance costs.............. 2 2
Chronically ill persons.......... 1 0Equipment  (See Medical equipment Form 8453:
or property)Comments on publication........ 2 Health coverage tax credit...... 2 5
Page 28

Page 29 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 8885: Self-employed persons......... 2 2Medical equipment or property:
Adjusted basis (WorksheetHealth coverage tax credit...... 2 5Health maintenance organizations
D ) ............................ 2 0Self-employed persons, health (HMOs) .......................... 7
Gain or loss (Worksheet E)..... 2 1insurance costs.............. 2 2Health reimbursement
Sale of.......................... 1 9Founder’s fee (See Lifetime care, arrangements (HRAs)......... 1 6
Medical expense records........ 1 9advance payments) Health Savings Accounts (HSAs):
Medical information plans....... 1 0Free tax services................ 2 6Payments from................. 1 4
Medical savings accountsFuneral expenses................ 1 4Hearing aids...................... 8
(MSAs) ......................... 1 5Future medical care.......... 9 ,  1 4Hearing-impaired persons:
Medicare:Guide dog or other animal for.... 7
Medicare A, deductibleHelp (See Tax help)G expense ....................... 8HMOs (Health maintenanceGlasses ........................... 7 Medicare B, deductibleorganizations).................. 7Guide dog or other animal....... 7 expense ....................... 8Home care (See Nursing services) Medicines ........................ 1 1Home improvements  (See Capital Imported....................11, 15expenses)H Nonprescription drugs andHospital services................. 8Hair: medicines.................... 1 5Hotels ............................. 9Removal ........................ 1 4 Mentally retarded persons:Transplants..................... 1 4Household help.................. 1 4Special homes for.............. 1 1W i g s............................ 1 3HRAs (Health reimbursement Mileage rates...................... 1Health club dues................. 1 4arrangements)................. 1 6Missing children:Health coverage tax credit..... 1 4 , Photographs of, included in IRS22 publications................... 1IAdvance payments............. 2 6 More information (See Tax help)Illegal operations andAlternative TAA recipient....... 2 3 treatments..................... 1 4Multiple support agreements.... 4Alternative TAA workers........ 2 3Illegal substances............... 1 4Archer MSAs ................... 2 5
Impairment-related workChildren of divorced parents.... 2 4 Nexpenses ...................... 2 2Eligible coverage month........ 2 5 Nondeductible expenses.....13-15Definition....................... 2 2Insurance that covers other Nonprescription drugs andReporting of.................... 2 2individuals.................... 2 5 medicines...................... 1 5In vitro fertilization............... 7Legally separated............... 2 4 Nursing homes .................. 1 1Insulin............................ 1 5Married persons filing separate Nursing services.............11, 14Insurance (See Health insurance)returns....................... 2 3 Chronically ill individuals........ 1 0Nonqualified health Nutritional supplements......... 1 5insurance..................... 2 4LOther specified coverage: Laboratory fees................... 9Benefits from the Veterans OLaser eye surgery................ 7Administration.............. 2 5 Operations....................... 1 1Lead-based paint removal........ 9PBGC pension recipient........ 2 3 Cosmetic surgery............... 1 4Learning disabilities............. 1 2Lump-sum payment .......... 2 3 Eye surgery...................... 7Qualified health insurance...... 2 4Legal fees......................... 9Illegal operations andQualifying family member....... 2 3Lessons, dancing and treatments.................... 1 4Refundable credit............... 2 5swimming ...................... 1 4Optometrist services............. 7Reporting....................... 2 5Lifetime care: Organ donors .................... 1 2State-qualified health Advance payments for........... 9Osteopaths....................... 1 1insurance..................... 2 4Lodging: (See also Travel and Oxygen ........................... 1 1TAA recipient................... 2 3transportation expenses).... 9 ,  1 2
Health institutes.................. 7Long-term care.................. 1 0
Health insurance: PChronically ill individuals........ 1 0
Credit (See Health coverage tax Paint removal, for lead-based.... 9Maintenance and personal care
credit) services...................... 1 0Parking fees and tolls........... 1 3
Employer-sponsored plan....... 8 Qualified insurance Patterning exercises............. 1 2Premiums: contracts..................... 1 0Personal injury damages........ 2 1Deductible..................... 8Qualified services............... 1 0Personal use items.............. 1 5Nondeductible................. 9 Physical therapy................. 1 2Paid by employer............. 1 7 Plastic surgery................... 1 4MPaid by employer and you.... 1 6 Premiums  (See Health insurance)Maintenance and personal carePaid by you.................. 1 6 Prepaid insurance premiums.... 8services........................ 1 0Prepaid........................ 8
Prosthesis........................ 5Maternity clothes................ 1 5Unused sick leave used to
Psychiatric care................. 1 1Meals: (See also Weight-lossp a y.......................... 8
programs)..................10, 13 Psychoanalysis.................. 1 2Reimbursements (See
Reimbursements) Medical conferences............ 1 0Psychologists.................... 1 2
Page 29

Page 30 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publications (See Tax help) Medical and dental expenses .... 3 Includible expenses.........12, 13
Parking fees and tolls........... 1 3Separated taxpayers:
Standard mileage rate for car useHealth coverage tax credit...... 2 4R for medical.................... 1Medical expenses of child....... 4Radial keratotomy................ 7 Trips.............................. 1 3Sick leave:Recordkeeping................... 1 9Used to pay health insurance TTY/TDD information............ 2 6Rehabilitation facilities.......... 1 1 premiums ..................... 8Tuition............................ 1 3Reimbursements .............15-18 Special education................ 1 2Excess includible in income: Spouse’s medical expenses..... 3 VWhen more than one policy Deceased spouse ............... 5(Worksheet C)............. 1 8 Vasectomy ....................... 1 3
Standard mileage rates:When one policy (Worksheet Veterinary fees................... 1 5Medical reasons for use ofB ) .......................... 1 7 Vision correction surgery........ 7c a r ............................ 1Excess may be taxable (Figure Visually-impaired persons:Sterilization...................... 1 21 )............................. 1 6 Guide dog or other animal for.... 7Stop-smoking programs ........ 1 2Health Reimbursement
Arrangement (HRA).......... 1 6Suggestions for publication..... 2 WInsurance....................... 1 6Surgery (See Operations) Weight-loss programs.......13, 15Medical expenses not Swimming lessons .............. 1 4What’s new:deducted..................... 1 8 Dependents ..................... 1More than one policy........... 1 7T Standard mileage rate........... 1Received in later year.......... 1 8Tables and figures: Wheelchairs...................... 1 3Rental property: Medical equipment or property: Wigs .............................. 1 3Improvements to................. 6 Adjusted basis (Worksheet Work expenses:Reporting: D ) .......................... 2 0Disabled dependent care........ 7Health coverage tax credit...... 2 5 Gain or loss (Worksheet Impairment-related............. 2 2Impairment-related work E ) .......................... 2 1Workers’ compensation......... 2 2expenses..................... 2 2Reimbursements, excess includibleWorksheets:Medical and dental in income: Capital expenses (Worksheetexpenses..................... 1 8When more than one policy A ) ............................. 6Medical deduction (See Form (Worksheet C)............. 1 8Medical equipment or property:1040, Schedule A) When one policy (Worksheet Adjusted basis (WorksheetSelf-employed persons, health B ) .......................... 1 7D ) .......................... 2 0insurance costs.............. 2 2Reimbursements, excess may be Gain or loss (Worksheettaxable (Figure 1)............ 1 6 E ) .......................... 2 1S Tax help.......................... 2 6Reimbursements, excess includibleSale of medical equipment or Taxpayer Advocate.............. 2 6 in income:property.....................19-21 Teeth: When more than one policyAdjusted basis (Worksheet Artificial.......................... 5 (Worksheet C)............. 1 8D ) ............................ 2 0Dental treatment................. 7 When one policy (WorksheetGain or loss (Worksheet E)..... 2 1 Whitening....................... 1 5 B ) .......................... 1 7Schedules (See Form 1040) Telephone ........................ 1 2
Seeing-eye dogs.................. 7Television........................ 1 2XSelf-employed persons: Therapy .......................... 1 2X-rays ............................ 1 3Health coverage tax credit...... 2 5Transplants...................... 1 2Health insurance costs......... 2 2 ■Travel and transportationSenior housing.................. 1 1expenses ...................... 1 2Separate returns: Car expenses................... 1 2Community property states...... 3
Page 30

Page 31 of 31 of Publication 502 13:03 - 19-DEC-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2006
Highlights of 2005 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service—How
to Get Help With Unresolved Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Que es lo que Debemos Saber sobre
el Proceso de Cobro del IRS
594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Page 31