Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P501.cvt (23-Oct-2002) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 ContentsCat. No. 15000U
Important Changes................ 1Department
of the Important Reminders.............. 1Exemptions,Treasury
Internal Introduction..................... 2
Revenue Standard Who Must File ................... 2Service
Who Should File ................. 4Deduction,
Filing Status.................... 4
and Filing Exemptions ..................... 9
Standard Deduction............... 18
Information 2002 Standard Deduction Tables.... 18
How To Get Tax Help.............. 20
Index.......................... 22For use in preparing
2002 Returns
Important Changes
Who must file. Generally, the amount of in-
come you can receive before you must file a
return has increased. Table 1 shows the filing
requirements for most taxpayers.
Exemption amount. The amount you can de-
duct for each exemption has increased from
$2,900 in 2001 to $3,000 in 2002.
Exemption phaseout. You lose all or part of
the benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted
gross income is above a certain amount. The
amount at which this phaseout begins depends
on your filing status. For 2002, the phaseout
begins at $103,000 for married persons filing
separately; $137,300 for single individuals;
$171,650 for heads of household; and at
$206,000 for married persons filing jointly. See
Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
Standard deduction.The standard deduction
for most taxpayers who do not itemize deduc-
tions on Schedule A of Form 1040 is higher in
2002 than it was in 2001. The amount depends
on your filing status. The 2002 Standard Deduc-
tion Tables are shown near the end of this publi-
cation as Tables 7, 8, and 9.
Itemized deductions.Some of your itemized
deductions may be limited if your adjusted gross
income is more than $137,300 ($68,650 if you
are married filing separately). See Who Should
Itemize, later.
Important Reminders
Kidnapped child. A child who has been kid-
napped may still qualify you for:
• Head of household or qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child filing status, and
• The child’s dependency exemption.
For details, see Filing Status and Exemptions for
Dependents, later.

Page 2 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Social security number for dependents. The second section is about who should file You can e-mail us while visiting our web site
a return. Reading this section will help you de- at www.irs.gov.You must list either the social security number
cide if you should file a return, even if you are not You can write to us at the following address:(SSN), individual taxpayer identification number
required to do so.(ITIN), or adoption taxpayer identification num-
Internal Revenue ServiceThe third section helps you determine whichber (ATIN) of every person for whom you claim
Tax Forms and Publicationsfiling status to use. Filing status is important inan exemption.
W:CAR:MP:FPdetermining whether you must file a return, yourIf you do not list the dependent’s SSN, ITIN, 1111 Constitution Ave. NWstandard deduction, and your tax rate. It alsoor ATIN, the exemption may be disallowed. See Washington, DC 20224helps determine what credits you may be enti-Social Security Numbers for Dependents, later. tled to.
The fourth section discusses exemptions, We respond to many letters by telephone.Election to report child’s unearned income
which reduce your taxable income. The discus-Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-on parent’s return.You may be able to in-
sions include the social security number re-clude your daytime phone number, including theclude your child’s interest and dividend income
quirement for dependents, the rules for multiplearea code, in your correspondence.on your tax return by using Form 8814,Parents’
support agreements, and the rules for divorcedElection To Report Child’s Interest and Divi-or separated parents. Useful Itemsdends. If you choose to do this, your child will notThe fifth section gives the rules and dollarYou may want to see:have to file a return. amounts for the standard deduction— a ben-
efit for taxpayers who do not itemize their deduc-Photographs of missing children.The Inter- Publication
tions. This section also discusses the standardnal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the ❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, anddeduction for taxpayers who are blind or age 65National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- Administratorsor older, and special rules for dependents. Indren. Photographs of missing children selected
addition, this section should help you decide❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children andby the Center may appear in this publication on
whether you would be better off taking the stan- Dependentspages that would otherwise be blank. You candard deduction or itemizing your deductions.help bring these children home by looking at theThe last section explains how to get tax helpForm (and Instructions)photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST from the IRS.(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child. ❏ 1040X Amended U.S. Individual IncomeThis publication is for U.S. citizens and resi-Tax Returndent aliens only. If you are a resident alien for
the entire year, you must follow the same tax❏ 2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration
rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules to of RepresentativeIntroduction determine if you are a resident or nonresident❏ 8332 Release of Claim to Exemption foralien are discussed in chapter 1 of PublicationThis publication discusses some tax rules that Child of Divorced or Separated519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.affect every person who may have to file a fed- Parents
eral income tax return. It answers some basicNonresident aliens.If you were a nonresi- ❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’squestions: who must file; who should file; whatdent alien at any time during the year, the rules Interest and Dividendsfiling status to use; how many exemptions toand tax forms that apply to you may be differentclaim; and the amount of the standard deduc-from those that apply to U.S. citizens. See Publi-tion. cation 519.
The first section of this publication explains
who must file an income tax return. If you have Who Must FileComments and suggestions. We welcome
little or no gross income, reading this section willyour comments about this publication and your
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether youhelp you decide if you have to file a return. suggestions for future editions.
must file a federal income tax return depends
upon your gross income, your filing status, yourTable 1. 2002 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers
age, and whether you are a dependent. For
details, see Table 1 and Table 2. You must alsoIF your filing status is... AND at the end of 2002 you THEN file a return
file if one of the situations described in Table 3were...* if your gross
applies. The filing requirements apply even ifincome was at
you owe no tax.least...**
You may have to pay a penalty if you are
required to file a return but fail to. If you wilfullyunder 65  $7,700Single
fail to file a return, you may be subject to criminal
65 or older $8,850 prosecution.
For information on what form to use — Formunder 65  $9,900Head of household 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040 — see the
instructions in your tax package.65 or older $11,050
Gross income. Gross income is all incomeunder 65 (both spouses) $13,850
you receive in the form of money, goods, prop-
65 or older (one spouse) $14,750Married, filing jointly*** erty, and services that is not exempt from tax. If
you are married and live with your spouse in a65 or older (both spouses) $15,650 community property state, half of any income
defined by state law as community income may
Married, filing separately any age  $3,000
be considered yours. For a list of community
under 65 $10,850 property states, see Community property statesQualifying widow(er) with
under Married Filing Separately, later.dependent child 65 or older $11,750
Self-employed persons. If you are*  If you turned age 65 on January 1, 2003, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2002.
self-employed in a business that provides serv-**  Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and
services that is not exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United ices (where products are not a factor), your
States (even if you may exclude part or all of it). Do not include social security benefits unless gross income from that business is the grossyou are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during
receipts. If you are self-employed in a business2002.
*** If you didn’t live with your spouse at the end of 2002 (or on the date your spouse died) and involving manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
your gross income was at least $3,000, you must file a return regardless of your age. ing, your gross income from that business is the
Page 2

Page 3 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filing status.Your filing status generally de-Table 2. 2002 Filing Requirements for Dependents
pends on whether you are single or married. InSee Exemptions for Dependents to find out if you are a dependent.
some cases, it depends on other factors as well.
Whether you are single or married is determinedIf your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see
as of the last day of your tax year, which isif you must file a return.
December 31 for most taxpayers. Filing status isIn this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, anddiscussed in detail later in this publication.capital gain distributions. Earned income includes wages, tips, and taxable
scholarship and fellowship grants. Gross income is the total of your unearned andAge. Age is a factor in determining if you mustearned income. file a return only if you are 65 or older at the end
of your tax year. You are considered to be ageCaution: If your gross income was $3,000 or more, you usually cannot be claimed
65 for 2002 if your 65th birthday is on or beforeas a dependent unless you were under age 19 or a full-time student under age 24.
January 1, 2003.For details, see Gross Income Test under Dependency Tests.
Single dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind? Filing Requirements
❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. for Most Taxpayers
1) Your unearned income was more than $750. You must file a return if your gross income for
2) Your earned income was more than $4,700. the year was at least the amount shown on the
3) Your gross income was more than the larger of — appropriate line in Table 1. Dependents should
see Table 2 instead.a) $750, or
b) Your earned income (up to $4,450) plus $250.
Deceased Persons
You must file an income tax return for a dece-❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
dent (a person who died) if both of the following
1) Your unearned income was more than $1,900 ($3,050 if 65 or older and are true.
blind).
1) You are the surviving spouse, executor,2) Your earned income was more than $5,850 ($7,000 if 65 or older and
administrator, or legal representative.blind).
3) Your gross income was more than — 2) The decedent met the filing requirements
at the time of his or her death.a) The larger of $750, or your earned income (up to $4,450) plus $250,
For more information, see Final Return forplus
Decedent in Publication 559.b) $1,150 ($2,300 if 65 or older and blind).
U.S. Citizens orMarried dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind? Residents Living Abroad
❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
For purposes of determining whether you must
1) Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separatefile a return, you must include in your gross
return and itemizes deductions. income all of the income you earned abroad,
including any income you can exclude under the2) Your unearned income was more than $750.
foreign earned income exclusion. For more in-3) Your earned income was more than $3,925.
formation on special tax rules that may apply to4) Your gross income was more than the larger of —
you, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.
a) $750, or Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad.
b)  Your earned income (up to $3,675) plus $250
Residents of Puerto Rico
❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi-
dent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. income1) Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate
tax return if you meet the income requirements.return and itemizes deductions.
This is in addition to any legal requirement you2) Your unearned income was more than $1,650 ($2,550 if 65 or older and may have to file an income tax return with Puertoblind). Rico.3) Your earned income was more than $4,825 ($5,725 if 65 or older and If you are a resident of Puerto Rico for theblind). whole year, your U.S. gross income does not4) Your gross income was more than — include income from sources within Puerto Rico.
However, include in your U.S. gross income anya) The larger of $750 or your earned income (up to $3,675) plus $250,
income you received for your services as anplus
employee of the United States or any U.S.b) $900 ($1,800 if 65 or older and blind). agency. If you receive income from Puerto Ri-
can sources that is not subject to U.S. tax, you
must reduce your standard deduction. This also
reduces the amount of income you can have
before you must file a U.S. income tax return.total sales minus the cost of goods sold. To thisYou must file Form 1040 if you owe any
For more information, see Publication 570,figure, you add any income from investments self-employment tax.
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income Fromand from incidental or outside operations or
TIP
U.S. Possessions.sources.
Page 3

Page 4 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information, see Parent’s ElectionTable 3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2002 Return
To Report Child’s Interest and Dividends in Pub-
lication 929, and Form 8814.If any of the four conditions listed below applied to you for 2002, you must file a
return.
Other Situations1. You owe any special taxes, such as:
You may have to file a tax return even if your• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer.
gross income is less than the amount shown in(See Publication 531, Reporting Tip Income.)
Table 1 or Table 2 for your filing status. See
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips youTable 3 for those other situations when you must
reported to your employer or on group-term life insurance. (See Publicationfile.
531 and the Form 1040 instructions for line 61.)
• Alternative minimum tax. (See the Form 1040 instructions for line 43.)
• Tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA),Who Should Fileor other tax-favored account. (See Publication 590, Individual Retirement
Arrangements (IRAs), and Publication 969, Medical Savings Accounts Even if you do not have to file, you should file a
(MSAs).) But if you are filing a return only because you owe this tax, you cantax return to get money back if one of the follow-
file Form 5329 by itself. ing applies.
• Recapture taxes. (See the Form 1040 instructions for lines 42 and 61.)1) You had income tax withheld from your
2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your pay.
employer. These payments should be shown in box 9 of your Form W–2. (See2) You qualify for the earned income credit.Publication 596, Earned Income Credit.) See Publication 596, Earned Income
Credit (EIC), for more information.3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Publication
533, Self-Employment Tax.) 3) You qualify for the additional child tax
credit. See the instructions in your tax4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled
forms package for more information on thisorganization that is exempt from employer social security and Medicare taxes.
credit.(See Publication 533.)
parents have the right to the earnings and mayIndividuals With Income From U.S.
actually have received them. If the child does notPossessions Filing Statuspay the tax due on this income, the parent is
If you had income from Guam, the Common- liable for the tax. You must determine your filing status before youwealth of Northern Mariana Islands, American can determine your filing requirements, stan-Samoa, or the Virgin Islands, special rules mayUnearned income. This is income such as dard deduction (discussed later), and correctapply when determining whether you must file ainterest, dividends, and capital gains. Trust dis-tax. You figure your correct tax by using the TaxU.S. federal income tax return. In addition, youtributions of interest, dividends, capital gains,Rate Schedule or the column in the Tax Tablemay have to file a return with the individualand survivor annuities are considered unearnedthat applies to your filing status.island government. See Publication 570 forincome also. You also use your filing status in determiningmore information.
whether you are eligible to claim certain otherElection to report child’s unearned incomedeductions and credits.Dependents on parent’s return.You may be able to in- There are five filing statuses:clude your child’s interest and dividend incomeA person who is a dependent may still have toon your tax return. If you choose to do this, your• Single,file a return. This depends on the amount of thechild will not have to file a return. However, all ofdependent’s earned income, unearned income, • Married Filing Jointly,the following conditions must be met.and gross income. For details, see Table 2. A • Married Filing Separately,dependent may also have to file if one of the1) Your child was under age 14 at the end of
situations described in Table 3 applies. • Head of Household, and2002. A child born on January 1, 1989, is
considered to be age 14 at the end of • Qualifying Widow(er) With DependentResponsibility of parent.If a dependent 2002. Child.child who must file an income tax return cannot
2) Your child is required to file a return forfile it for any reason, such as age, a parent, If more than one filing status applies to you,
2002 unless you make this election.guardian, or other legally responsible person choose the one that will give you the lowest tax.
must file it for the child. If the child cannot sign3) Your child had gross income only from in-the return, the parent or guardian must sign theterest and dividends (including Alaska Per-Marital Statuschild’s name followed by the words “By (signa-manent Fund Dividends).ture), parent (or guardian), for minor child.” In general, your filing status depends on4) The interest and dividend income was lesswhether you are considered unmarried or mar-than $7,500.Earned income. This is salaries, wages, pro- ried. A marriage means only a legal union be-
fessional fees, and other amounts received as tween a man and a woman as husband and5) No estimated tax payment was made forpay for work you actually perform. Earned in- wife.2002 and no 2001 overpayment was ap-come (only for purposes of filing requirementsplied to 2002 under your child’s name andand the standard deduction) also includes any Unmarried persons. You are considered un-social security number.part of a scholarship that you must include in married for the whole year if, on the last day of6) No federal income tax was withheld fromyour gross income. See Publication 520, Schol- your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa-
your child’s income under the backup with-arships and Fellowships, for more information rated from your spouse under a divorce or a
holding rules.on taxable and nontaxable scholarships. separate maintenance decree.
7) You are the parent whose return must beChild’s earnings.Amounts a child earns by State law governs whether you are married
used when making the election to reportperforming services are his or her gross income. or legally separated under a divorce or separate
This is true even if under local law the child’s your child’s unearned income. maintenance decree.
Page 4

Page 5 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Divorced persons.  If you are divorced separated. If you qualify to file as head of house-Filing a Joint Return
under a final decree by the last day of the year, hold instead of as married filing separately, your
Both you and your spouse must include all ofyou are considered unmarried for the whole standard deduction will be higher. Also, your tax
your income, exemptions, and deductions onyear. may be lower, and you may be able to claim the
your joint return.earned income credit. See Head of Household,Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a later. Accounting period.Both of you must use thedivorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing
same accounting period, but you can use differ-tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the
Single ent accounting methods.time of divorce you intended to and did remarry
each other in the next tax year, you and your Joint responsibility.Both of you may be heldYour filing status is single if, on the last day ofspouse must file as married individuals. responsible, jointly and individually, for the taxthe year, you are unmarried or legally separated
and any interest or penalty due on your jointAnnulled marriages. If you obtain a courtfrom your spouse under a divorce or separate
return. One spouse may be held responsible fordecree of annulment, which holds that no validmaintenance decree, and you do not qualify for
all the tax due even if all the income was earnedmarriage ever existed, you are considered un-another filing status. To determine your marital
by the other spouse.married even if you filed joint returns for earlierstatus on the last day of the year, see Marital
years. You must file amended returns (FormStatus, earlier. Divorced taxpayer.You may be held jointly1040X) claiming single or head of householdYour filing status may be single if you wereand individually responsible for any tax, interest,status for all tax years affected by the annulmentwidowed before January 1, 2002, and did notand penalties due on a joint return filed beforethat are not closed by the statute of limitationsremarry in 2002. However, you might be able toyour divorce. This responsibility may apply evenfor filing a tax return. The statute of limitationsuse another filing status that will give you a lowerif your divorce decree states that your formergenerally does not expire until 3 years after yourtax. See Head of Household and Qualifying spouse will be responsible for any amounts dueoriginal return was filed. Widow(er) With Dependent Child, later, to see ifon previously filed joint returns.
you qualify.Head of household or qualifying widow(er) Relief from joint responsibility.In somewith dependent child.If you are consideredHow to file.You can file Form 1040EZ (if youcases, one spouse may be relieved of joint liabil-unmarried, you may be able to file as a head ofhave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,ity for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint returnhousehold or as a qualifying widow(er) with aand meet other requirements), Form 1040A, orfor items of the other spouse which were incor-dependent child. See Head of Household and Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Formrectly reported on the joint return. You can askQualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child to 1040, show your filing status as single by check-for relief no matter how small the liability.see if you qualify. ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of There are three types of relief available. 
the Tax Table, or Schedule X of the Tax Rate
Married persons. If you are considered mar-Schedules, to figure your tax. 1) Innocent spouse relief, which applies to
ried for the whole year, you and your spouse can all joint filers.
file a joint return, or you can file separate re-Married Filing Jointly 2) Separation of liability, which applies toturns.
joint filers who are divorced, widowed, le-You can choose married filing jointly as yourConsidered married. You are considered gally separated, or who have not lived to-filing status if you are married and both you andmarried for the whole year if on the last day of gether for the 12 months ending on theyour spouse agree to file a joint return. On a jointyour tax year you and your spouse meet any one date election of this relief is filed.return, you report your combined income andof the following tests.
3) Equitable relief, which applies to all jointdeduct your combined allowable expenses. You
filers who do not qualify for innocentcan file a joint return even if one of you had no1) You are married and living together as
spouse relief or separation of liability andincome or deductions.husband and wife.
to married couples filing separate returnsIf you and your spouse decide to file a joint2) You are living together in a common law in community property states.return, your tax may be lower than your com-marriage that is recognized in the statebined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, yourYou must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-where you now live or in the state wherestandard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc-cent Spouse Relief, to request any of thesethe common law marriage began. tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for taxkinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spousebenefits that do not apply to other filing statuses.3) You are married and living apart, but not Relief, explains these kinds of relief and wholegally separated under a decree of di- may qualify for them.If you and your spouse each have in-vorce or separate maintenance. come, you may want to figure your taxSigning a joint return.For a return to beboth on a joint return and on separate4) You are separated under an interlocutory
TIP
considered a joint return, both husband and wifereturns (using the filing status of married filing(not final) decree of divorce. For purposes must generally sign the return.separately). Choose the method that gives theof filing a joint return, you are not consid-
Spouse died before signing. If yourtwo of you the lower combined tax.ered divorced.
spouse died before signing the return, the exec-
utor or administrator must sign the return forHow to file.If you file as married filing jointly,Spouse died during the year. If your
your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else hasyou can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youspouse died during the year, you are considered
yet been appointed as executor or administrator,have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,married for the whole year for filing status pur-
you can sign the return for your spouse and printand meet other requirements, you can file Formposes.
“Filing as surviving spouse” in the area where1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A,If you did not remarry before the end of the
you sign the return.show this filing status by checking the box ontax year, you can file a joint return for yourself
line 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of theand your deceased spouse. For the next 2 Spouse away from home. If your spouse isTax Table, or Schedule Y–1 of the Tax Rateyears, you may be entitled to the special benefits away from home, you should prepare the return,Schedules, to figure your tax.described later under Qualifying Widow(er) With sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so that
Dependent Child. it can be filed on time.Spouse died during the year.If your spouse
If you remarried before the end of the taxdied during the year, you are considered mar-Injury or disease prevents signing.If youryear, you can file a joint return with your newried for the whole year and can choose marriedspouse cannot sign because of injury or diseasespouse. Your deceased spouse’s filing status isfiling jointly as your filing status. See Spouse and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse’smarried filing separately for that year. died during the year, earlier. name in the proper space on the return followed
Married persons living apart.If you liveDivorced persons. If you are divorced under by the words “By (your name), Husband (or
apart from your spouse and meet certain tests,a final decree by the last day of the year, you are Wife).” Be sure to also sign in the space pro-
you may be considered unmarried. If this ap-considered unmarried for the whole year and vided for your signature. Attach a dated state-
plies to you, you can file as head of householdyou cannot choose married filing jointly as yourment, signed by you, to the return. The
even though you are not divorced or legallyfiling status. statement should include the form number of the
Page 5

Page 6 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
return you are filing, the tax year, the reasonHow to file.If you file a separate return, you than you would on a joint return. For infor-
your spouse cannot sign, and that your spouse generally report only your own income, exemp- mation on social security and railroad re-
has agreed to your signing for him or her. tions, credits, and deductions on your individual tirement benefits, see Publication 915,
return. You can claim an exemption for your Social Security and Equivalent RailroadSigning as guardian of spouse.If you arespouse if your spouse had no gross income andRetirement Benefits.the guardian of your spouse who is mentallywas not the dependent of another person. How-incompetent, you can sign the return for your 11) You cannot roll over amounts from a tradi-ever, if your spouse had any gross income orspouse as guardian. tional IRA into a Roth IRA during the year,was the dependent of someone else, you cannotunless you did not live with your spouse atSpouse in combat zone. If your spouse isclaim an exemption for him or her on your sepa-any time during the year.unable to sign the return because he or she israte return.
serving in a combat zone (such as the Persian 12) Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500If you file as married filing separately, you
Gulf Area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), or a (instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select this
qualified hazardous duty area (such as Bosnia turn).filing status by checking the box on line 3 of
and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Macedonia), andeither form. You must also enter your spouse’s13) You cannot claim the credit for contribu-you do not have a power of attorney or othersocial security number and full name in the tions to certain qualified plans, includingstatement, you can sign for your spouse. Attachspaces provided. Use the Married filing sepa- IRAs (discussed next), if your adjusteda signed statement to your return that explainsrately column of the Tax Table or Schedule Y–2 gross income is more than $25,000 (in-that your spouse is serving in a combat zone.of the Tax Rate Schedules to figure your tax.stead of $50,000 if you filed a joint return).For more information on special tax rules for
persons who are serving in a combat zone, or Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).Special Ruleswho are in missing status as a result of serving You may not be able to deduct all or part of yourin a combat zone, get Publication 3, Armed contributions to a traditional IRA if you or yourSpecial rules apply if your filing status is marriedForces’ Tax Guide. spouse were covered by an employee retire-filing separately.
ment plan at work during the year. Your deduc-Other reasons spouse cannot sign. If
Community property states.If you live in Ari-tion is reduced or eliminated if your income isyour spouse cannot sign the joint return for any
zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,more than a certain amount. This amount isother reason, you can sign for your spouse only
New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsinmuch lower for married individuals who file sep-if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legal
and file separately, your income may be consid-arately and lived together at any time during thedocument giving you permission to act for your
ered separate income or community income foryear. For more information, see How Much Can Ispouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copy
income tax purposes. See Publication 555,Deduct? in Chapter 1 of Publication 590, Individ-of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848.
Community Property. ual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs). For more
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien.A information on the credit for contributions to anDeductions, credits, and certain income.Ifjoint return generally cannot be filed if either IRA, see Chapter 5 of Publication 590.your filing status is married filing separately:spouse is a nonresident alien at any time during Rental activity losses.If you actively partici-the tax year. However, if one spouse was a1) You should itemize deductions if yourpated in a passive rental real estate activity thatnonresident alien or dual-status alien who wasspouse itemizes deductions, because youproduced a loss, you generally can deduct themarried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end ofcannot claim the standard deduction. loss from your nonpassive income up tothe year, the spouses can choose to file a joint $25,000. This is called a special allowance.2) You cannot deduct interest paid on a quali-return. If you do file a joint return, you and your However, married persons filing separate re-fied student loan.spouse are both treated as U.S. residents for the turns who lived together at any time during theentire tax year. See chapter 1 of Publication 519.3) You cannot take the credit for child andyear cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-dependent care expenses in most cases,ried persons filing separate returns who livedand the amount that you can exclude fromMarried Filing Separately apart at all times during the year are each al-income under an employer’s dependent lowed a $12,500 maximum special allowanceYou can choose married filing separately as care assistance program is limited tofor losses from passive real estate activities.your filing status if you are married. This method$2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed aSee Rental Activities in Publication 925, Passivemay benefit you if you want to be responsiblejoint return). For more information aboutActivity and At-Risk Rules.only for your own tax or if this method results inthese expenses, the credit, and the exclu-
less tax than a joint return. If you and yoursion, see Publication 503, Child and De-
spouse do not agree to file a joint return, youpendent Care Credit. Joint Return Aftermay have to use this filing status. Separate Returns4) You cannot take the earned income credit.If you live apart from your spouse and meet
certain tests, you may be considered unmar- 5) You cannot exclude any interest incomeYou can change your filing status by filing an
ried and may be able to file as head of house-from qualified U.S. savings bonds that youamended return using Form 1040X.
hold. This can apply to you even if you are notused for higher education expenses. If you or your spouse (or both of you) file a
divorced or legally separated. If you qualify to file separate return, you generally can change to a6) You cannot take the credit for the elderlyas head of household, instead of as married joint return any time within 3 years from the dueor the disabled unless you lived apart fromfiling separately, your tax may be lower, you may date of the separate return or returns. This doesyour spouse for the entire year.be able to claim the earned income credit and not include any extensions. A separate return
certain other credits, and your standard deduc-7) You cannot take the education credits (theincludes a return filed by you or your spouse
tion will be higher. The head of household filingHope credit and the lifetime learningclaiming married filing separately, single, or
status allows you to choose the standard deduc-credit). head of household filing status.
tion even if your spouse chooses to itemize8) You cannot take the exclusion or credit fordeductions. See Head of Household, later, for adoption expenses in most cases.more information. Separate Returns
9) You will become subject to the limit on theAfter Joint ReturnUnless you are required to file sepa-child tax credit, the limit on itemized de-rately, you should figure your tax both Once you file a joint return, you cannot chooseductions, and the phaseout of the deduc-ways (on a joint return and on separate
TIP
to file separate returns for that year after the duetion for personal exemptions at incomereturns). This way you can make sure you are date of the return.levels that are half of those for a joint re-using the method that results in the lowest com-turn.bined tax. However, you will generally pay more Exception. A personal representative for a
combined tax on separate returns than you10) You may have to include in income more decedent can change from a joint return elected
would on a joint return because the tax rate isof your social security benefits (or any by the surviving spouse to a separate return for
higher for married persons filing separately.equivalent railroad retirement benefits) the decedent. The personal representative has
Page 6

Page 7 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. Who Is a Qualifying Person for Filing as Head of Household?1
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
you can claim an exemption for him or a qualifying person.parent, grandparent, brother, sister,
her2stepbrother, stepsister, stepmother,
stepfather, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, half brother, halfyou cannot claim an exemption for him orNOT  a qualifying person.sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,herson-in-law, or daughter-in-law
he or she is related to you by blood and a qualifying person.uncle, aunt, nephew, or niece
you can claim an exemption for him or
her
2, 3
he or she is not related to you by blood3 NOT  a qualifying person.
you cannot claim an exemption for him or
her
he or she is single a qualifying person. 4child, grandchild, stepchild, or
adopted child he or she is married, and you can claim an a qualifying person.
exemption for him or her2
he or she is married, and you cannot claimNOT  a qualifying person.5
an exemption for him or her
the child lived with you all year, and you a qualifying person.foster child6
can claim an exemption for him or her2
the child did not live with you all year, orNOT  a qualifying person.
you cannot claim an exemption for him or
her
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person cannot be a qualifying person.
See Multiple Support Agreement.
3You are related by blood to an uncle or aunt if he or she is the brother or sister of your mother or father. You are related by blood to a
nephew or niece if he or she is the child or your brother or sister.
4This child is a qualifying person even if you cannot claim an exemption for the child.
5This child is a qualifying person if you could claim an exemption for the child except that the child’s other parent claims the exemption
under the special rules for a noncustodial parent discussed under Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents.
6The term “foster child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents.
1 year from the due date of the return to makestandard deduction than if you file as single or4) Your home was the main home of your
child, stepchild or adopted child for moremarried filing separately.the change. See Publication 559 for more infor-
than half the year or was the main home ofmation on filing income tax returns for a dece-
your foster child for the entire year. (Seedent. How to file.If you file as head of household,Home of qualifying person, later, for rulesyou can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040. applying to a child’s birth, death, or tempo-Head of Household Indicate your choice of this filing status byrary absence during the year.)
checking the box on line 4 of either form. Use theYou may be able to file as head of household if 5) You must be able to claim an exemptionHead of a household column of the Tax Table oryou meet all of the following requirements. for the child. However, you can still meetSchedule Z of the Tax Rate Schedules, to figure
this test if you cannot claim the exemptionyour tax.1) You are unmarried or considered unmar- only because of one of the three situations
ried on the last day of the year. described under Exception on page 15.
The general rules for claiming an exemp-Considered Unmarried2) You paid more than half the cost of keep-
tion for a dependent are explained latering up a home for the year.
You are considered unmarried on the last day ofunder Exemptions for Dependents.
3) A qualifying person lived with you in thethe tax year if you meet all of the following tests. 
home for more than half the year (except If you were considered married for part
for temporary absences, such as school).1) You file a separate return. of the year and lived in a community
However, your dependent parent does not property state (listed earlier under Mar-CAUTION
!
2) You paid more than half the cost of keep-have to live with you. See Special rule for ried Filing Separately), special rules may applying up your home for the tax year.parent, later, under Qualifying Person. A in determining your income and expenses. See
3) Your spouse did not live in your home dur-Publication 555 for more information.foster child must live with you all year.
ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your
spouse is considered to live in your homeIf you qualify to file as head of house- Nonresident alien spouse.You are consid-
even if he or she is temporarily absent duehold, your tax rate usually will be lower ered unmarried for head of household purposes
to special circumstances. See Temporarythan the rates for single or married fil- if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any
TIP
ing separately. You will also receive a higher absences, later. time during the year and you do not choose to
Page 7

Page 8 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
treat your nonresident spouse as a resident of your services or those of a member of your This treatment applies for all years until the
alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifying child is returned. However, the last year thishousehold.
person for head of household purposes. You treatment can apply is the earlier of:
must have another qualifying person and meet
1) The year there is a determination that theQualifying Personthe other tests to be eligible to file as a head of
child is dead, orhousehold.
See Table 4 to see who is a qualifying person.2) The year the child would have reachedEarned income credit.Even if you are con- Any person not described in Table 4 is not a age 18.sidered unmarried for head of household pur-qualifying person.poses because you are married to a nonresident
alien, you are still considered married for pur-Home of qualifying person.Generally, the Qualifying Widow(er)poses of the earned income credit (unless youqualifying person must live with you for moreWith Dependent Childmeet the five tests listed earlier). You are notthan half of the year.entitled to the credit unless you file a joint return
If your spouse died in 2002, you can use marriedwith your spouse and meet other qualifications.Special rule for parent.You may be eligi-filing jointly as your filing status for 2002 if youSee Publication 596 for more information.ble to file as head of household even if theotherwise qualify to use that status. The year ofparent for whom you can claim an exemptionChoice to treat spouse as resident.You death is the last year for which you can file jointlydoes not live with you. You must pay more thanare considered married if you choose to treat with your deceased spouse. See Married Filinghalf the cost of keeping up a home that was theyour spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1 Jointly, earlier.main home for the entire year for your father orof Publication 519. You may be eligible to use qualifyingmother. You are keeping up a main home forwidow(er) with dependent child as your filingyour father or mother if you pay more than halfstatus for 2 years following the year of death ofthe cost of keeping your parent in a rest home orKeeping Up a Home your spouse. For example, if your spouse died inhome for the elderly. 2001 and you have not remarried, you may beTo qualify for head of household status, you able to use this filing status for 2002 and 2003.Death or birth.You may be eligible to file asmust pay more than half of the cost of keeping The rules for using this filing status are ex-head of household if the individual who qualifiesup a home for the year. You can determine plained in detail here.you for this filing status is born or dies during thewhether you paid more than half of the cost of
year. You must have provided more than half ofThis filing status entitles you to use jointkeeping up a home by using the Cost of Keeping
return tax rates and the highest standard deduc-the cost of keeping up a home that was theUp a Home worksheet, below.
tion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).individual’s main home for more than half of the
This status does not entitle you to file a jointyear, or, if less, the period during which the
return.individual lived.Cost of Keeping Up a Home
How to file.If you file as a qualifying widow(er)Example. You are unmarried. Your mother,
with dependent child, you can use either Formfor whom you can claim an exemption, lived inAmount 1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing statusan apartment by herself. She died on Septem-You Total by checking the box on line 5 of either form.ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartmentPaid Cost Write the year your spouse died in the spacefor the year until her death was $6,000. You paid
provided on line 5. Use the Married filing jointly$4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. YourProperty taxes $ $ column of the Tax Table or Schedule Y–1 of thebrother made no other payments towards yourMortgage interest expense Tax Rate Schedules to figure your tax.mother’s support. Your mother had no income.
Rent Because you paid more than half of the cost ofEligibility rules.You are eligible to file yourkeeping up your mother’s apartment from Janu-Utility charges 2002 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-ary 1 until her death, and you can claim anUpkeep and repairs pendent child if you meet all of the followingexemption for her, you can file as a head oftests. Property insurance household.
Food consumed 1) You were entitled to file a joint return withTemporary absences. You and your quali-on the premises your spouse for the year your spouse died.fying person are considered to live together
It does not matter whether you actuallyOther household expenses even if one or both of you are temporarily absent
filed a joint return.from your home due to special circumstancesTotals $$
such as illness, education, business, vacation,2) You did not remarry before the end of
or military service. It must be reasonable to2002.
Minus total amount you () assume that the absent person will return to the
3) You have a child, stepchild, adopted child,paid home after the temporary absence. You must
or foster child for whom you can claim ancontinue to keep up the home during the ab-
exemption.sence.Amount others paid $ 4) You paid more than half of the cost ofKidnapped child.You may be eligible to file
keeping up a home that is the main homeas head of household, even if the child who is
for you and that child for the entire year,your qualifying person has been kidnapped. You
If the total amount you paid is more than the amount except for temporary absences. See Tem-can claim head of household filing status if all ofothers paid, you meet the requirement of paying more porary absences and Keeping Up a Home,the following statements are true.than half the cost of keeping up the home. discussed earlier under Head of House-
hold.1) The child must be presumed by law en-
forcement authorities to have been kid-Costs you include.Include in the cost of up-
napped by someone who is not a member Example. John Reed’s wife died in 2000.keep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest,
of your family or the child’s family.John has not remarried. He has continued dur-real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re-
ing 2001 and 2002 to keep up a home for himselfpairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home.2) In the year of the kidnapping, the childand his child for whom he can claim an exemp-lived with you for more than half the part ofCosts you do not include.Do not include in tion. For 2000 he was entitled to file a joint returnthe year before the kidnapping.the cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing, for himself and his deceased wife. For 2001 and
3) You would have qualified for head ofeducation, medical treatment, vacations, life in- 2002 he can file as a qualifying widower with a
household filing status if the child had notsurance, or transportation. Also, do not include dependent child. After 2002 he can file as head
been kidnapped.the rental value of a home you own or the value of household if he qualifies.
Page 8

Page 9 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Death or birth.You may be eligible to file as aU.S. citizen or resident.If you are a U.S. spouse and the separate return of your new
qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if the citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or spouse for that year. If you file a joint return with
child who qualifies you for this filing status is Mexico, you may qualify for any of the exemp- your new spouse, you can be claimed as an
born or dies during the year. You must have tions discussed here. exemption only on that return.
provided more than half of the cost of keeping up Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-Nonresident aliens.Generally, if you are aa home that was the child’s main home during tained a final decree of divorce or separatenonresident alien (other than a resident of Can-the entire part of the year he or she was alive. maintenance by the end of the year, you cannotada or Mexico, or certain residents of India,
take your former spouse’s exemption. This ruleJapan, or Korea), you can qualify for only oneKidnapped child. You may be eligible to file applies even if you provided all of your formerpersonal exemption for yourself. You cannotas a qualifying widow(er) with dependent child, spouse’s support.claim exemptions for a spouse or dependents.even if the child who qualifies you for this filingThese restrictions do not apply if you are astatus has been kidnapped. You can claim quali-nonresident alien married to a citizen or resident
Exemptionsfying widow(er) with dependent child filing statusof the United States and have chosen to beif all of the following statements are true. for Dependentstreated as a resident of the United States.
For information on exemptions if you are a1) The child must be presumed by law en- You are allowed one exemption for each person
nonresident alien, see chapter 5 in Publicationforcement authorities to have been kid- you can claim as a dependent.
519.napped by someone who is not a member To claim the exemption for a dependent, you
of your family or the child’s family. must meet all five of the dependency tests dis-Dual-status taxpayers.If you have been both
cussed later. You can claim an exemption fora nonresident alien and a resident alien in the2) In the year of the kidnapping, the child your dependent even if your dependent files asame tax year, you should get Publication 519lived with you for more than half the part of return. But that dependent cannot claim his orfor information on determining your exemptions.the year before the kidnapping. her personal exemption if you are entitled to do
3) You would have qualified for qualifying so. However, see Joint Return Test, later.Personal Exemptionswidow(er) with dependent child filing status Kidnapped children. You may be eligible toif the child had not been kidnapped. You are generally allowed one exemption forclaim the exemption for a child even if the child
yourself and, if you are married, one exemptionhas been kidnapped. Both of the following state-As mentioned earlier, this filing statusfor your spouse. These are called personal ex-ments must be true.is only available for 2 years followingemptions.the year of death of your spouse.CAUTION
!
1) The child must be presumed by law en-
forcement authorities to have been kid-
napped by someone who is not a member
Your Own Exemption
of your family or the child’s family.
You can take one exemption for yourself unless
2) The child must have qualified as your de-Exemptions you can be claimed as a dependent by another
pendent for the part of the year before thetaxpayer.
kidnapping.Exemptions reduce your taxable income. Gen-
Single persons.If another taxpayer is entitlederally, you can deduct $3,000 for each exemp- If both statements are true, the child isto claim you as a dependent, you cannot take antion you claim in 2002. If you are entitled to two treated as your dependent and you qualify toexemption for yourself. This is true even if theexemptions for 2002, you would deduct $6,000 claim the exemption.other taxpayer does not actually claim your ex-($3,000 × 2). But you may lose the benefit of part This treatment applies for all years until theemption.or all of your exemptions if your adjusted gross child is returned. However, the last year thisincome is above a certain amount. See Married persons. If you file a joint return, youtreatment can apply is the earlier of:Phaseout of Exemptions, later. can take your own exemption. If you file a sepa-
There are two types of exemptions: personal 1) The year there is a determination that therate return, you can take your own exemption
exemptions and exemptions for dependents. child is dead, oronly if another taxpayer is not entitled to claim
While these are both worth the same amount,you as a dependent. 2) The year the child would have reacheddifferent rules, discussed later, apply to each age 18.type.
You usually can claim exemptions for your-Your Spouse’s Exemption Child born alive.If your child was born aliveself, your spouse, and each person you can during the year, and the dependency tests areYour spouse is never considered your depen-claim as a dependent. If you are entitled to claim met, you can claim the exemption. This is truedent. You may be able to take one exemption foran exemption for a dependent (such as your even if the child lived only for a moment. State oryour spouse only because you are married.child), that dependent cannot claim a personal local law must treat the child as having beenexemption on his or her own tax return. Joint return.On a joint return, you can claimborn alive. There must be proof of a live birth
one exemption for yourself and one for yourshown by an official document, such as a birthHow to claim exemptions.How you claim an spouse. certificate.exemption on your tax return depends on which
Separate return.If you file a separate return,form you file. Stillborn child.You cannot claim an exemp-
you can claim the exemption for your spousetion for a stillborn child.Form 1040EZ filers. If you file Form only if your spouse had no gross income and1040EZ, the exemption amount is combined Death of dependent. If your dependent diedwas not the dependent of another taxpayer. Thiswith the standard deduction and entered on line during the year and otherwise met the depen-is true even if the other taxpayer does not actu-5. dency tests, you can claim the exemption forally claim your spouse’s exemption. This is alsoyour dependent.Form 1040A filers.If you file Form 1040A, true if your spouse is a nonresident alien.
complete lines 6a through 6d. The total numberDeath of spouse. If your spouse died duringExample. Your dependent mother died onof exemptions you can claim is the total in thethe year, you can generally claim your spouse’sJanuary 15. The five dependency tests are met.box on line 6d. Also complete line 26 by multiply-exemption under the rules just explained in Joint You can claim the exemption for her on youring the number in the box on line 6d by $3,000.return and Separate return. return.
Form 1040 filers.If you file Form 1040, If you remarried during the year, you cannotHousekeepers, maids, or servants.If thesecomplete lines 6a through 6d. On line 40, multi-take an exemption for your deceased spouse.people work for you, you cannot claim exemp-ply the total exemptions shown in the box on lineIf you are a surviving spouse without grosstions for them. 6d by $3,000 and enter the result. If your ad-income and you remarry in the year your spouse
justed gross income is more than $103,000, seedied, you can be claimed as an exemption onChild tax credit.You may be entitled to a child
Phaseout of Exemptions, later. both the final separate return of your deceased tax credit for each of your qualifying children for
Page 9

Page 10 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure A. Can You Claim an Exemption for a Dependent?
Was the person either a member of your household for the entire tax
year or related to you? (See Member of Household or Relationship Test. )
You cannot
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
You can
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
Start Here
No
Yes
No
Yes
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075 Was the person a U.S. citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or
Mexico, for any part of the tax year?
1
Did the person file a joint return for the year?
2
Did you provide more than half the person’s total support for the
year? (If you are a divorced or separated parent of the person, see
Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents. )
3
Did the person have gross income of $3,000 or more during the tax
year?
4
Was the person your child?
Was your child under 19 at the end of the year?
Was your child under 24 at the end of the year and a full-time
student for some part of each of five months during the year? (See
Student under age 24 .)
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
No
No
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
1
If the person was your legally adopted child and lived in your home as a member of your household for the entire tax year, answ er “yes” to this question.
2
If neither the person nor the person’s spouse is required to file a return, but they file a joint return only to claim a refund  of tax withheld, answer “no” to this
question.
3
Answer “yes” to this question if you meet the multiple support requirements under Multiple Support Agreement.
/H17075
4
Gross income for this purpose does not include income received by a permanently disabled individual at a sheltered workshop. (S ee Disabled dependents.)
whom you can claim an exemption. For more due to special circumstances. Temporary ab-1. Member of Household or
information, see the instructions in your tax sences due to special circumstances include Relationship Test
forms package. absences because of illness, education, busi-
To meet this test, a person must either: ness, vacation, or military service.
If the person is placed in a nursing home for1) Live with you for the entire year as a mem-Dependency Tests an indefinite period of time to receive constantber of your household, or
medical care, the absence is considered tempo-The following five tests must be met for you to2) Be related to you in one of the ways listedrary.claim an exemption for a dependent. later under Relatives who do not have to
live with you.1. Member of Household or Relationship Test. Death or birth.A person who died during theIf at any time during the year the person was2. Citizen or Resident Test. year, but was a member of your household untilyour spouse, that person cannot be your depen-death, will meet the member of household test.3. Joint Return Test. dent. However, see Personal Exemptions, ear- The same is true for a child who was born duringlier.4. Gross Income Test. the year and was a member of your household
for the rest of the year. The test is also met if aTemporary absences. A person lives with5. Support Test.
child would have been a member except for anyyou as a member of your household even if
required hospital stay following birth.either (or both) of you are temporarily absent
Page 10

Page 11 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Local law violated.A person does not meet 2) A student under age 24 at the end of the2. Citizen or Resident Test
year.the member of household test if at any time
To meet the citizen or resident test, a personduring your tax year the relationship between The exceptions for children under age 19 andmust be a U.S. citizen or resident, or a residentyou and that person violates local law. students under age 24 are discussed in detailof Canada or Mexico, for some part of the calen-
later.dar year in which your tax year begins.Relatives who do not have to live with you. If you file on a fiscal year basis, the gross
A person related to you in any of the following income test applies to the calendar year in whichChildren’s place of residence.Children usu-ways does not have to live with you for the entire your fiscal year begins.ally are citizens or residents of the country ofyear as a member of your household to meettheir parents. Gross income defined.All income in the formthis test. If you were a U.S. citizen when your childof money, property, and services that is notwas born, the child may be a U.S. citizen al-• Your child, grandchild, great grandchild, exempt from tax is gross income.though the other parent was a nonresident alienetc. (a legally adopted child is considered In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-and the child was born in a foreign country. If so,your child). ing business, gross income is the total net salesand the other dependency tests are met, youminus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-• Your stepchild. can take the exemption. It does not matter if theneous income from the business.child lives abroad with the nonresident alien• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis- Gross receipts from rental property are grossparent.ter, stepbrother, or stepsister. income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., to
If you are a U.S. citizen who has legallydetermine the gross income from rental prop-• Your parent, grandparent, or other directadopted a child who is not a U.S. citizen orerty.ancestor, but not foster parent. resident, and the other dependency tests areGross income includes a partner’s share of
met, you can take the exemption if your home is• Your stepfather or stepmother. the gross (not a share of the net) partnership
the child’s main home and the child is a memberincome. • A brother or sister of your father orof your household for your entire tax year.Gross income also includes all unemploy-mother. ment compensation and certain scholarship andForeign students’ place of residence.For-• A son or daughter of your brother or sister. fellowship grants. Scholarships received by de-eign students brought to this country under agree candidates that are used for tuition, fees,• Your father-in-law, mother-in-law, qualified international education exchange pro-supplies, books, and equipment required forson-in-law, daughter-in-law, gram and placed in American homes for a tem-particular courses are not included in gross in-brother-in-law, or sister-in-law. porary period generally are not U.S. residentscome. For more information, see Publicationand do not meet the citizen or resident test. YouAny of these relationships that were established 520.cannot claim an exemption for them. However, ifTax-exempt income, such as certain socialby marriage are not ended by death or divorce.you provided a home for a foreign student, yousecurity payments, is not included in gross in-may be able to take a charitable contributionAdoption. Even if your adoption of a child is come.deduction. See Expenses Paid for Student Liv-not yet final, the child is considered to be your Disabled dependents. For this gross in-ing With You in Publication 526, Charitable Con-child if he or she was placed with you for legal come test, gross income does not include in-tributions.adoption by an authorized placement agency. come received by a permanently and totallyAlso, the child must have been a member of disabled individual for services performed at a
your household. An authorized placement sheltered workshop. The availability of medical3. Joint Return Testagency includes any person authorized by state care must be the main reason the individual is at
law to place children for legal adoption. If theEven if the other dependency tests are met, youthe workshop. Also, the income must come
child was not placed with you by an authorizedare generally not allowed an exemption for yoursolely from activities at the workshop that are
placement agency, the child will meet this testdependent if he or she files a joint return.incident to this medical care. A sheltered work-
only if he or she was a member of your house- shop is a school operated by certain tax-exempt
Example. You supported your daughter forhold for your entire tax year. organizations, or by a state, a U.S. possession,
the entire year while her husband was in thea political subdivision of a state or possession,
Armed Forces. The couple files a joint return.the United States, or the District of Columbia,Foster child.A foster child must live with you
Even though all the other tests are met, youthat provides special instruction or training de-as a member of your household for the entire
cannot take an exemption for your daughter.signed to alleviate the disability of the individual.year to qualify as your dependent. For this test, a
foster child is one who is in your care that youException. The joint return test does not applyChild defined.For purposes of the gross in-care for as your own child. It does not matterif a joint return is filed by the dependent and hiscome test, your child is your son, stepson,how the child became a member of the house-or her spouse merely as a claim for refund anddaughter, stepdaughter, a legally adopted child,hold. no tax liability would exist for either spouse onor a child who was placed with you by an author-
separate returns. ized placement agency for your legal adoption.Cousin. You can claim an exemption for your A foster child who was a member of your house-cousin only if he or she lives with you as aExample. Your son and his wife each hadhold for your entire tax year is also considered
member of your household for the entire year. Aless than $3,000 of wages and no unearnedyour child.
cousin is a descendant of a brother or sister ofincome. Neither is required to file a tax return.
Child under age 19.If your child is under 19 atyour father or mother. Taxes were taken out of their pay, so they filed a
the end of the year, the gross income test doesjoint return to get a refund. You are allowed to
not apply. Your child can have any amount ofJoint return.If you file a joint return, you dotake exemptions for your son and
income and you can still claim an exemption ifdaughter-in-law if the other dependency testsnot need to show that a person is related to both
the other dependency tests, including the sup-are met, even though they can also claim theiryou and your spouse. You also do not need to
port test, are met.personal exemptions on their joint return.show that a person is related to the spouse who
provides support. Example. Marie, 18, earned $4,000. Her fa-For example, your spouse’s uncle who re- ther provided more than half her support. Be-4. Gross Income Testceives more than half of his support from you cause Marie is under 19, the gross income testmay be your dependent, even though he doesGenerally, you cannot take an exemption for adoes not apply. If the other dependency testsnot live with you. However, if you and yourdependent if that person had gross income ofwere met, Marie’s father can claim an exemptionspouse file separate returns, your spouse’s $3,000 or more for 2002. This test does notfor her.uncle can be your dependent only if he is aapply if the person is your child and is either:
member of your household and lives with you for Student under age 24.The gross income test
your entire tax year. 1) Under age 19 at the end of the year, or does not apply if your child is a student who is
Page 11

Page 12 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 5. Worksheet for Determining Support
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1) Total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable and
nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year $
2) Amount used for support $
3) Amount used for other purposes $
4) Amount in savings and other accounts at the end of the year $
(The total of lines 2, 3, and 4 should equal line 1) $
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
5) Lodging (Complete item a or b)
a) Rent paid $
b) If not rented, show fair rental value of home. If the person you supported owned the
home, include this amount in line 19. $
6) Food $
7) Utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 5a or 5b) $
8) Repairs (not included in line 5a or 5b) $
9) Other. Do not include expenses of maintaining home, such as mortgage interest, real estate
taxes, and insurance. $
10) Total household expenses (Add lines 5 through 9) $
11) Total number of persons who lived in household
Expenses for the Person You Supported
12) Each person’s part of household expenses (line 10 divided by line 11) $
13) Clothing $
14) Education $
15) Medical, dental $
16) Travel, recreation $
17) Other (specify)
$
18) Total cost of support for the year (Add lines 12 through 17) $
Did You Provide More Than Half?
19) Amount the person provided for own support (line 2, plus line 5b if the person you supported
owned the home) $
20) Amount others provided for the person’s support. Include amounts provided by state, local,
and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. $
21) Amount you provided for the person’s support (line 18 minus lines 19 and 20) $
22) 50% of line 18 $
Is line 21 more than line 22?
Yes. You meet the support test for the person. If the other exemption tests are met, you may claim an exemption for
the person.
No. You do not meet the support test for the person. You cannot claim an exemption for the person unless you can
do so under a multiple support agreement. See Multiple Support Agreement later in this publication.
Page 12

Page 13 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
under age 24 at the end of the calendar year. A person’s own funds are not support unlessSocial security benefit payments.If a
The other dependency tests must still be met. they are actually spent for support. husband and wife each receive payments that
are paid by one check made out to both of them,Student defined.To qualify as a student, Example. Your mother received $2,400 inhalf of the total paid is considered to be for theyour child must be, during some part of each of 5social security benefits and $300 in interest. Shesupport of each spouse, unless they can showcalendar months during the calendar year (notpaid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation.otherwise.necessarily consecutive): Even though your mother received a total ofIf a child receives social security benefits and
$2,700, she spent only $2,400 for her own sup-uses them toward his or her own support, the1) A full-time student at a school that has aport. If you spent more than $2,400 for her sup-payments are considered as provided by theregular teaching staff, course of study, andport and no other support was received, youchild.regularly enrolled body of students in at-have provided more than half of her support.tendance, or Support provided by the state (welfare,
food stamps, housing, etc.).Benefits pro-Child’s wages used for own support.You2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm train- vided by the state to a needy person generallycannot include in your contribution to youring course given by a school described in are considered to be used for support. However,child’s support any support that is paid for by the(1) above or a state, county, or local gov- payments based on the needs of the recipientchild with the child’s own wages, even if you paidernment. will not be considered as used entirely for thatthe wages.
person’s support if it is shown that part of theFull-time student defined.A full-time stu-Year support is provided.The year you pro-payments were not used for that purpose.dent is a person who is enrolled for the numbervide the support is the year you pay for it, even ifof hours or courses the school considers to beyou do so with borrowed money that you repayFoster care payments and expenses.Pay-full-time attendance. in a later year. ments you receive for the support of a foster
If you use a fiscal year to report your income,child from a child placement agency are consid-School defined.The term “school” includes
you must provide more than half of the ered support provided by the agency. Similarly,elementary schools, junior and senior high
dependent’s support for the calendar year inpayments you receive for the support of a fosterschools, colleges, universities, and technical,
which your fiscal year begins. child from a state or county are considered sup-trade, and mechanical schools. It does not in-
port provided by the state or county.clude on-the-job training courses, correspond-Armed Forces dependency allotments.Theence schools, and night schools. If you are not in the trade or business ofpart of the allotment contributed by the govern-providing foster care and your unreimbursedment and the part taken out of your military payExample. James, 22, attends college as a out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a fosterare both considered provided by you in figuringfull-time student. During the summer, James child were mainly to benefit an organizationwhether you provide more than half of the sup-earned $4,000. If the other dependency tests qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-port. If your allotment is used to support personsare met, his parents can take the exemption for butions, the expenses are deductible as charita-other than those you name, you can take theJames. ble contributions, but are not considered supportexemptions for them if they otherwise qualify.you provided. For more information about theVocational high school students.People deduction for charitable contributions, see Publi-who work on “co-op” jobs in private industry as aExample. You are in the Armed Forces. cation 526. If your unreimbursed expenses arepart of the school’s prescribed course of class-You authorize an allotment for your widowednot deductible as charitable contributions, theyroom and practical training are consideredmother that she uses to support herself and yourare considered support you provided.full-time students. sister. If the allotment provides more than half ofIf you are in the trade or business of provid-their support, you can take an exemption forNight school. Your child is not a full-time ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenseseach of them, if they otherwise qualify, evenstudent while attending school only at night. are not considered support provided by you.though you authorize the allotment only for yourHowever, full-time attendance at a school canmother.include some attendance at night as part of a Example.  Lauren, a foster child, lived with
full-time course of study. Mr. and Mrs. Smith. The Smiths cared forTax-exempt military quarters allowances.
Lauren because they wanted to adopt her, notThese allowances are treated the same way as
as a trade or business or to benefit the agencydependency allotments in figuring support. The
5. Support Test that placed her in their home. The Smiths’ un-allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow-
reimbursed expenses are not deductible asance for quarters are both considered as pro-Generally, you must provide more than half of a charitable contributions, but are considered sup-vided by you for support.person’s total support during the calendar year port they provided for Lauren.to meet the support test. However, there areTax-exempt income. In figuring a person’s
special rules that apply in the following two situa-total support, include tax-exempt income, sav-Home for the aged. If you make a lump-sum
tions. ings, and borrowed amounts used to supportadvance payment to a home for the aged to take
that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer-care of your relative for life and the payment is
1) Two or more persons provide support, buttain social security benefits, welfare benefits,based on that person’s life expectancy, the
no one person provides more than half ofnontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armedamount of support you provide each year is the
a person’s total support. See Multiple Sup- Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions,lump-sum payment divided by the relative’s life
port Agreement, later. and tax-exempt interest. expectancy. The amount of support you provide
also includes any other amounts that you pro-2) The person supported is the child of di-Example 1. You provide $4,000 toward vided during the year.vorced or separated parents. See Support your mother’s support during the year. She hasTest for Child of Divorced or Separatedearned income of $600, nontaxable social se-Parents, later. curity benefit payments of $4,800, and tax-ex-Total Support
You figure whether you have provided moreempt interest of $200. She uses all these for her
than half of a person’s total support by compar- To figure if you provided more than half of thesupport. You cannot claim an exemption for your
ing the amount you contributed to that person’s support of a person, you must first determine themother because the $4,000 you provide is not
support with the entire amount of support that total support provided for that person. Total sup-more than half of her total support of $9,600.
person received from all sources. This includes port includes amounts spent to provide food,
support the person provided from his or her own lodging, clothing, education, medical and dentalExample 2. Your daughter takes out a stu-
funds. care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-dent loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay her col-
cessities.lege tuition. She is personally responsible for theYou may find Table 5 helpful in figuring
loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total sup- Generally, the amount of an item of supportwhether you provided more than half of a
port. You cannot claim an exemption for your is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-person’s support.
daughter because you provide less than half of ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support
Person’s own funds not used for support. her support. is the fair rental value of the lodging.
Page 13

Page 14 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Expenses that are not directly related to any the person lives. It includes a reasonable allow-Example 2. You buy a $150 television set
as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.one member of a household, such as the cost ofance for the use of furniture and appliances, and
The television set is placed in your child’s bed-food for the household, must be divided amongfor heat and other utilities.
room. You can include the cost of the televisionthe members of the household. Fair rental value defined.This is the set in the support of your child.amount you could reasonably expect to receiveExample 1. Grace Brown, mother of Maryfrom a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It isExample 3. You pay $5,000 for a car andMiller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and theirused in place of rent or taxes, interest, deprecia-register it in your name. You and yourtwo children. Grace gets social security benefits
tion, paint, insurance, utilities, cost of furniture17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-
and appliances, etc. In some cases, fair rentalcause you own the car and do not give it to yourportation, and recreation. Grace has no other
value may be equal to the rent paid. daughter but merely let her use it, you cannotincome. Frank and Mary’s total food expense for
If you provide the total lodging, the amount ofinclude the cost of the car in your daughter’sthe household is $5,200. They pay Grace’s
support you provide is the fair rental value of thetotal support. However, you can include in yourmedical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fair
daughter’s support your out-of-pocket expensesroom the person uses, or a share of the fairrental value of the lodging provided for Grace is
of operating the car for her benefit.rental value of the entire dwelling if the person$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar
has use of your entire home. If you do not pro-rooming facilities. Figure Grace’s total support
Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, usingvide the total lodging, the total fair rental valueas follows:
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-must be divided depending on how much of the
vide all the rest of your son’s support — $4,000.total lodging you provide. If you provide only aFair rental value of lodging...... $  1,800 Since the car is bought and owned by your son,part and the person supplies the rest, the fair
the car’s fair market value ($4,500) must beClothing, transportation and 2,400 rental value must be divided between both ofrecreation.................. included in his support. The $4,000 support youyou according to the amount each provides.provide is less than half of his total support ofMedical expenses............ 1,200 $8,500. You cannot claim an exemption for yourExample. Your parents live rent free in aShare of food (1/5 of $5,200)..... 1,040 son.house you own. It has a fair rental value of
Total support............... $6,440 $5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fairMedical insurance premiums.Medical insur-
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800ance premiums you pay, including premiums forBecause the support Frank and Mary pro-for the furniture. This does not include heat andsupplementary Medicare coverage, are in-vide ($1,800 lodging + $1,200 medical ex-utilities. The house is completely furnished withcluded in the support you provide.penses + $1,040 food = $4,040) is more thanfurniture belonging to your parents. You payMedical insurance benefits.Medical in-half of Grace’s $6,440 total support, and Grace$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usuallysurance benefits, including basic and supple-meets the other dependency tests, they canincluded in rent for houses in the area wherementary Medicare benefits, are not part ofclaim an exemption for her. your parents live. Therefore, you consider thesupport.total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000Example 2. Your parents live with you, your($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnishedTuition payments and allowances under thespouse, and your two children in a house you GI Bill.Amounts veterans receive under thehouse, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro-own. The fair rental value of your parents’ share GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances whilevided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities)of the lodging is $2,000 a year, which includes they attend school are included in total support.of which you are considered to provide $4,200furnishings and utilities. Your father receives a($3,600 + $600).nontaxable pension of $4,200, which he spends Example. During the year, your son re-equally between your mother and himself forPerson living in his or her own home.The ceives $2,200 from the government under the GIitems of support such as clothing, transporta-total fair rental value of a person’s home that heBill. He uses this amount for his education. Yoution, and recreation. Your total food expense foror she owns is considered support contributedprovide the rest of his support — $2,000. Be-the household is $6,000. Your heat and utilityby that person. cause GI benefits are included in total support,bills amount to $1,200. Your mother has hospital your son is not your dependent.Living with someone rent free.If you liveand medical expenses of $600, which you paywith a person rent free in his or her home, youOther support items. Other items may beduring the year. Figure your parents’ total sup-
must reduce the amount you provide for supportconsidered as support depending on the facts inport as follows:
by the fair rental value of lodging he or sheeach case. For example, if you pay someone to
provides you. provide child care or disabled dependent care,Support provided Father Mother you can include these payments as support,
Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000Property. Property provided as support iseven if you claim a credit for them. For informa-
measured by its fair market value. Fair markettion on the credit, see Publication 503, Child andPension spent for their 2,100 2,100
value is the price that property would sell for onDependent Care Expenses.support .............
the open market. It is the price that would be
Share of food (1/6 of 1,000 1,000 agreed upon between a willing buyer and a$6,000) ............. Do Not Includewilling seller, with neither being required to act,
in Total SupportMedical expenses for 600 and both having reasonable knowledge of the
mother.............. relevant facts. The following items are not included in totalParents’ total support. . . $4,100 $4,700 Capital expenses. Capital items, such assupport.
furniture, appliances, and cars, that are boughtYou must apply the support test separately 1) Federal, state, and local income taxes paidfor a person during the year can be included into each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000 by persons from their own income.total support under certain circumstances.lodging, $1,000 food) of your father’s total sup-
The following examples show when a capital2) Social security and Medicare taxes paid byport of $4,100 — less than half. You provide
item is or is not support. persons from their own income.$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000
food, $600 medical) — more than half of her 3) Life insurance premiums.Example 1. You buy a $200 power lawntotal support of $4,700. You meet the support
mower for your 13-year-old child. The child is4) Funeral expenses. test for your mother, but not your father. Heat
given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed.and utility costs are included in the fair rental 5) Scholarships received by your child if yourBecause a lawn mower is ordinarily an item youvalue of the lodging, so these are not considered child is a full-time student.buy for personal and family reasons that bene-separately.
fits all members of the household, you cannot6) Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational
include the cost of the lawn mower in the supportLodging defined. Lodging is the fair rental Assistance payments used for the support
value of the room, apartment, or house in which of your child. of the child who receives them.
Page 14

Page 15 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) One or both parents provide more than payment of support, and the noncustodialMultiple Support Agreement
half of the child’s total support for the cal-parent attaches to his or her return the
Sometimes no one provides more than half of endar year. documentation described later under Di-
the support of a person. Instead, two or more vorce decree or separation agreement3) One or both parents have custody of thepersons, each of whom would be able to take made after 1984, orchild for more than half of the calendarthe exemption but for the support test, togetheryear. 3) A decree or agreement executed beforeprovide more than half of the person’s support.
1985 provides that the noncustodial parent“Child” is defined earlier under Gross IncomeWhen this happens, you can agree that any is entitled to the exemption, and he or sheTest.one of you who individually provides more than provides at least $600 for the child’s sup-This discussion does not apply if the support10% of the person’s support, but only one, can port during the year, unless the pre-1985of the child is determined under a multiple sup-claim an exemption for that person. Each of the decree or agreement is modified afterport agreement, discussed earlier.others must sign a statement agreeing not to 1984 to specify that this provision will notclaim the exemption for that year. The personGeneral rule.The parent who has custody of apply.who claims the exemption must keep these the child for the greater part of the year (the
signed statements for his or her records. A multi-custodial parent) is generally treated as theNoncustodial parent. The noncustodial
ple support declaration identifying each of theparent who provides more than half of the child’sparent is the parent who has custody of the child
others who agreed not to claim the exemptionsupport. It does not matter whether the custodialfor the shorter part of the year or who does not
must be attached to the return of the personparent actually provided more than half of thehave custody at all.
support.claiming the exemption. Form 2120, Multiple
Support Declaration, can be used for this pur- Example. Under the terms of your 1984 di-Custody. Custody is usually determined bypose. vorce decree, your former spouse has custodythe terms of the most recent decree of divorce or
of your child. The decree specifically states thatseparate maintenance, or a later custody de-Example 1. You, your sister, and your two you are entitled to the exemption. You provide atcree. If there is no decree, use the written sepa-brothers provide the entire support of your least $600 in child support during the calendarration agreement. If neither a decree nor
mother for the year. You provide 45%, your year. You are considered to have provided moreagreement establishes custody, then the parent
sister 35%, and your two brothers each provide than half of the child’s support.who has the physical custody of the child for the
10%. Either you or your sister can claim angreater part of the year is considered to haveWritten declaration. The custodial parentexemption for your mother. The other must signcustody of the child. This also applies if themay use either Form 8332 or a similar state-a statement agreeing not to take an exemptionvalidity of a decree or agreement awarding cus-ment (containing the information required by thefor your mother. The one who claims the exemp-tody is uncertain because of legal proceedingsform) to make the written declaration to releasetion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara-pending on the last day of the calendar year.the exemption to the noncustodial parent. TheIf the parents are divorced or separated dur-tion, to his or her return and must keep the noncustodial parent must attach the form oring the year and had joint custody of the childstatement signed by the other for his or her statement to his or her tax return.before the separation, the parent who has cus-records. Because neither brother provides more The exemption can be released for a singletody for the greater part of the rest of the year isthan 10% of the support, neither can take the year, for a number of specified years (for exam-considered to have custody of the child for theexemption and neither has to sign a statement. ple, alternate years), or for all future years, astax year.
specified in the declaration. If the exemption isExample 2. You and your brother each pro-
released for more than one year, the originalExample 1. Under the terms of your di-vide 20% of your mother’s support for the year.
release must be attached to the return of thevorce, you have custody of your child for 10The remaining 60% of her support is provided
months of the year. Your former spouse has noncustodial parent for the first year, and a copyequally by two persons who are not related to
custody for the other 2 months. You and yourmust be attached for each later year.her. She does not live with them. Because moreformer spouse provide the child’s total support.than half of her support is provided by persons Divorce decree or separation agreementYou are considered to have provided more thanwho cannot claim an exemption for her, no one made after 1984. If your divorce decree orhalf of the support of the child. However, seecan take the exemption. separation agreement was executed after 1984,Exception, later. the noncustodial parent does not have to attach
Example 3. Your father lives with you and Form 8332 if both of the following requirementsExample 2. You and your former spousereceives 25% of his support from social security, are met.provided your child’s total support for 2002. For40% from you, 24% from his brother, and 11%the first 8 months of the year, you had custody of1) The decree or agreement is signed by thefrom a friend. Either you or your uncle can takeyour child under your 1994 divorce decree (thecustodial parent and states all of the fol-the exemption for your father if the other signs amost recent decree at the time). On August 31,lowing.statement agreeing not to. The one who takes2002, a new custody decree granted custody to
the exemption must attach Form 2120, or ayour former spouse. Because you had custody a) The custodial parent will not claim thesimilar declaration, to his return and must keepfor the greater part of the year, you are consid-child as a dependent for the year.for his records the signed statement from theered to have provided more than half of your
one agreeing not to take the exemption. b) The noncustodial parent can claim thechild’s support, unless the exception described
child as a dependent without regardnext applies.
to any condition, such as payment of
Exception. The noncustodial parent will beSupport Test for Child of support.
treated as providing more than half of the child’sDivorced or Separated Parents c) The years for which the noncustodialsupport if:
parent, rather than the custodial parent,The support test for a child of divorced or sepa-
1) The custodial parent signs a written decla-can claim the child as a dependent.rated parents is based on the special rules ex-
ration, discussed later, that he or she willplained here and shown in Figure B. However,
not claim the exemption for the child, and2) The noncustodial parent attaches a copythese special rules apply only if all of the follow-
the noncustodial parent attaches this writ-of the following pages of the decree oring are true. ten declaration to his or her return, agreement to his or her tax return.
1) The parents are divorced or legally sepa-2) The custodial parent signed a decree or a) The cover page (write the otherrated under a decree of divorce or sepa- agreement executed after 1984 stating parent’s social security number on thisrate maintenance, or separated under a that he or she will not claim the exemptionpage).written separation agreement, or lived for the child, and that the noncustodial par-
apart at all times during the last 6 months b) The pages that contain the informationent can claim an exemption for the child
of the calendar year. without regard to any condition such as shown in item (1).
Page 15

Page 16 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure B. Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents
Are the parents divorced or
legally separated, separated
under a written agreement, or
did they live apart the last 6
months of the year?
Did the custodial parent sign
a decree or agreement
executed after 1984 releasing
the exemption?
Start Here
No
/H17075
/H17074
/H17075
Did one or both parents
furnish over half of the
child’s total support?
Is the child in the custody
of one or both parents for
more than half of the year?
Did the custodial parent sign a
Form 8332 or similar statement
releasing the exemption?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
YesDid any one person
provide over half of the
child’s total support?
The person who provided
over half of the child’s
support meets the support
test.
See Multiple Support
Agreement.
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
before 1985 (and not
modified after 1984) that
entitles the noncustodial
parent to the exemption?
Did the noncustodial
parent provide at least
$600 of the child’s
support during the year?
The noncustodial parent
meets the support test.
The custodial parent meets
the support test.
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Is the noncustodial parent
attaching the signed form or
other required documentation
to his or her return?
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
No
/H17075
Yes
Page 16

Page 17 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
than half the support of your child or enter into a
multiple support agreement, as discussed ear-
lier, to satisfy the support test.
Example. You never married the father of
your child and do not live with him, but he pro-
vides the home you and your child live in. The
fair rental value of the lodging he provides to
your child is $3,000 a year. You provide the rest
of your child’s support for the year, which is
$1,200. The special rules for a child of divorced
or separated parents do not apply because you
and the child’s father never married. As a result,
you cannot claim an exemption for your child
because you did not provide more than half of
the child’s support.
Phaseout of Exemptions
The amount you can claim as a deduction for
exemptions is phased out once your adjusted
gross income (AGI) goes above a certain level
for your filing status. These levels are as follows:
AGI Level
Which Reduces
Filing Status Exemption Amount
Married filing separately . . $103,000
Single.............. 137,300
Head of household...... 171,650
Married filing jointly..... 206,000
Qualifying widow(er)..... 206,000
You must reduce the dollar amount of your
exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part of
$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-
rately), that your AGI exceeds the amount
shown above for your filing status. If your AGI
Table 6. Deduction for Exemptions Worksheet
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 35, more than the amount shown on
line 4 below for your filing status?
● Married filing separately, enter $103,000
No. Stop. Multiply $3,000 by the total number of exemptions
claimed on Form 1040, line 6d, and enter the result on line 40.
Yes. Complete the worksheet below to figure your deduction for
exemptions.
2. Multiply $3,000 by the total number of exemptions claimed on Form
1040, line 6d
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 35
4. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status:
● Single, enter $137,300
● Head of household, enter $171,650
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er),
enter $206,000
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, stop here;
enter the amount from line 2 above on Form 1040,
line 40
Note: If line 5 is more than $122,500 (more than $61,250 if married filing
separately), stop here; you cannot take a deduction for exemptions. Enter
-0- on Form 1040, line 40.
6. Divide line 5 by $2,500 ($1,250 if married filing
separately). If the result is not a whole number, round
it UP to the next higher whole number
7. Multiply line 6 by 2% (.02), and enter the result as a
decimal amount
8. Multiply line 2 by line 7
9. Deduction for exemptions. Subtract line 8 from line 2. Enter the result
here and on Form 1040, line 40
2.
3.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
4.
/H20854
exceeds the amount shown above by more than
c) The signature page with the other Third-party support.Support provided by a$122,500 ($61,250 if married filing separately),
parent’s signature and the date of the third party for a divorced or separated parent isthe amount of your deduction for exemptions is
agreement. not included as support provided by that parent. reduced to zero.
However, see Remarried parent, below. If your AGI exceeds the level for your filing
status, use Table 6 to figure the amount of yourIf these requirements are not met, theExample. You are divorced. During the en-deduction for exemptions.noncustodial parent must attach to histire year you and your child live with your motheror her return Form 8332 or a similarCAUTION
!
in a house she owns. The fair rental value of thestatement from the custodial parent releasing Social Securitylodging provided by your mother for your child isthe exemption. Numbers for Dependents$3,000. The home provided by your mother is
not included in the amount of support you pro-You must list the social security number (SSN)Child support.All child support payments ac-vide. of any person for whom you claim an exemptiontually received from the noncustodial parent areRemarried parent.If you remarry, the sup-in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 orconsidered used for the support of the child.port provided by your new spouse is treated asForm 1040A.
provided by you.Example. The noncustodial parent provides If you do not list the dependent’s SSN$1,200 for the child’s support. This amount is when required or if you list an incorrectExample. You have two children from a for-considered support provided by the noncus- SSN, the exemption may be disal-CAUTION
!
mer marriage who live with you. You have re-todial parent even if the $1,200 was actually lowed.married and are living in a home owned by yourspent on things other than support.
new spouse. The fair rental value of the home
Paid in a later year.If you fail to pay childprovided to the children by your new spouse isNote. If your dependent does not have and
support in the year it is due, but pay it in a latertreated as provided by you. cannot get an SSN, you must list the individual
year, your payment of the overdue amount is not taxpayer identification number (ITIN) or adop-
considered paid for the support of your childHome jointly owned. If you and your formertion taxpayer identification number (ATIN) in-
either for the year the payment was due or forspouse have the right to use and live in thestead of an SSN. See Taxpayer identification
the year it is paid. It is payment of an amount youhome, each of you is considered to provide halfnumbers for aliens or Taxpayer identification
owed to the custodial parent, but it is not consid-of your child’s lodging. However, if the divorcenumber for adoptees, later.
ered paid by you for the support of your child.decree gives only you the right to use and live in
No social security number.If a person forthe home, you are considered to provide your
Example. You owed but failed to pay child whom you expect to claim an exemption on yourchild’s entire lodging. It does not matter if the
support last year. This year, you pay all of the return does not have an SSN, either you or thatlegal title to the home remains in the names of
amount owed from last year and the full amount person should apply for an SSN as soon asboth parents.
due for this year. Your payment of this year’s possible by filing Form SS–5, Application for a
child support counts as your support for thisParents who never married. These special Social Security Card, with the Social Security
year, but payment of the amount owed from last rules for divorced or separated parents do not Administration (SSA). Information about apply-
year does not count as support either for this apply to parents who never married each other. ing for an SSN and Form SS–5 is available at
year or for last year. If this is your situation, you must provide more your local SSA office.
Page 17

Page 18 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 7. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF Your Filing Status is . . .
Your Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,700
7,850
3,925
6,900
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table 8 or 9 instead.Table 8. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status
is . . .
THEN your
Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,850
7,000
8,750
9,650
10,550
11,450
4,825
5,725
6,625
7,525
8,050
9,200
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table 9, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box Above
is . . .
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table 9. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,700
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,925
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,850
● Head of household, enter $6,900
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,150 ($900 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2002.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$750
2002 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 3.
$250
It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN.Form W–7, Application for IRS Individual Tax-are taxed. It is a benefit that eliminates the need
If you do not have a required SSN by the filingpayer Identification Number. for many taxpayers to itemize actual deductions,
due date, you can file Form 4868, Application for such as medical expenses, charitable contribu-It usually takes about 30 days to get an ITIN.
Automatic Extension of Time to File U.S. Individ- tions, and taxes, on Schedule A of Form 1040.Taxpayer identification number forual Income Tax Return, for an extension of time The standard deduction is higher for taxpayersadoptees. If you have a child who was placedto file. who are 65 or older or blind. If you have awith you by an authorized placement agency,choice, you should use the method that givesBorn and died in 2002.If your child wasyou may be able to claim an exemption for theyou the lower tax.born and died in 2002, and you do not have anchild. However, if you cannot get an SSN or an
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the You benefit from the standard deduc-ITIN for the child, you must get an adoption
child’s birth certificate instead. If you do, enter tion if your standard deduction is moretaxpayer identification number (ATIN) for the
“DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of your Form than the total of your allowable item-child from the IRS. See Form W–7A, Applica-
TIP
1040 or Form 1040A. ized deductions.tion for Taxpayer Identification Number for
Pending U.S. Adoptions, for details.Taxpayer identification numbers for Persons not eligible for the standard deduc-aliens. If your dependent is a resident or non- tion. Your standard deduction is zero and youresident alien who does not have and is not should itemize any deductions you have if:eligible to get an SSN, the IRS will issue your
Standard Deductiondependent an individual taxpayer identification 1) You are married and filing a separate re-
number (ITIN) instead of an SSN. Write the turn, and your spouse itemizes deductions,Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking anumber in column (2) of line 6c of your Form
standard deduction or itemizing their deduc- 2) You are filing a tax return for a short tax1040 or Form 1040A. To apply for an ITIN, use
tions. The standard deduction is a dollar amount year because of a change in your annual
that reduces the amount of income on which you accounting period, or
Page 18

Page 19 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) You are a nonresident or dual-status alien you can take the higher standard deduction forExample 1. Michael is single. His parents
during the year. You are considered ablindness if you otherwise qualify. claim an exemption for him on their 2002 tax
dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi- return. He has interest income of $780 and
dent and resident alien during the year. wages of $150. He has no itemized deductions.
Spouse 65 or Older or BlindIf you are a nonresident alien who is mar- Michael uses Table 9 to find his standard deduc-
ried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of tion. He enters $150 (his earned income) on lineYou can take the higher standard deduction ifthe year, you can choose to be treated as a 1, $400 ($150 plus $250) on line 3, $750 (theyour spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:U.S. resident. (See Publication 519.) If you larger of $400 and $750) on line 5, and $4,700
make this choice, you can take the standard on line 6. The amount of his standard deduction,1) You file a joint return, ordeduction. on line 7a, is $750 (the smaller of $750 and
2) You file a separate return and can claim$4,700).
If an exemption for you can be claimedan exemption for your spouse because
on another person’s return (such as your spouse had no gross income and an Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-timeyour parents’ return), your standard exemption for your spouse could not be
CAUTION
!
college student, is claimed on his parents’ 2002deduction may be limited. See Standard Deduc- claimed by another taxpayer. tax return. Joe is married and files a separatetion for Dependents, later. return. His wife does not itemize deductions onYou cannot claim the higher standardher separate return.deduction for an individual other thanStandard Deduction Amount Joe has $1,500 in interest income andyourself and your spouse.CAUTION
!
wages of $3,800. He has no itemized deduc-
The standard deduction amount depends on tions. Joe finds his standard deduction by usingyour filing status, whether you are 65 or older or Table 9. He enters his earned income, $3,800,blind, and whether an exemption can be claimedExamples on line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 and entersfor you by another taxpayer. Generally, the stan- $4,050 on line 3. On line 5 he enters $4,050, thedard deduction amounts are adjusted each yearThe following examples illustrate how to deter-larger of lines 3 and 4. Since Joe is married filingfor inflation. The standard deduction amountsmine your standard deduction using Tables 7 a separate return, he enters $3,925 on line 6. Onfor most taxpayers for 2002 are shown in Table and 8. line 7a he enters $3,925 as his standard deduc-7. tion because it is smaller than $4,050, theExample 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, areThe amount of the standard deduction for a amount on line 5.decedent’s final tax return is the same as it filing a joint return for 2002. Neither is blind.
would have been had the decedent continued toThey decide not to itemize their deductions.Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimedlive. However, if the decedent was not 65 orThey use Table 7. Their standard deduction ison her parents’ 2002 tax return. She is 18 yearsolder at the time of death, the higher standard$7,850. old and blind. She has interest income of $1,300deduction for age cannot be claimed. and wages of $2,900. She has no itemized de-Example 2. Assume the same facts as inductions. Amy uses Table 9 to find her standardExample 1, except that Larry is blind at the enddeduction. She enters her wages of $2,900 onHigher Standard Deduction for Ageof 2002. Larry and Donna use Table 8. Their line 1. She adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $3,150(65 or Older) standard deduction is $8,750. on line 3. On line 5 she enters $3,150, the larger
of lines 3 and 4. Since she is single, Amy entersIf you do not itemize deductions, you are entitledExample 3. Bill and Terry are filing a joint$4,700 on line 6. She enters $3,150 on line 7a.to a higher standard deduction if you are age 65return for 2002. Both are over age 65. Neither isThis is the smaller of the amounts on lines 5 andor older at the end of the year. You are consid-blind. If they do not itemize deductions, they use6. Because she checked one box in the top partered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday.Table 8. Their standard deduction is $9,650.of the worksheet, she enters $1,150 on line 7b.Therefore, you can take a higher standard de-
She then adds the amounts on lines 7a and 7bduction for 2002 if your 65th birthday was on orStandard Deduction and enters her standard deduction of $4,300 onbefore January 1, 2003.
line 7c.for DependentsUse Table 8 to figure the standard deduction
amount. The standard deduction for an individual forWho Should Itemizewhom an exemption can be claimed on another
person’s tax return is generally limited to theYou should itemize deductions if your total de-Higher Standard Deduction for
greater of: ductions are more than the standard deductionBlindness
amount. Also, you should itemize if you do not
1) $750, orIf you are blind on the last day of the year and qualify for the standard deduction, as discussed
you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled earlier under Persons not eligible for the stan-2) The individual’s earned income for the
to a higher standard deduction. Use Table 8. dard deduction.year plus $250 (but not more than the reg-You qualify for this benefit if you are totally or You should first figure your itemized deduc-ular standard deduction amount, generallypartly blind. tions and compare that amount to your standard$4,700).
deduction to make sure you are using theHowever, if the individual is 65 or older or blind,Partly blind.If you are partly blind, you must method that gives you the greater benefit.the standard deduction may be higher.get a certified statement from an eye doctor or
You may be subject to a limit on someregistered optometrist that: If an exemption for you (or your spouse if you
of your itemized deductions if your ad-are married filing jointly) can be claimed on
1) You cannot see better than 20/200 in the justed gross income (AGI) is more thansomeone else’s return, use Table 9 to determine
CAUTION
!
better eye with glasses or contact lenses, $137,300 ($68,650 if you are married filing sep-your standard deduction.
or arately). See the instructions for Schedule A
Earned income defined.Earned income is (Form 1040), line 28, for more information on2) Your field of vision is not more than 20salaries, wages, tips, professional fees andfiguring the correct amount of your itemized de-degrees. other amounts received as pay for work youductions.
actually perform.If your eye condition will never improve be-
For purposes of the standard deduction,yond these limits, the statement should include When to itemize. You may benefit from
earned income also includes any part of a schol-this fact. You must keep the statement in your itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form
records. arship or fellowship grant that you must include 1040) if you:
in your gross income. See Publication 520 forIf your vision can be corrected beyond these
more information on what qualifies as a scholar- 1) Do not qualify for the standard deduction,limits only by contact lenses that you can wear
ship or fellowship grant. or the amount you can claim is limited,only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,
Page 19

Page 20 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) Had large uninsured medical and dental • Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate your local directory assistance or
expenses during the year, office in your area. www.irs.gov for the numbers.
3) Paid interest and taxes on your home, • Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
TTY/TDD user. to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–4) Had large unreimbursed employee busi-
4059 to ask tax questions or to orderness expenses or other miscellaneous de-For more information, see Publication 1546,forms and publications.ductions, The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS.
• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to5) Had large uninsured casualty or theft
listen to pre-recorded messages coveringlosses, Free tax services.To find out what services various tax topics.6) Made large contributions to qualified chari-are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free
ties, or Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-
Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-7) Have total itemized deductions that are
ices. To ensure that IRS representatives givescribes other free tax information services,more than the standard deduction to which
accurate, courteous, and professional answers,including tax education and assistance pro-you otherwise are entitled.
grams and a list of TeleTax topics. we use several methods to evaluate the qualityIf you decide to itemize your deductions, of our telephone services. One method is for aPersonal computer. With your per-complete Schedule A and attach it to your Form second IRS representative to sometimes listensonal computer and modem, you can1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, line in on or record telephone calls. Another is to askaccess the IRS on the Internet at28, on Form 1040, line 38.
some callers to complete a short survey at thewww.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, you
Itemizing for state tax or other purposes.If end of the call.can:
you choose to itemize even though your item-
• See answers to frequently asked tax ques-ized deductions are less than the amount of your Walk-in. Many products and servicestions or request help by e-mail.standard deduction, write “IE” (itemized elected) are available on a walk-in basis.next to line 38 (Form 1040). • Download forms and publications or
search for forms and publications by topicChanging your mind. If you do not itemize • Products. You can walk in to many postor keyword.your deductions and later find that you should offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick uphave itemized — or if you itemize your deduc-• Order IRS products on-line. certain forms, instructions, and publica-tions and later find you should not have — you
• View forms that may be filled in electroni-tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocerycan change your return by filing Form 1040X.
cally, print the completed form, and thenstores, copy centers, city and county gov-Married persons who filed separate save the form for recordkeeping. ernments, credit unions, and office supplyreturns. You can change methods of taking stores have an extensive collection of• View Internal Revenue Bulletins publisheddeductions only if you and your spouse both products available to print from a CD-ROMin the last few years.make the same changes. Both of you must file a
or photocopy from reproducible proofs.consent to assessment for any additional tax• Search regulations and the Internal Reve-Also, some IRS offices and libraries haveeither one may owe as a result of the change.nue Code. the Internal Revenue Code, regulations,You and your spouse can use the method
• Receive our electronic newsletters on hotInternal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-that gives you the lower total tax, even though
tax issues and news.one of you may pay more tax than you would tive Bulletins available for research pur-
have paid by using the other method. You both poses.• Learn about the benefits of filing electroni-must use the same method of claiming deduc- cally (IRS e-file). • Services. You can walk in to your localtions. If one itemizes deductions, the other
IRS office to ask tax questions or get helpshould itemize because he or she will not qualify• Get information on starting and operating
with a tax problem. Now you can set up anfor the standard deduction (see Persons not a small business.
appointment by calling your local IRS of-eligible for the standard deduction, earlier).
fice number and, at the prompt, leaving aYou can also reach us with your computer
message requesting Everyday Tax Solu-using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
tions help. A representative will call you
TaxFax Service. Using the phone at-How To Get Tax Help back within 2 business days to schedule
tached to your fax machine, you can an in-person appointment at your conve-
receive forms and instructions by call-You can get help with unresolved tax issues, nience.
ing 703–368–9694. Follow the directions fromorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques-
the prompts. When you order forms, enter thetions, and get more information from the IRS in
Mail. You can send your order forseveral ways. By selecting the method that iscatalog number for the form you need. The items
forms, instructions, and publications tobest for you, you will have quick and easy ac-you request will be faxed to you.
the Distribution Center nearest to youcess to tax help. For help with transmission problems, call theand receive a response within 10 workdays afterFedWorld Help Desk at 703–487–4608.Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you your request is received. Find the address that
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem applies to your part of the country.Phone. Many services are available byunsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-
phone. • Western part of U.S.:payer Advocate.
Western Area Distribution CenterThe Taxpayer Advocate represents your in-
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001terests and concerns within the IRS by protect-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
ing your rights and resolving problems that havetions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order cur- • Central part of U.S.:not been fixed through normal channels. Whilerent and prior year forms, instructions, andCentral Area Distribution CenterTaxpayer Advocates cannot change the tax lawpublications. P.O. Box 8903or make a technical tax decision, they can clear Bloomington, IL 61702–8903• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withup problems that resulted from previous con-
your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.tacts and ensure that your case is given a com- • Eastern part of U.S. and foreign
plete and impartial review. addresses:• Solving problems. Take advantage of Eve-To contact your Taxpayer Advocate: Eastern Area Distribution Centerryday Tax Solutions service by calling your
P.O. Box 85074local IRS office to set up an in-person ap-• Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
pointment at your convenience. Check1–877–777–4778. Richmond, VA 23261–5074
Page 20

Page 21 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CD-ROM for tax products. You can calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet atness. In addition, the CD provides an
order IRS Publication 1796, Federal http://www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release abundance of other helpful information, such as
Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain: is available in early January and the final release how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-
is available in late February. ing for your business, and much more. The de-• Current tax forms, instructions, and publi- sign of the CD makes finding information easycations. CD-ROM for small businesses. IRS and quick and incorporates file formats and
• Prior-year tax forms and instructions. Publication 3207, Small Business Re- browsers that can be run on virtually any
source Guide, is a must for every smalldesktop or laptop computer.• Popular tax forms that may be filled inbusiness owner or any taxpayer about to start a It is available in March. You can get a freeelectronically, printed out for submission,business. This handy, interactive CD containscopy by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting theand saved for recordkeeping. all the business tax forms, instructions and pub-website at www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins. lications needed to successfully manage a busi-
The CD-ROM can be purchased from Na-
tional Technical Information Service (NTIS) by
Page 21

Page 22 of 22 of Publication 501 8:14 - 23-OCT-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Earned income credit....... 8 Joint return...........5 ,  6 ,  9A S
Divorced persons........ 5Exemptions:Absences, temporary.....8 ,  1 0 Scholarships........ 4 ,  11, 14
Joint liability............ 5For dependents......... 9Adopted child Self-employed persons...... 2
Signing............... 5For spouse ............ 9(Relationship test)....... 1 1 Separate returns......6 ,  9 ,  2 0
In general............. 9 Joint return test.......... 1 1Adoption .............. 1 1 Separated parents:Personal.............. 9Adoption Taxpayer Support test for child..... 1 5Phaseout of........... 1 7Identification Number K Single taxpayers........ 5 ,  9
(ATIN) .............. 1 8 Keeping up a home........ 8 Social security benefits..... 1 3
FAge 65 or older.........3 ,  1 9 Kidnapped child......... 8 ,  9 Social security numbers for
Fair rental value......... 1 4Armed Forces dependency dependents ........... 1 7
allotments............ 1 3 Filing requirements...... 2 ,  4 Spouse:LAssistance (See Tax help) Filing status............. 4 Died ..............5 ,  8 ,  9Lodging ............... 1 4 Exemption for.......... 9Foreign students......... 1 1
Filing a joint return....... 5Form:B M Nonresident.......... 6 ,  71040X ...........5 ,  6 ,  2 0Blindness.............. 1 9 Marital status.......... 3 ,  4 Standard deduction..... 18, 192120 ............... 1 5
Marriage annulled......... 52848 ................ 6 State benefit payments..... 1 3C Married persons.......4 ,  5 ,  98332 ............... 1 5 Stepchild.............8 ,  1 1Canada, resident of......9 ,  1 1 8814 ................ 2 Medical insurance Student ............... 1 1Capital expenses......... 1 4 S S – 5............... 1 7 premiums ............ 1 4 Suggestions............. 2Child: W–7 ............... 1 8 Medicare benefits........ 1 4 Support test............ 1 3Born alive............. 9 W – 7 A .............. 1 8 Member of household or Multiple supportOf divorced or separated Foster care expenses...... 1 3 relationship test........ 1 0 agreement .......... 1 5parents ............ 1 5 Foster care payments...... 1 3 Mexico, resident of.......9 ,  1 1 Total support.......... 1 3Stillborn.............. 9 Foster child, dependency More information (See Tax help)Support.............. 1 7 exemption for: Multiple support agreement . . 15TUnder age 19 (Gross Member of household
income test)......... 1 1 Tax help............... 2 0test............... 1 1
NChild’s income, parent’s Tax-exempt income....... 1 3Support test........... 1 3
return................ 4 Noncustodial parent....... 1 5 Taxpayer Advocate....... 2 0Free tax services......... 2 0
Citizen or resident test..... 1 1 Nonresident alien spouse . . 6, 7Temporary absences.....8 ,  1 0
Comments .............. 2 Nonresident aliens......2 ,  7 ,  9Tests for exemption....... 1 0GCommon law marriage...... 5 Citizen or resident test.... 1 1GI Bill................ 1 4 Gross income test....... 1 1Community property states . . . 6 OGross income..........2 ,  1 1 Joint return test........ 1 1Custodial parent......... 1 5 Overseas taxpayers........ 3Gross income test........ 1 1 Member of household orCustody ............... 1 5
relationship test....... 1 0
P Support test........... 1 3HD Personal exemption........ 9 Total support........... 1 3Head of household......... 7Death of dependent........ 9 Phaseout of exemptions.... 1 7 TTY/TDD information...... 2 0Help (See Tax help)Death of spouse.......5 ,  8 ,  9 Publications (See Tax help)Home, keeping up......... 8Death or birth of Puerto Rico, residents of..... 3Household, member of, test . . 10 Udependent........... 8 ,  9
U.S. citizens abroad........ 3Deceased persons......... 3 Q Unearned income ......... 4IDependency tests........ 1 0 Qualifying widow(er) with Unmarried persons........ 4Individual retirementDependents ........... 4 ,  9 dependent child......... 8arrangements (IRAs)...... 6Divorce decree, exemption
Individual Taxpayer Wfor child.............. 1 5
Identification Number R Who must file............ 2Divorced taxpayers: (ITIN)............... 1 8 Relationship test....... 10, 11Exemptions ............ 9 Who should file........... 4
Innocent spouse relief...... 5 Relief from jointFiling status............ 5 Who should itemize....... 1 9
responsibility........... 5Support test for child..... 1 5
■Rental losses............ 6J
Rental value, fair......... 1 4Joint responsibility:E
Divorced taxpayer........ 5Earned income .........4 ,  1 9
Page 22