Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 10  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 35  10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Publication 502
Cat. No. 15002Q
Medical and
Dental
Expenses
(Including the Health 
Coverage Tax Credit)
For use in preparing
2012 Returns
Get forms and other Information
faster and easier by:
Internet IRS.gov
Contents
What's New .............................. 1
Reminders ............................... 1
Introduction .............................. 2
What Are Medical Expenses? ................. 2
What Expenses Can You Include This Year? ..... 2
How Much of the Expenses Can You 
Deduct? .............................. 3
Whose Medical Expenses Can You Include? ..... 3
What Medical Expenses Are Includible? ........ 5
What Expenses Are Not Includible? ........... 15
How Do You Treat Reimbursements? ......... 17
How Do You Figure and Report the Deduction 
on Your Tax Return? ................... 21
Sale of Medical Equipment or Property ........ 22
Damages for Personal Injuries ............... 24
Impairment-Related Work Expenses .......... 25
Health Insurance Costs for Self-Employed 
Persons ............................. 25
COBRA Premium Assistance ................ 26
Health Coverage Tax Credit ................. 27
How To Get Tax Help ...................... 30
Index .................................. 33
What's New
Standard mileage rate.  The standard mileage rate al-
lowed for operating expenses for a car when you use it for 
medical reasons is 23 cents per mile. See Transportation 
under What Medical Expenses Are Includible.
Reminders
Future developments.  For the latest information about 
developments related to Publication 502, such as legisla-
tion enacted after it was published, go to www.irs.gov/
pub502.
Photographs of missing children.  The Internal Reve-
nue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for 
Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missing 
children selected by the Center may appear in this publi-
cation on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can 
help bring these children home by looking at the photo-
graphs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST (1-800-843-5678) if 
you recognize a child.
Dec 10, 2012

Page 2 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Introduction
This publication explains the itemized deduction for medi-
cal and dental expenses that you claim on Schedule A 
(Form 1040). It discusses what expenses, and whose ex-
penses, you can and cannot include in figuring the deduc-
tion. It explains how to treat reimbursements and how to 
figure the deduction. It also tells you how to report the de-
duction on your tax return and what to do if you sell medi-
cal property or receive damages for a personal injury.
Medical expenses include dental expenses, and in this 
publication the term “medical expenses” is often used to 
refer to medical and dental expenses.
You can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) only the 
part of your medical and dental expenses that is more 
than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income (AGI). If your 
medical and dental expenses are not more than 7.5% of 
your AGI, you cannot claim a deduction.
This publication also explains how to treat impair-
ment-related work expenses, health insurance premiums 
if you are self-employed, and the health coverage tax 
credit that is available to certain individuals.
Pub. 502 covers many common medical expenses but 
not every possible medical expense. If you cannot find the 
expense you are looking for, refer to the definition of medi-
cal expenses under What Are Medical Expenses.
See How To Get Tax Help  near the end of this publica-
tion for information about getting publications and forms.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and your suggestions for fu-
ture editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Individual and Specialty Forms and Publications 
Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it 
would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone 
number, including the area code, in your correspondence.
You can email us at taxforms@irs.gov. Please put 
“Publications Comment” on the subject line. You can also 
send us comments from www.irs.gov/formspubs/. Select 
“Comment on Tax Forms and Publications” under “More 
Information.”
Although we cannot respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments as we revise our tax products.
Ordering forms and publications. Visit www.irs.gov/
formspubs/ to download forms and publications, call 
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or write to the ad-
dress below and receive a response within 10 days after 
your request is received.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
Tax questions. If you have a tax question, check the 
information available on IRS.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. 
We cannot answer tax questions sent to either of the 
above addresses.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Health Savings Accounts and Other 
Tax-Favored Health Plans
Forms (and Instructions)
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions
Health Coverage Tax Credit
What Are Medical Expenses?
Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, cure, mitiga-
tion, treatment, or prevention of disease, and the costs for 
treatments affecting any part or function of the body. 
These expenses include payments for legal medical serv-
ices rendered by physicians, surgeons, dentists, and 
other medical practitioners. They include the costs of 
equipment, supplies, and diagnostic devices needed for 
these purposes.
Medical care expenses must be primarily to alleviate or 
prevent a physical or mental defect or illness. They do not 
include expenses that are merely beneficial to general 
health, such as vitamins or a vacation.
Medical expenses include the premiums you pay for in-
surance that covers the expenses of medical care, and 
the amounts you pay for transportation to get medical 
care. Medical expenses also include amounts paid for 
qualified long-term care services and limited amounts 
paid for any qualified long-term care insurance contract.
What Expenses Can You 
Include This Year?
You can include only the medical and dental expenses 
you paid this year, regardless of when the services were 
provided. (But see Decedent under Whose Medical Ex­
penses Can You Include , for an exception.) If you pay 
medical expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver 
the check generally is the date of payment. If you use a 
“pay-by-phone” or “online” account to pay your medical 
expenses, the date reported on the statement of the finan-
cial institution showing when payment was made is the 
date of payment. If you use a credit card, include medical 
  969
  1040
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  8885
Page 2 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 3 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expenses you charge to your credit card in the year the 
charge is made, not when you actually pay the amount 
charged.
If you did not claim a medical or dental expense that 
would have been deductible in an earlier year, you can file 
Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-
turn, for the year in which you overlooked the expense. Do 
not claim the expense on this year's return. Generally, an 
amended return must be filed within 3 years from the date 
the original return was filed or within 2 years from the time 
the tax was paid, whichever is later.
You cannot include medical expenses that were paid 
by insurance companies or other sources. This is true 
whether the payments were made directly to you, to the 
patient, or to the provider of the medical services.
Separate returns. If you and your spouse live in a non-
community property state and file separate returns, each 
of you can include only the medical expenses each ac-
tually paid. Any medical expenses paid out of a joint 
checking account in which you and your spouse have the 
same interest are considered to have been paid equally 
by each of you, unless you can show otherwise.
Community property states.  If you and your spouse 
live in a community property state and file separate re-
turns or are registered domestic partners in Nevada, 
Washington, or California (or a person in California who is 
married to a person of the same sex), any medical expen-
ses paid out of community funds are divided equally. Gen-
erally, each of you should include half the expenses. If 
medical expenses are paid out of the separate funds of 
one individual, only the individual who paid the medical 
expenses can include them. If you live in a community 
property state and are not filing a joint return, see Publica-
tion 555, Community Property. 
How Much of the Expenses 
Can You Deduct?
You can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) only the 
amount of your medical and dental expenses that is more 
than 7.5% of your AGI (Form 1040, line 38).
In this publication, the term “7.5% limit” is used to refer 
to 7.5% of your AGI. The phrase “subject to the 7.5% limit” 
is also used. This phrase means that you must subtract 
7.5% (.075) of your AGI from your medical expenses to 
figure your medical expense deduction.
Example. Your AGI is $40,000, 7.5% of which is 
$3,000. You paid medical expenses of $2,500. You can-
not deduct any of your medical expenses because they 
are not more than 7.5% of your AGI.
Whose Medical Expenses
Can You Include?
You can generally include medical expenses you pay for 
yourself, as well as those you pay for someone who was 
your spouse or your dependent either when the services 
were provided or when you paid for them. There are differ-
ent rules for decedents and for individuals who are the 
subject of multiple support agreements. See Support 
claimed under a multiple support agreement , later under 
Qualifying Person.
Yourself
You can include medical expenses that you paid for your-
self.
Spouse
You can include medical expenses you paid for your 
spouse. To include these expenses, you must have been 
married either at the time your spouse received the medi-
cal services or at the time you paid the medical expenses.
Example 1.  Mary received medical treatment before 
she married Bill. Bill paid for the treatment after they mar-
ried. Bill can include these expenses in figuring his medi-
cal expense deduction even if Bill and Mary file separate 
returns.
If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could not include 
Mary's expenses in his separate return. Mary would in-
clude the amounts she paid during the year in her sepa-
rate return. If they filed a joint return, the medical expen-
ses both paid during the year would be used to figure their 
medical expense deduction.
Example 2. This year, John paid medical expenses for 
his wife Louise, who died last year. John married Belle 
this year and they file a joint return. Because John was 
married to Louise when she received the medical serv-
ices, he can include those expenses in figuring his medi-
cal expense deduction for this year.
Dependent
You can include medical expenses you paid for your de-
pendent. For you to include these expenses, the person 
must have been your dependent either at the time the 
medical services were provided or at the time you paid the 
expenses. A person generally qualifies as your dependent 
for purposes of the medical expense deduction if both of 
the following requirements are met.
1. The person was a Qualifying Child (defined later) or a 
Qualifying Relative (defined later), and
2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national or a resident 
of the United States, Canada, or Mexico. If your quali-
fying child was adopted, see Exception for adopted 
child, later.
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 3

Page 4 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can include medical expenses you paid for an individ-
ual that would have been your dependent except that:
1. He or she received gross income of $3,800 or more in 
2012,
2. He or she filed a joint return for 2012, or
3. You, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed 
as a dependent on someone else's 2012 return.
Exception for adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen or 
national and your adopted child lived with you as a mem-
ber of your household for 2012, that child does not have to 
be a U.S. citizen or national, or a resident of the United 
States, Canada, or Mexico.
Qualifying Child
A qualifying child is a child who:
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, 
sister, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, 
or a descendant of any of them (for example, your 
grandchild, niece, or nephew),
2. Was:
a. Under age 19 at the end of 2012 and younger than 
you (or your spouse, if filing jointly),
b. Under age 24 at the end of 2012, a full-time stu-
dent, and younger than you (or your spouse, if fil-
ing jointly), or
c. Any age and permanently and totally disabled,
3. Lived with you for more than half of 2012,
4. Did not provide over half of his or her own support for 
2012, and
5. Did not file a joint return, other than to claim a refund.
Adopted child. A legally adopted child is treated as your 
own child. This child includes a child lawfully placed with 
you for legal adoption.
You can include medical expenses that you paid for a 
child before adoption if the child qualified as your depend-
ent when the medical services were provided or when the 
expenses were paid.
If you pay back an adoption agency or other persons 
for medical expenses they paid under an agreement with 
you, you are treated as having paid those expenses provi-
ded you clearly substantiate that the payment is directly 
attributable to the medical care of the child.
But if you pay the agency or other person for medical 
care that was provided and paid for before adoption nego-
tiations began, you cannot include them as medical ex-
penses.
You may be able to take a credit for other expen­
ses related to an adoption. See the Instructions 
for Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses, for 
more information.
Child of divorced or separated parents.  For purposes 
of the medical and dental expenses deduction, a child of 
TIP
divorced or separated parents can be treated as a de-
pendent of both parents. Each parent can include the 
medical expenses he or she pays for the child, even if the 
other parent claims the child's dependency exemption, if:
1. The child is in the custody of one or both parents for 
more than half the year,
2. The child receives over half of his or her support dur-
ing the year from his or her parents, and
3. The child's parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree 
of divorce or separate maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separation agree-
ment, or
c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 months of 
the year.
This does not apply if the child's exemption is being 
claimed under a multiple support agreement (discussed 
later).
Qualifying Relative
A qualifying relative is a person:
1. Who is your:
a. Son, daughter, stepchild, or foster child, or a de-
scendant of any of them (for example, your grand-
child),
b. Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, or a son or 
daughter of any of them,
c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sibling of either 
of them (for example, your grandmother, grandfa-
ther, aunt, or uncle),
d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, stepmother, 
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law, 
mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, or
e. Any other person (other than your spouse) who 
lived with you all year as a member of your house-
hold if your relationship did not violate local law,
2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Qualifying Child, 
earlier) of any taxpayer for 2012, and
3. For whom you provided over half of the support in 
2012. But see Child of divorced or separated parents, 
earlier, Support claimed under a multiple support 
agreement, next, and Kidnapped child under Qualify­
ing Relative in Publication 501, Exemptions, Standard 
Deduction, and Filing Information.
Support claimed under a multiple support agree-
ment. If you are considered to have provided more than 
half of a qualifying relative's support under a multiple sup-
port agreement, you can include medical expenses you 
pay for that person. A multiple support agreement is used 
when two or more people provide more than half of a per-
son's support, but no one alone provides more than half.
Page 4 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 5 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Any medical expenses paid by others who joined you in 
the agreement cannot be included as medical expenses 
by anyone. However, you can include the entire unreim-
bursed amount you paid for medical expenses.
Example. You and your three brothers each provide 
one-fourth of your mother's total support. Under a multiple 
support agreement, you treat your mother as your de-
pendent. You paid all of her medical expenses. Your 
brothers repaid you for three-fourths of these expenses. In 
figuring your medical expense deduction, you can include 
only one-fourth of your mother's medical expenses. Your 
brothers cannot include any part of the expenses. How-
ever, if you and your brothers share the nonmedical sup-
port items and you separately pay all of your mother's 
medical expenses, you can include the unreimbursed 
amount you paid for her medical expenses in your medi-
cal expenses.
Decedent
Medical expenses paid before death by the decedent are 
included in figuring any deduction for medical and dental 
expenses on the decedent's final income tax return. This 
includes expenses for the decedent's spouse and de-
pendents as well as for the decedent.
The survivor or personal representative of a decedent 
can choose to treat certain expenses paid by the dece-
dent's estate for the decedent's medical care as paid by 
the decedent at the time the medical services were provi-
ded. The expenses must be paid within the 1-year period 
beginning with the day after the date of death. If you are 
the survivor or personal representative making this 
choice, you must attach a statement to the decedent's 
Form 1040 (or the decedent's amended return, Form 
1040X) saying that the expenses have not been and will 
not be claimed on the estate tax return.
Qualified medical expenses paid before death by 
the decedent are not deductible if paid with a 
tax­free distribution from any Archer MSA, Medi­
care Advantage MSA, or health savings account.
What if the decedent's return had been filed and the 
medical expenses were not included?  Form 1040X 
can be filed for the year or years the expenses are treated 
as paid, unless the period for filing an amended return for 
that year has passed. Generally, an amended return must 
be filed within 3 years of the date the original return was 
filed, or within 2 years from the time the tax was paid, 
whichever date is later.
Example. John properly filed his 2011 income tax re-
turn. He died in 2012 with unpaid medical expenses of 
$1,500 from 2011 and $1,800 in 2012. If the expenses are 
paid within the 1-year period, his survivor or personal rep-
resentative can file an amended return for 2011 claiming a 
deduction based on the $1,500 medical expenses. The 
$1,800 of medical expenses from 2012 can be included 
on the decedent's final return for 2012.
CAUTION
!
What if you pay medical expenses of a deceased 
spouse or dependent? If you paid medical expenses for 
your deceased spouse or dependent, include them as 
medical expenses on your Form 1040 in the year paid, 
whether they are paid before or after the decedent's 
death. The expenses can be included if the person was 
your spouse or dependent either at the time the medical 
services were provided or at the time you paid the expen-
ses.
What Medical Expenses Are 
Includible?
Following is a list of items that you can include in figuring 
your medical expense deduction. The items are listed in 
alphabetical order.
This list does not include all possible medical expen-
ses. To determine if an expense not listed can be included 
in figuring your medical expense deduction, see What Are 
Medical Expenses, earlier.
Abortion
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for a legal abortion.
Acupuncture
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for acupuncture.
Alcoholism
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
an inpatient's treatment at a therapeutic center for alcohol 
addiction. This includes meals and lodging provided by 
the center during treatment.
You can also include in medical expenses amounts you 
pay for transportation to and from Alcoholics Anonymous 
meetings in your community if the attendance is pursuant 
to medical advice that membership in Alcoholics Anony-
mous is necessary for the treatment of a disease involving 
the excessive use of alcoholic liquors.
Ambulance
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
ambulance service.
Annual Physical Examination
See Physical Examination, later.
Artificial Limb
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for an artificial limb.
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 5

Page 6 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Artificial Teeth
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for artificial teeth.
Autoette
See Wheelchair, later.
Bandages
You can include in medical expenses the cost of medical 
supplies such as bandages.
Birth Control Pills
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for birth control pills prescribed by a doctor.
Body Scan
You can include in medical expenses the cost of an elec-
tronic body scan.
Braille Books and Magazines
You can include in medical expenses the part of the cost 
of Braille books and magazines for use by a visually im-
paired person that is more than the cost of regular printed 
editions.
Breast Pumps and Supplies
You can include in medical expenses the cost of breast 
pumps and supplies that assist lactation.
Breast Reconstruction Surgery
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you 
pay for breast reconstruction surgery, as well as breast 
prosthesis, following a mastectomy for cancer. See Cos­
metic Surgery, later.
Capital Expenses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
special equipment installed in a home, or for improve-
ments, if their main purpose is medical care for you, your 
spouse, or your dependent. The cost of permanent im-
provements that increase the value of your property may 
be partly included as a medical expense. The cost of the 
improvement is reduced by the increase in the value of 
your property. The difference is a medical expense. If the 
value of your property is not increased by the improve-
ment, the entire cost is included as a medical expense.
Certain improvements made to accommodate a home 
to your disabled condition, or that of your spouse or your 
dependents who live with you, do not usually increase the 
value of the home and the cost can be included in full as 
medical expenses. These improvements include, but are 
not limited to, the following items.
Constructing entrance or exit ramps for your home.
Widening doorways at entrances or exits to your 
home.
Widening or otherwise modifying hallways and interior 
doorways.
Installing railings, support bars, or other modifications 
to bathrooms.
Lowering or modifying kitchen cabinets and equip-
ment.
Moving or modifying electrical outlets and fixtures.
Installing porch lifts and other forms of lifts (but eleva-
tors generally add value to the house).
Modifying fire alarms, smoke detectors, and other 
warning systems.
Modifying stairways.
Adding handrails or grab bars anywhere (whether or 
not in bathrooms).
Modifying hardware on doors.
Modifying areas in front of entrance and exit door-
ways.
Grading the ground to provide access to the resi-
dence.
Only reasonable costs to accommodate a home to a 
disabled condition are considered medical care. Addi-
tional costs for personal motives, such as for architectural 
or aesthetic reasons, are not medical expenses.
Capital expense worksheet. Use Worksheet A to figure 
the amount of your capital expense to include in your 
medical expenses.
Page 6 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 7 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Capital Expense 
Worksheet
Worksheet A.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any, of 
your medical expenses due to a home improvement.
1. Enter the amount you paid for the home 
improvement ......................... 1.  
2. Enter the value of your home 
immediately after the 
improvement .............. 2.  
3. Enter the value of your home 
immediately before the 
improvement .............. 3.  
4. Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the 
increase in the value of your home due to 
the improvement. ..................... 4.  
• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1, 
you have no medical expenses due to the 
home improvement; stop here.
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are your 
medical expenses due to the home 
improvement. ........................ 5.  
Example. You have a heart ailment. On your doctor's 
advice, you install an elevator in your home so that you 
will not have to climb stairs. The elevator costs $8,000. An 
appraisal shows that the elevator increases the value of 
your home by $4,400. You figure your medical expense as 
shown in the filled-in example of Worksheet A.
Capital Expense 
Worksheet—Illustrated
Worksheet A. 
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any, of 
your medical expenses due to a home improvement.
1. Enter the amount you paid for the home 
improvement ......................... 1. 8,000
2. Enter the value of your home 
immediately after the 
improvement .............. 2. 124,400
3. Enter the value of your home 
immediately before the 
improvement .............. 3. 120,000
4. Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the 
increase in the value of your home due to 
the improvement. ..................... 4. 4,400
• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1, 
you have no medical expenses due to the 
home improvement; stop here.
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are your 
medical expenses due to the home 
improvement. ........................ 5. 3,600
Operation and upkeep.  Amounts you pay for operation 
and upkeep of a capital asset qualify as medical expen-
ses, as long as the main reason for them is medical care. 
This rule applies even if none or only part of the original 
cost of the capital asset qualified as a medical care ex-
pense.
Example. If, in the previous example, the elevator in-
creased the value of your home by $8,000, you would 
have no medical expense for the cost of the elevator. 
However, the cost of electricity to operate the elevator and 
any costs to maintain it are medical expenses as long as 
the medical reason for the elevator exists.
Improvements to property rented by a person with a 
disability. Amounts paid to buy and install special 
plumbing fixtures for a person with a disability, mainly for 
medical reasons, in a rented house are medical expen-
ses.
Example. John has arthritis and a heart condition. He 
cannot climb stairs or get into a bathtub. On his doctor's 
advice, he installs a bathroom with a shower stall on the 
first floor of his two-story rented house. The landlord did 
not pay any of the cost of buying and installing the special 
plumbing and did not lower the rent. John can include in 
medical expenses the entire amount he paid.
Car
You can include in medical expenses the cost of special 
hand controls and other special equipment installed in a 
car for the use of a person with a disability.
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 7

Page 8 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Special design.  You can include in medical expenses 
the difference between the cost of a regular car and a car 
specially designed to hold a wheelchair.
Cost of operation. The includible costs of using a car for 
medical reasons are explained under Transportation, 
later.
Chiropractor
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to a 
chiropractor for medical care.
Christian Science Practitioner
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to 
Christian Science practitioners for medical care.
Contact Lenses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
contact lenses needed for medical reasons. You can also 
include the cost of equipment and materials required for 
using contact lenses, such as saline solution and enzyme 
cleaner. See Eyeglasses and Eye Surgery, later.
Crutches
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
to buy or rent crutches.
Dental Treatment
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you 
pay for the prevention and alleviation of dental disease. 
Preventive treatment includes the services of a dental hy-
gienist or dentist for such procedures as teeth cleaning, 
the application of sealants, and fluoride treatments to pre-
vent tooth decay. Treatment to alleviate dental disease in-
clude services of a dentist for procedures such as X-rays, 
fillings, braces, extractions, dentures, and other dental ail-
ments. But see Teeth Whitening  under What Expenses 
Are Not Includible, later.
Diagnostic Devices
You can include in medical expenses the cost of devices 
used in diagnosing and treating illness and disease.
Example. You have diabetes and use a blood sugar 
test kit to monitor your blood sugar level. You can include 
the cost of the blood sugar test kit in your medical expen-
ses.
Disabled Dependent Care Expenses
Some disabled dependent care expenses may qualify as 
either:
Medical expenses, or
Work-related expenses for purposes of taking a credit 
for dependent care. (See Publication 503, Child and 
Dependent Care Expenses.)
You can choose to apply them either way as long as you 
do not use the same expenses to claim both a credit and a 
medical expense deduction.
Drug Addiction
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
an inpatient's treatment at a therapeutic center for drug 
addiction. This includes meals and lodging at the center 
during treatment.
Drugs
See Medicines, later.
Eye Exam
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for eye examinations.
Eyeglasses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
eyeglasses and contact lenses needed for medical rea-
sons. See Contact Lenses, earlier, for more information.
Eye Surgery
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for eye surgery to treat defective vision, such as laser eye 
surgery or radial keratotomy.
Fertility Enhancement
You can include in medical expenses the cost of the fol-
lowing procedures to overcome an inability to have chil-
dren.
Procedures such as in vitro fertilization (including tem-
porary storage of eggs or sperm).
Surgery, including an operation to reverse prior sur-
gery that prevented the person operated on from hav-
ing children.
Founder's Fee
See Lifetime Care—Advance Payments, later.
Guide Dog or Other Service Animal
You can include in medical expenses the costs of buying, 
training, and maintaining a guide dog or other service ani-
mal to assist a visually impaired or hearing disabled per-
son, or a person with other physical disabilities. In gen-
eral, this includes any costs, such as food, grooming, and 
veterinary care, incurred in maintaining the health and vi-
tality of the service animal so that it may perform its duties.
Page 8 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 9 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Health Institute
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay for 
treatment at a health institute only if the treatment is pre-
scribed by a physician and the physician issues a state-
ment that the treatment is necessary to alleviate a physi-
cal or mental defect or illness of the individual receiving 
the treatment.
Health Maintenance
Organization (HMO)
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
entitle you, your spouse, or a dependent to receive medi-
cal care from an HMO. These amounts are treated as 
medical insurance premiums. See Insurance Premiums , 
later.
Hearing Aids
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a hearing 
aid and batteries, repairs, and maintenance needed to op-
erate it.
Home Care
See Nursing Services, later.
Home Improvements
See Capital Expenses, earlier.
Hospital Services
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
the cost of inpatient care at a hospital or similar institution 
if a principal reason for being there is to receive medical 
care. This includes amounts paid for meals and lodging. 
Also see Lodging, later.
Insurance Premiums
You can include in medical expenses insurance premiums 
you pay for policies that cover medical care. Medical care 
policies can provide payment for treatment that includes:
Hospitalization, surgical services, X-rays,
Prescription drugs and insulin,
Dental care,
Replacement of lost or damaged contact lenses, and
Long-term care (subject to additional limitations). See 
Qualified Long­Term Care Insurance Contracts under 
Long­Term Care, later.
If you have a policy that provides payments for other 
than medical care, you can include the premiums for the 
medical care part of the policy if the charge for the medi-
cal part is reasonable. The cost of the medical part must 
be separately stated in the insurance contract or given to 
you in a separate statement.
Health coverage tax credit.  If, during 2012, you were 
an eligible trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, 
alternative TAA (ATAA) recipient, reemployment TAA 
(RTAA) recipient, or Pension Benefit Guaranty Corpora-
tion (PBGC) pension recipient, you must complete Form 
8885 before completing Schedule A, line 1. When figuring 
the amount of insurance premiums you can deduct on 
Schedule A, do not include:
Any amounts you included on Form 8885, line 4,
Any qualified health insurance premiums you paid to 
“U.S. Treasury–HCTC,” or
Any health coverage tax credit advance payments 
shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H.
Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Plan
Do not include in your medical and dental expenses any 
insurance premiums paid by an employer-sponsored 
health insurance plan unless the premiums are included in 
box 1 of your Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. Also, 
do not include any other medical and dental expenses 
paid by the plan unless the amount paid is included in 
box 1 of your Form W-2.
Example. You are a federal employee participating in 
the premium conversion plan of the Federal Employee 
Health Benefits (FEHB) program. Your share of the FEHB 
premium is paid by making a pre-tax reduction in your sal-
ary. Because you are an employee whose insurance pre-
miums are paid with money that is never included in your 
gross income, you cannot deduct the premiums paid with 
that money.
Long-term care services.  Contributions made by your 
employer to provide coverage for qualified long-term care 
services under a flexible spending or similar arrangement 
must be included in your income. This amount will be re-
ported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.
Retired public safety officers.  If you are a retired pub-
lic safety officer, do not include as medical expenses any 
health or long-term care insurance premiums that you 
elected to have paid with tax-free distributions from a re-
tirement plan. This applies only to distributions that would 
otherwise be included in income.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).  If you 
have medical expenses that are reimbursed by a health 
reimbursement arrangement, you cannot include those 
expenses in your medical expenses. This is because an 
HRA is funded solely by the employer.
Medicare A
If you are covered under social security (or if you are a 
government employee who paid Medicare tax), you are 
enrolled in Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare 
A is not a medical expense.
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 9

Page 10 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are not covered under social security (or were not 
a government employee who paid Medicare tax), you can 
voluntarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation you can 
include the premiums you paid for Medicare A as a medi-
cal expense.
Medicare B
Medicare B is a supplemental medical insurance. Premi-
ums you pay for Medicare B are a medical expense. 
Check the information you received from the Social Se-
curity Administration to find out your premium.
Medicare D
Medicare D is a voluntary prescription drug insurance pro-
gram for persons with Medicare A or B. You can include 
as a medical expense premiums you pay for Medicare D.
Prepaid Insurance Premiums
Premiums you pay before you are age 65 for insurance for 
medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your depend-
ents after you reach age 65 are medical care expenses in 
the year paid if they are:
1. Payable in equal yearly installments or more often, 
and
2. Payable for at least 10 years, or until you reach age 
65 (but not for less than 5 years).
Unused Sick Leave Used To Pay Premiums
You must include in gross income cash payments you re-
ceive at the time of retirement for unused sick leave. You 
also must include in gross income the value of unused 
sick leave that, at your option, your employer applies to 
the cost of your continuing participation in your employer's 
health plan after you retire. You can include this cost of 
continuing participation in the health plan as a medical ex-
pense.
If you participate in a health plan where your employer 
automatically applies the value of unused sick leave to the 
cost of your continuing participation in the health plan 
(and you do not have the option to receive cash), do not 
include the value of the unused sick leave in gross in-
come. You cannot include this cost of continuing partici-
pation in that health plan as a medical expense.
Insurance Premiums You Cannot Include
You cannot include premiums you pay for:
Life insurance policies,
Policies providing payment for loss of earnings,
Policies for loss of life, limb, sight, etc.,
Policies that pay you a guaranteed amount each week 
for a stated number of weeks if you are hospitalized 
for sickness or injury,
The part of your car insurance that provides medical 
insurance coverage for all persons injured in or by 
your car because the part of the premium providing in-
surance for you, your spouse, and your dependents is 
not stated separately from the part of the premium 
providing insurance for medical care for others, or
Health or long-term care insurance if you elected to 
pay these premiums with tax-free distributions from a 
retirement plan made directly to the insurance pro-
vider and these distributions would otherwise have 
been included in income.
Taxes imposed by any governmental unit, such as Medi-
care taxes, are not insurance premiums.
Coverage for nondependents.  Generally, you cannot 
deduct any additional premium you pay as the result of in-
cluding on your policy someone who is not your spouse or 
dependent, even if that person is your child under age 27. 
However, you can deduct the additional premium if that 
person is:
Your child whom you do not claim as a dependent be-
cause of the rules for children of divorced or separa-
ted parents,
Any person you could have claimed as a dependent 
on your return except that person received $3,800 or 
more of gross income or filed a joint return, or
Any person you could have claimed as a dependent 
except that you, or your spouse if filing jointly, can be 
claimed as a dependent on someone else's 2012 re-
turn.
Also, if you had family coverage when you added this indi-
vidual to your policy and your premiums did not increase, 
you can enter on line 1 the full amount of your medical and 
dental insurance premiums.
Intellectually and Developmentally 
Disabled, Special Home for
You can include in medical expenses the cost of keeping 
a person who is intellectually and developmentally disa-
bled in a special home, not the home of a relative, on the 
recommendation of a psychiatrist to help the person ad-
just from life in a mental hospital to community living.
Laboratory Fees
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you 
pay for laboratory fees that are part of medical care.
Lactation Expenses
See Breast Pumps and Supplies, earlier.
Lead-Based Paint Removal
You can include in medical expenses the cost of removing 
lead-based paints from surfaces in your home to prevent a 
child who has or had lead poisoning from eating the paint. 
Page 10 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 11 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
These surfaces must be in poor repair (peeling or crack-
ing) or within the child's reach. The cost of repainting the 
scraped area is not a medical expense.
If, instead of removing the paint, you cover the area 
with wallboard or paneling, treat these items as capital ex-
penses. See Capital Expenses, earlier. Do not include the 
cost of painting the wallboard as a medical expense.
Learning Disability
See Special Education, later.
Legal Fees
You can include in medical expenses legal fees you paid 
that are necessary to authorize treatment for mental ill-
ness. However, you cannot include in medical expenses 
fees for the management of a guardianship estate, fees 
for conducting the affairs of the person being treated, or 
other fees that are not necessary for medical care.
Lifetime Care—Advance Payments
You can include in medical expenses a part of a life-care 
fee or “founder's fee” you pay either monthly or as a lump 
sum under an agreement with a retirement home. The part 
of the payment you include is the amount properly alloca-
ble to medical care. The agreement must require that you 
pay a specific fee as a condition for the home's promise to 
provide lifetime care that includes medical care. You can 
use a statement from the retirement home to prove the 
amount properly allocable to medical care. The statement 
must be based either on the home's prior experience or on 
information from a comparable home.
Dependents with disabilities. You can include in medi-
cal expenses advance payments to a private institution for 
lifetime care, treatment, and training of your physically or 
mentally impaired child upon your death or when you be-
come unable to provide care. The payments must be a 
condition for the institution's future acceptance of your 
child and must not be refundable.
Payments for future medical care.  Generally, you can-
not include in medical expenses current payments for 
medical care (including medical insurance) to be provided 
substantially beyond the end of the year. This rule does 
not apply in situations where the future care is purchased 
in connection with obtaining lifetime care of the type de-
scribed earlier.
Lodging
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals 
and lodging at a hospital or similar institution if a principal 
reason for being there is to receive medical care. See 
Nursing Home, later.
You may be able to include in medical expenses the 
cost of lodging not provided in a hospital or similar institu-
tion. You can include the cost of such lodging while away 
from home if all of the following requirements are met.
1. The lodging is primarily for and essential to medical 
care.
2. The medical care is provided by a doctor in a licensed 
hospital or in a medical care facility related to, or the 
equivalent of, a licensed hospital.
3. The lodging is not lavish or extravagant under the cir-
cumstances.
4. There is no significant element of personal pleasure, 
recreation, or vacation in the travel away from home.
The amount you include in medical expenses for lodg-
ing cannot be more than $50 for each night for each per-
son. You can include lodging for a person traveling with 
the person receiving the medical care. For example, if a 
parent is traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per night 
can be included as a medical expense for lodging. Meals 
are not included.
Do not include the cost of lodging while away from 
home for medical treatment if that treatment is not re-
ceived from a doctor in a licensed hospital or in a medical 
care facility related to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hos-
pital or if that lodging is not primarily for or essential to the 
medical care received.
Long-Term Care
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
qualified long-term care services and premiums paid for 
qualified long-term care insurance contracts.
Qualified Long-Term Care Services
Qualified long-term care services are necessary diagnos-
tic, preventive, therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, re-
habilitative services, and maintenance and personal care 
services (defined later) that are:
1. Required by a chronically ill individual, and
2. Provided pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by a li-
censed health care practitioner.
Chronically ill individual.  An individual is chronically ill 
if, within the previous 12 months, a licensed health care 
practitioner has certified that the individual meets either of 
the following descriptions.
1. He or she is unable to perform at least two activities of 
daily living without substantial assistance from an-
other individual for at least 90 days, due to a loss of 
functional capacity. Activities of daily living are eating, 
toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-
nence.
2. He or she requires substantial supervision to be pro-
tected from threats to health and safety due to severe 
cognitive impairment.
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 11

Page 12 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Maintenance and personal care services.  Mainte-
nance or personal care services is care which has as its 
primary purpose the providing of a chronically ill individual 
with needed assistance with his or her disabilities (includ-
ing protection from threats to health and safety due to se-
vere cognitive impairment).
Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance 
Contracts
A qualified long-term care insurance contract is an insur-
ance contract that provides only coverage of qualified 
long-term care services. The contract must:
1. Be guaranteed renewable,
2. Not provide for a cash surrender value or other money 
that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or borrowed,
3. Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the death 
of the insured or complete surrender or cancellation 
of the contract, and dividends under the contract must 
be used only to reduce future premiums or increase 
future benefits, and
4. Generally not pay or reimburse expenses incurred for 
services or items that would be reimbursed under 
Medicare, except where Medicare is a secondary 
payer, or the contract makes per diem or other peri-
odic payments without regard to expenses.
The amount of qualified long-term care premiums you 
can include is limited. You can include the following as 
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040).
1. Qualified long-term care premiums up to the amounts 
shown below.
a. Age 40 or under – $350.
b. Age 41 to 50 – $660.
c. Age 51 to 60 – $1,310.
d. Age 61 to 70 – $3,500.
e. Age 71 or over – $4,370.
2. Unreimbursed expenses for qualified long-term care 
services.
Note. The limit on premiums is for each person.
Also, if you are an eligible retired public safety officer, 
you cannot include premiums for long-term care insurance 
if you elected to pay these premiums with tax-free distribu-
tions from a qualified retirement plan made directly to the 
insurance provider and these distributions would other-
wise have been included in your income.
Meals
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals at 
a hospital or similar institution if a principal reason for be-
ing there is to get medical care.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of 
meals that are not part of inpatient care. Also see 
Weight­Loss Program and Nutritional Supplements, later.
Medical Conferences
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
admission and transportation to a medical conference if 
the medical conference concerns the chronic illness of 
yourself, your spouse, or your dependent. The costs of 
the medical conference must be primarily for and neces-
sary to the medical care of you, your spouse, or your de-
pendent. The majority of the time spent at the conference 
must be spent attending sessions on medical information.
The cost of meals and lodging while attending the 
conference is not deductible as a medical ex­
pense.
Medical Information Plan
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid to a 
plan that keeps medical information in a computer data 
bank and retrieves and furnishes the information upon re-
quest to an attending physician.
Medicines
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
prescribed medicines and drugs. A prescribed drug is one 
that requires a prescription by a doctor for its use by an in-
dividual. You can also include amounts you pay for insu-
lin. Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical ex-
penses amounts you pay for a drug that is not prescribed.
Imported medicines and drugs.  If you imported medi-
cines or drugs from other countries, see Medicines and 
Drugs From Other Countries , under What Expenses Are 
Not Includible, later.
Nursing Home
You can include in medical expenses the cost of medical 
care in a nursing home, home for the aged, or similar insti-
tution, for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents. This 
includes the cost of meals and lodging in the home if a 
principal reason for being there is to get medical care.
Do not include the cost of meals and lodging if the rea-
son for being in the home is personal. You can, however, 
include in medical expenses the part of the cost that is for 
medical or nursing care.
Nursing Services
You can include in medical expenses wages and other 
amounts you pay for nursing services. The services need 
not be performed by a nurse as long as the services are of 
a kind generally performed by a nurse. This includes serv-
ices connected with caring for the patient's condition, 
such as giving medication or changing dressings, as well 
CAUTION
!
Page 12 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 13 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
as bathing and grooming the patient. These services can 
be provided in your home or another care facility.
Generally, only the amount spent for nursing services is 
a medical expense. If the attendant also provides per-
sonal and household services, amounts paid to the at-
tendant must be divided between the time spent perform-
ing household and personal services and the time spent 
for nursing services. For example, because of your medi-
cal condition you pay a visiting nurse $300 per week for 
medical and household services. She spends 10% of her 
time doing household services such as washing dishes 
and laundry. You can include only $270 per week as med-
ical expenses. The $30 (10% × $300) allocated to house-
hold services cannot be included. However, certain main-
tenance or personal care services provided for qualified 
long-term care can be included in medical expenses. See 
Maintenance and personal care services  under 
Long­Term Care , earlier. Additionally, certain expenses 
for household services or for the care of a qualifying indi-
vidual incurred to allow you to work may qualify for the 
child and dependent care credit. See Publication 503, 
Child and Dependent Care Expenses.
You can also include in medical expenses part of the 
amount you pay for that attendant's meals. Divide the food 
expense among the household members to find the cost 
of the attendant's food. Then divide that cost in the same 
manner as in the preceding paragraph. If you had to pay 
additional amounts for household upkeep because of the 
attendant, you can include the extra amounts with your 
medical expenses. This includes extra rent or utilities you 
pay because you moved to a larger apartment to provide 
space for the attendant.
Employment taxes.  You can include as a medical ex-
pense social security tax, FUTA, Medicare tax, and state 
employment taxes you pay for an attendant who provides 
medical care. If the attendant also provides personal and 
household services, you can include as a medical ex-
pense only the amount of employment taxes paid for med-
ical services as explained earlier. For information on em-
ployment tax responsibilities of household employers, see 
Publication 926, Household Employer's Tax Guide.
Operations
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
legal operations that are not for unnecessary cosmetic 
surgery. See Cosmetic Surgery  under What Expenses 
Are Not Includible, later.
Optometrist
See Eyeglasses, earlier.
Organ Donors
See Transplants, later.
Osteopath
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
an osteopath for medical care.
Oxygen
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
oxygen and oxygen equipment to relieve breathing prob-
lems caused by a medical condition.
Physical Examination
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for an annual physical examination and diagnostic tests 
by a physician. You do not have to be ill at the time of the 
examination.
Example. Beth goes to see Dr. Hayes for her annual 
check-up. Dr. Hayes does a physical examination and has 
some lab tests done. Beth can include the cost of the 
exam and lab tests in her medical expenses, if her insur-
ance does not cover the cost.
Pregnancy Test Kit
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
to purchase a pregnancy test kit to determine if you are 
pregnant.
Prosthesis
See Artificial Limb  and Breast Reconstruction Surgery , 
earlier.
Psychiatric Care
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
psychiatric care. This includes the cost of supporting a 
mentally ill dependent at a specially equipped medical 
center where the dependent receives medical care. See 
Psychoanalysis, next, and Transportation, later.
Psychoanalysis
You can include in medical expenses payments for psy-
choanalysis. However, you cannot include payments for 
psychoanalysis that is part of required training to be a psy-
choanalyst.
Psychologist
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
a psychologist for medical care.
Special Education
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay on a 
doctor's recommendation for a child's tutoring by a 
teacher who is specially trained and qualified to work with 
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 13

Page 14 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
children who have learning disabilities caused by mental 
or physical impairments, including nervous system disor-
ders.
You can include in medical expenses the cost (tuition, 
meals, and lodging) of attending a school that furnishes 
special education to help a child to overcome learning dis-
abilities. A doctor must recommend that the child attend 
the school. Overcoming the learning disabilities must be a 
principal reason for attending the school, and any ordinary 
education received must be incidental to the special edu-
cation provided. Special education includes:
Teaching Braille to a visually impaired person,
Teaching lip reading to a hearing disabled person, or
Giving remedial language training to correct a condi-
tion caused by a birth defect.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of 
sending a problem child to a school where the course of 
study and the disciplinary methods have a beneficial ef-
fect on the child's attitude if the availability of medical care 
in the school is not a principal reason for sending the stu-
dent there.
Sterilization
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a legal 
sterilization (a legally performed operation to make a per-
son unable to have children). Also see Vasectomy, later.
Stop-Smoking Programs
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
a program to stop smoking. However, you cannot include 
in medical expenses amounts you pay for drugs that do 
not require a prescription, such as nicotine gum or 
patches, that are designed to help stop smoking.
Surgery
See Operations, earlier.
Telephone
You can include in medical expenses the cost of special 
telephone equipment that lets a person with a hearing or 
speech disability communicate over a regular telephone. 
This includes teletypewriter (TTY) and telecommunica-
tions device for the deaf (TDD) equipment. You can also 
include the cost of repairing the equipment.
Television
You can include in medical expenses the cost of equip-
ment that displays the audio part of television programs as 
subtitles for persons with a hearing disability. This may be 
the cost of an adapter that attaches to a regular set. It also 
may be the part of the cost of a specially equipped televi-
sion that exceeds the cost of the same model regular 
television set.
Therapy
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
therapy received as medical treatment.
Transplants
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
medical care you receive because you are a donor or a 
possible donor of a kidney or other organ. This includes 
transportation.
You can include any expenses you pay for the medical 
care of a donor in connection with the donating of an or-
gan. This includes transportation.
Transportation
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
transportation primarily for, and essential to, medical care.
You can include: 
Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares or ambulance service,
Transportation expenses of a parent who must go with 
a child who needs medical care,
Transportation expenses of a nurse or other person 
who can give injections, medications, or other treat-
ment required by a patient who is traveling to get med-
ical care and is unable to travel alone, and
Transportation expenses for regular visits to see a 
mentally ill dependent, if these visits are recommen-
ded as a part of treatment.
Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket expenses, 
such as the cost of gas and oil, when you use a car for 
medical reasons. You cannot include depreciation, insur-
ance, general repair, or maintenance expenses.
If you do not want to use your actual expenses for 
2012, you can use the standard medical mileage rate of 
23 cents a mile.
You can also include parking fees and tolls. You can 
add these fees and tolls to your medical expenses 
whether you use actual expenses or the standard mileage 
rate.
Example. In 2012, Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for 
medical reasons. He spent $500 for gas, $30 for oil, and 
$100 for tolls and parking. He wants to figure the amount 
he can include in medical expenses both ways to see 
which gives him the greater deduction.
He figures the actual expenses first. He adds the $500 
for gas, the $30 for oil, and the $100 for tolls and parking 
for a total of $630.
He then figures the standard mileage amount. He multi-
plies 2,800 miles by 23 cents a mile for a total of $644. He 
then adds the $100 tolls and parking for a total of $744.
Bill includes the $744 of car expenses with his other 
medical expenses for the year because the $744 is more 
than the $630 he figured using actual expenses.
Page 14 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 15 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Transportation expenses you cannot include.  You 
cannot include in medical expenses the cost of transpor-
tation in the following situations.
Going to and from work, even if your condition re-
quires an unusual means of transportation.
Travel for purely personal reasons to another city for 
an operation or other medical care.
Travel that is merely for the general improvement of 
one's health.
The costs of operating a specially equipped car for 
other than medical reasons.
Trips
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
transportation to another city if the trip is primarily for, and 
essential to, receiving medical services. You may be able 
to include up to $50 for each night for each person. You 
can include lodging for a person traveling with the person 
receiving the medical care. For example, if a parent is 
traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per night can be in-
cluded as a medical expense for lodging. Meals are not 
included. See Lodging, earlier.
You cannot include in medical expenses a trip or vaca-
tion taken merely for a change in environment, improve-
ment of morale, or general improvement of health, even if 
the trip is made on the advice of a doctor. However, see 
Medical Conferences, earlier.
Tuition
Under special circumstances, you can include charges for 
tuition in medical expenses. See Special Education, ear-
lier.
You can include charges for a health plan included in a 
lump-sum tuition fee if the charges are separately stated 
or can easily be obtained from the school.
Vasectomy
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for a vasectomy.
Vision Correction Surgery
See Eye Surgery, earlier.
Weight-Loss Program
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
lose weight if it is a treatment for a specific disease diag-
nosed by a physician (such as obesity, hypertension, or 
heart disease). This includes fees you pay for member-
ship in a weight reduction group as well as fees for attend-
ance at periodic meetings. You cannot include member-
ship dues in a gym, health club, or spa as medical 
expenses, but you can include separate fees charged 
there for weight loss activities.
You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages 
in medical expenses because the diet food and bever-
ages substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy 
nutritional needs. You can include the cost of special food 
in medical expenses only if:
1. The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs,
2. The food alleviates or treats an illness, and
3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physician.
The amount you can include in medical expenses is limi-
ted to the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-
ceeds the cost of a normal diet. See also Weight­Loss 
Program under What Expenses Are Not Includible, later.
Wheelchair
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
an autoette or a wheelchair used mainly for the relief of 
sickness or disability, and not just to provide transporta-
tion to and from work. The cost of operating and maintain-
ing the autoette or wheelchair is also a medical expense.
Wig
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a wig 
purchased upon the advice of a physician for the mental 
health of a patient who has lost all of his or her hair from 
disease.
X-ray 
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
X-rays for medical reasons.
What Expenses Are Not 
Includible?
Following is a list of some items that you cannot include in 
figuring your medical expense deduction. The items are 
listed in alphabetical order.
Baby Sitting, Childcare, and Nursing 
Services for a Normal, Healthy Baby
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for the care of children, even if the expenses enable you, 
your spouse, or your dependent to get medical or dental 
treatment. Also, any expense allowed as a childcare credit 
cannot be treated as an expense paid for medical care.
Controlled Substances
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for controlled substances (such as marijuana, laetrile, 
etc.). Such substances may be legalized by state law. 
However, they are in violation of federal law and cannot 
be included in medical expenses.
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 15

Page 16 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cosmetic Surgery
Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses the 
amount you pay for unnecessary cosmetic surgery. This 
includes any procedure that is directed at improving the 
patient's appearance and does not meaningfully promote 
the proper function of the body or prevent or treat illness 
or disease. You generally cannot include in medical ex-
penses the amount you pay for procedures such as face 
lifts, hair transplants, hair removal (electrolysis), and lipo-
suction.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you 
pay for cosmetic surgery if it is necessary to improve a de-
formity arising from, or directly related to, a congenital ab-
normality, a personal injury resulting from an accident or 
trauma, or a disfiguring disease.
Example. An individual undergoes surgery that re-
moves a breast as part of treatment for cancer. She pays 
a surgeon to reconstruct the breast. The surgery to recon-
struct the breast corrects a deformity directly related to the 
disease. The cost of the surgery is includible in her medi-
cal expenses.
Dancing Lessons
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of danc-
ing lessons, swimming lessons, etc., even if they are rec-
ommended by a doctor, if they are only for the improve-
ment of general health.
Diaper Service
You cannot include in medical expenses the amount you 
pay for diapers or diaper services, unless they are needed 
to relieve the effects of a particular disease.
Electrolysis or Hair Removal
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Flexible Spending Account
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts for 
which you are fully reimbursed by your flexible spending 
account if you contribute a part of your income on a 
pre-tax basis to pay for the qualified benefit.
Funeral Expenses
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for funerals.
Future Medical Care
Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses cur-
rent payments for medical care (including medical insur-
ance) to be provided substantially beyond the end of the 
year. This rule does not apply in situations where the fu-
ture care is purchased in connection with obtaining 
lifetime care or long-term care of the type described at 
Lifetime Care—Advance Payments  or Long­Term Care , 
earlier under What Medical Expenses Are Includible.
Hair Transplant
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Health Club Dues
You cannot include in medical expenses health club dues 
or amounts paid to improve one's general health or to re-
lieve physical or mental discomfort not related to a partic-
ular medical condition.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of 
membership in any club organized for business, pleasure, 
recreation, or other social purpose.
Health Coverage Tax Credit
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for health insurance that you use in figuring your health 
coverage tax credit. For more information, see Health 
Coverage Tax Credit, later.
Health Savings Accounts
You cannot include in medical expenses any payment or 
distribution for medical expenses out of a health savings 
account. Contributions to health savings accounts are de-
ducted separately. See Publication 969.
Household Help
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of 
household help, even if such help is recommended by a 
doctor. This is a personal expense that is not deductible. 
However, you may be able to include certain expenses 
paid to a person providing nursing-type services. For 
more information, see Nursing Services , earlier under 
What Medical Expenses Are Includible . Also, certain 
maintenance or personal care services provided for quali-
fied long-term care can be included in medical expenses. 
For more information, see Long­Term Care, earlier under 
What Medical Expenses Are Includible.
Illegal Operations and Treatments
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for illegal operations, treatments, or controlled substances 
whether rendered or prescribed by licensed or unlicensed 
practitioners.
Insurance Premiums
See Insurance Premiums under What Medical Expenses 
Are Includible, earlier.
Page 16 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 17 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Maternity Clothes
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for maternity clothes.
Medical Savings Account (MSA)
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you 
contribute to an Archer MSA. You cannot include expen-
ses you pay for with a tax-free distribution from your 
Archer MSA. You also cannot use other funds equal to the 
amount of the distribution and include the expenses. For 
more information on Archer MSAs, see Publication 969.
Medicines and Drugs From Other 
Countries
In general, you cannot include in your medical expenses 
the cost of a prescribed drug brought in (or ordered ship-
ped) from another country. You can only include the cost 
of a drug that was imported legally. For example, you can 
include the cost of a prescribed drug the Food and Drug 
Administration announces can be legally imported by indi-
viduals.
You can include the cost of a prescribed drug you pur-
chase and consume in another country if the drug is legal 
in both the other country and the United States.
Nonprescription Drugs and Medicines
Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical expen-
ses amounts you pay for a drug that is not prescribed.
Example. Your doctor recommends that you take as-
pirin. Because aspirin is a drug that does not require a 
physician's prescription, you cannot include its cost in 
your medical expenses.
Nutritional Supplements
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of nutri-
tional supplements, vitamins, herbal supplements, “natu-
ral medicines,” etc. unless they are recommended by a 
medical practitioner as treatment for a specific medical 
condition diagnosed by a physician. Otherwise, these 
items are taken to maintain your ordinary good health, and 
are not for medical care.
Personal Use Items
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of an 
item ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposes 
unless it is used primarily to prevent or alleviate a physical 
or mental defect or illness. For example, the cost of a 
toothbrush and toothpaste is a nondeductible personal ex-
pense.
In order to accommodate an individual with a physical 
defect, you may have to purchase an item ordinarily used 
as a personal, living, or family item in a special form. You 
can include the excess of the cost of the item in a special 
form over the cost of the item in normal form as a medical 
expense. (See Braille Books and Magazines  under What 
Medical Expenses Are Includible, earlier.)
Swimming Lessons
See Dancing Lessons, earlier.
Teeth Whitening
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts paid to 
whiten teeth. See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Veterinary Fees
You generally cannot include veterinary fees in your medi-
cal expenses, but see Guide Dog or Other Service Animal 
under What Medical Expenses Are Includible, earlier.
Weight-Loss Program
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of a 
weight-loss program if the purpose of the weight loss is 
the improvement of appearance, general health, or sense 
of well-being. You cannot include amounts you pay to lose 
weight unless the weight loss is a treatment for a specific 
disease diagnosed by a physician (such as obesity, hy-
pertension, or heart disease). If the weight-loss treatment 
is not for a specific disease diagnosed by a physician, you 
cannot include either the fees you pay for membership in 
a weight reduction group or fees for attendance at peri-
odic meetings. Also, you cannot include membership 
dues in a gym, health club, or spa.
You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages 
in medical expenses because the diet food and bever-
ages substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy 
nutritional needs.
See Weight­Loss Program under What Medical Expen­
ses Are Includible, earlier.
How Do You Treat 
Reimbursements?
You can include in medical expenses only those amounts 
paid during the tax year for which you received no insur-
ance or other reimbursement.
Insurance Reimbursement
You must reduce your total medical expenses for the year 
by all reimbursements for medical expenses that you re-
ceive from insurance or other sources during the year. 
This includes payments from Medicare.
Even if a policy provides reimbursement only for certain 
specific medical expenses, you must use amounts you re-
ceive from that policy to reduce your total medical 
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 17

Page 18 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expenses, including those it does not provide reimburse-
ment for.
Example. You have insurance policies that cover your 
hospital and doctors' bills but not your nursing bills. The 
insurance you receive for the hospital and doctors' bills is 
more than their charges. In figuring your medical deduc-
tion, you must reduce the total amount you spent for medi-
cal care by the total amount of insurance you received, 
even if the policies do not cover some of your medical ex-
penses.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).  A health 
reimbursement arrangement is an employer-funded plan 
that reimburses employees for medical care expenses 
and allows unused amounts to be carried forward. An 
HRA is funded solely by the employer and the reimburse-
ments for medical expenses, up to a maximum dollar 
amount for a coverage period, are not included in your in-
come.
Other reimbursements.  Generally, you do not reduce 
medical expenses by payments you receive for:
Permanent loss or loss of use of a member or function 
of the body (loss of limb, sight, hearing, etc.) or disfig-
urement to the extent the payment is based on the na-
ture of the injury without regard to the amount of time 
lost from work, or
Loss of earnings.
You must, however, reduce your medical expenses by 
any part of these payments that is designated for medical 
costs. See How Do You Figure and Report the Deduction 
on Your Tax Return, later.
For how to treat damages received for personal injury 
or sickness, see Damages for Personal Injuries, later.
What If Your Insurance Reimbursement Is 
More Than Your Medical Expenses?
If you are reimbursed more than your medical expenses, 
you may have to include the excess in income. You may 
want to use Figure 1 to help you decide if any of your re-
imbursement is taxable.
Figure 1.
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer.
Was any part of
your premiums
paid by your
employer?
Were your
employer’s
contributions to
your premiums
included in your
income?
Did you pay any
part of the
premiums?
NONE of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Is Your Excess Medical
Reimbursement Taxable?
Premiums paid by you.  If you pay either the entire pre-
mium for your medical insurance or all the costs of a plan 
similar to medical insurance and your insurance payments 
or other reimbursements are more than your total medical 
expenses for the year, you have excess reimbursement. 
Generally, you do not include the excess reimbursement 
in your gross income. However, gross income does in-
clude total payments in excess of $310 a day ($113,460 
for 2012) for qualified long-term care services.
Premiums paid by you and your employer. If both you 
and your employer contribute to your medical insurance 
plan and your employer's contributions are not included in 
your gross income, you must include in your gross income 
the part of your excess reimbursement that is from your 
employer's contribution.
If you are not covered by more than one policy, you can 
figure the amount of the excess reimbursement you must 
include in gross income using Worksheet B. If you are 
covered under more than one policy, see More than one 
policy, later.
Page 18 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 19 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Excess Reimbursement 
Includible in Income 
When You Have Only 
One Policy
Worksheet B.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess 
reimbursement you must include in income when both you and your 
employer contributed to your medical insurance and your employer's 
contributions are not included in your gross income.
1. Enter the amount contributed to your 
medical insurance for the year by your 
employer. ........................ 1.  
2. Enter the total annual cost of the 
policy. ........................... 2.  
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............... 3.  
4. Enter the amount of excess 
reimbursement. ................... 4.  
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the 
amount of the excess reimburse-
ment you must include as other income 
on Form 1040, line 21. ............. 5.  
Example. You are covered by your employer's medi-
cal insurance policy. The annual premium is $2,000. Your 
employer pays $600 of that amount, which is not included 
in your gross income, and the balance of $1,400 is taken 
out of your wages. You receive $500 excess reimburse-
ment for your medical expenses. The part of the excess 
reimbursement you receive under the policy that is from 
your employer's contributions is figured as follows.
Excess Reimbursement 
Includible in Income 
When You Have Only 
One Policy—Illustrated
Worksheet B.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess 
reimbursement you must include in income when both you and your 
employer contributed to your medical insurance and your employer's 
contributions are not included in your gross income.
1. Enter the amount contributed to your 
medical insurance for the year by your 
employer. ........................ 1. 600
2. Enter the total annual cost of the 
policy. ........................... 2. 2,000
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............... 3. .30
4. Enter the amount of excess 
reimbursement. ................... 4. 500
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the 
amount of the excess reimbursement 
you must include as other income on 
Form 1040, line 21. ................ 5. 150
You must include in your gross income 30% (.30) of 
$500, or $150, of the excess reimbursement you received 
for medical expenses under the policy.
Premiums paid by your employer.  If your employer or 
your former employer pays the total cost of your medical 
insurance plan and your employer's contributions are not 
included in your income, you must report all of your ex-
cess reimbursement as other income.
More than one policy.  If you are covered under more 
than one policy, the cost of at least one of which is paid by 
both you and your employer, you must first divide the 
medical expenses among the policies to figure the excess 
reimbursement from each policy. Then divide the policy 
costs to figure the part of any excess reimbursement that 
is from your employer's contribution. Any excess reim-
bursement that is due to your employer's contributions is 
includible in your income.
You can figure the part of the excess reimbursement 
that is from your employer's contribution by using Work-
sheet C. Use Worksheet C only if both you and your em-
ployer paid part of the cost of at least one policy. If you 
had more than one policy, but you did not share in the 
cost of at least one policy, do not use Worksheet C.
Excess 
Reimbursement 
Includible in Income 
When You Have More 
Than One Policy
Worksheet C.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess 
reimbursement you must include as income on your tax return when 
a) you are reimbursed under two or more health insurance policies, 
b) at least one of which is paid for by both you and your employer, 
and c) your employer's contributions are not included in your gross 
income. If you and your employer did not share in the cost of at least 
one policy, do not use this worksheet.
1. Enter the reimbursement from your 
employer's policy. ................... 1.  
2. Enter the reimbursement from your own 
policy. ............................. 2.  
3. Add lines 1 and 2 .................... 3.  
4. Divide line 1 by line 3. ................ 4.  
5. Enter the total medical expenses you paid 
during the year. If this amount is at least as 
much as the amount on line 3, stop here 
because there is no excess 
reimbursement. ..................... 5.  
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ............... 6.  
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1 ............. 7.  
8. Enter employer's contribution to the 
annual cost of the employer's 
policy. ............................. 8.  
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 19

Page 20 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
9. Enter total annual cost of the employer's 
policy. ............................. 9.  
10. Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the 
percentage of your total excess 
reimbursement you must report as other 
income. ............................ 10.  
11. Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the 
amount of your total excess 
reimbursement you must report as other 
income on Form 1040, line 21. ......... 11.  
Example. You are covered by your employer's health 
insurance policy. The annual premium is $1,200. Your 
employer pays $300 and the balance of $900 is deducted 
from your wages. You also paid the entire premium ($250) 
for a personal health insurance policy.
During the year, you paid medical expenses of $3,600. 
In the same year, you were reimbursed $2,400 under your 
employer's policy and $1,600 under your own personal 
policy. The amount you must report as other income is fig-
ured as follows.
Excess Reimbursement 
Includible in Income When 
You Have More Than One 
Policy—Illustrated
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess 
reimbursement you must include as income on your tax return when 
a) you are reimbursed under two or more health insurance policies, 
b) at least one of which is paid for by both you and your employer, 
and c) your employer's contributions are not included in your gross 
income. If you and your employer did not share in the cost of at least 
one policy, do not use this worksheet.
1. Enter the reimbursement from your 
employer's policy. .................... 1. 2,400
2. Enter the reimbursement from your own 
policy. ............................. 2. 1,600
3. Add lines 1 and 2 .................... 3. 4,000
4. Divide line 1 by line 3 ................. 4. .60
5. Enter the total medical expenses you paid 
during the year. If this amount is at least as 
much as the amount on line 3, stop here 
because there is no excess 
reimbursement. ..................... 5. 3,600
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ............... 6. 2,160
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1 ............. 7. 240
8. Enter employer's contribution to the annual 
cost of the employer's policy. .......... 8. 300
9. Enter total annual cost of the employer's 
policy. ............................. 9. 1,200
10. Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the 
percentage of your total excess 
reimbursement you must report as other 
income. ............................ 10. .25
11. Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the amount 
of your total excess reimbursement you 
must report as other income on Form 1040, 
line 21. ............................ 11. 60
What If You Receive Insurance 
Reimbursement in a Later Year?
If you are reimbursed in a later year for medical expenses 
you deducted in an earlier year, you generally must report 
the reimbursement as income up to the amount you previ-
ously deducted as medical expenses.
However, you do not report as income the amount of 
reimbursement you received up to the amount of your 
medical deductions that did not reduce your tax for the 
earlier year.
For more information about the recovery of an amount 
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier 
year, see Recoveries in Publication 525, Taxable and 
Nontaxable Income.
Worksheet C.
Page 20 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 21 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What If You Are Reimbursed for Medical 
Expenses You Did Not Deduct?
If you did not deduct a medical expense in the year you 
paid it because your medical expenses were not more 
than 7.5% of your AGI, or because you did not itemize de-
ductions, do not include the reimbursement, up to the 
amount of the expense, in income. However, if the reim-
bursement is more than the expense, see What If Your In­
surance Reimbursement Is More Than Your Medical Ex­
penses, earlier.
Example. Last year, you had $500 of medical expen-
ses. You cannot deduct the $500 because it is less than 
7.5% of your AGI. If, in a later year, you are reimbursed for 
any of the $500 of medical expenses, you do not include 
that amount in your gross income. 
How Do You Figure and Report 
the Deduction on Your Tax 
Return?
Once you have determined which medical expenses you 
can include, figure and report the deduction on your tax 
return.
What Tax Form Do You Use?
You report your medical expense deduction on Sched-
ule A, Form 1040. You cannot claim medical expenses on 
Form 1040A, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, or Form 
1040EZ, Income Tax Return for Single and Joint Filers 
With No Dependents. An example of a filled-in medical 
and dental expense part of Schedule A is shown.
How Do You Figure Your Deduction?
To figure your medical and dental expense deduction, 
complete lines 1 through 4 of Schedule A, Form 1040, as 
follows:
Line 1. Enter the amount you paid for medical expenses 
after reducing the amount by payments you received from 
insurance and other sources.
Line 2. Enter your AGI from Form 1040, line 38.
Line 3. Multiply the amount on line 2 (AGI) by 7.5% (.075) 
and enter the result.
Line 4. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-. Otherwise, 
subtract the amount on line 3 from the amount on line 1. 
This is your deduction for medical and dental expenses.
Example. Bill and Helen Jones belong to a group 
medical plan and part of their insurance is paid by Bill's 
employer. They file a joint return, and their AGI is $33,004. 
The following list shows the net amounts, after insurance 
reimbursements, that Bill and Helen paid this year for 
medical expenses.
1. For themselves, Bill and Helen paid $375 for prescrip-
tion medicines and drugs, $337 for hospital bills, $439 
for doctor bills, $295 for hospitalization insurance, 
$380 for medical and surgical insurance, and $33 for 
transportation for medical treatment, which totals 
$1,859.
2. For Grace Taylor (Helen's dependent mother), they 
paid $300 for doctors, $300 for insulin, and $175 for 
eyeglasses, which totals $775.
3. For Betty Jones (Bill's dependent sister), they paid 
$450 for doctors and $350 for prescription medicines 
and drugs, which totals $800.
Bill and Helen add all their medical and dental expen-
ses together ($1,859 + $775 + $800 = $3,434). They fig-
ure their deduction on the medical and dental expenses 
part of Schedule A, Form 1040.
Recordkeeping. For each medical expense, you 
should keep a record of:
The name and address of each person you paid, and
The amount and date of each payment.
You can keep a record like the following.
RECORDS
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 21

Page 22 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Record of medical expenses
Name of 
person paid
Address of 
person paid Amount paid Date paid
Transportation (mileage, 
taxi, etc.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
 You should also keep a statement or itemized invoice 
showing the following.
What medical care was received.
Who received the care.
The nature and purpose of any other medical expen-
ses.
Who the other medical expenses were for.
The amount of the other medical expenses and the 
date of payment.
Do not send these records with your return. 
Sale of Medical Equipment or 
Property
If you deduct the cost of medical equipment or property in 
one year and sell it in a later year, you may have a taxable 
gain. The taxable gain is the amount of the selling price 
that is more than the adjusted basis of the equipment or 
property.
The adjusted basis is the portion of the cost of the 
equipment or property that you could not deduct because 
of the 7.5% limit used to compute the medical deduction. 
Use Worksheet D, later, to figure the adjusted basis of the 
equipment or property.
Page 22 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 23 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Adjusted Basis of 
Medical Equipment or 
Property Sold
Worksheet D.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of medical 
equipment or property in one year and sold the equipment or 
property in a later year. This worksheet will give you the adjusted 
basis of the equipment or property you sold.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment or 
property. ...................... 1.  
2. Enter your total includible medical 
expenses for the year you included 
the cost in your medical 
expenses. ..................... 2.  
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............ 3.  
4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the year 
the cost was included in your 
medical expenses ($15,000 
x .075). ....................... 4.  
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your 
allowable itemized deductions for the 
year you purchased the equipment 
or property were not more than your 
AGI for that year, stop here. This is 
the adjusted basis of the equipment 
or property. If your allowable 
itemized deductions for the year you 
purchased the equipment or property 
were more than your AGI for that 
year, complete lines 6 through 
11. ........................... 5.  
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ........ 6.  
7. Enter your total allowable itemized 
deductions for the year the cost was 
included in your medical 
expenses. ..................... 7.  
8. Divide line 6 by line 7 ............ 8.  
9. Enter your AGI for the year the cost 
was included in your medical 
expenses. ..................... 9.  
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7 ........ 10.  
11. Multiply line 8 by line 10. ......... 11.  
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your allowable 
itemized deductions for the year you 
purchased the equipment or property 
were more than your AGI for that 
year, this is the adjusted basis of the 
equipment or property. .......... 12.  
Next, use Worksheet E to figure the total gain or loss on 
the sale of the medical equipment or property.
Gain or Loss On the 
Sale of Medical 
Equipment or Property
Worksheet E.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure total gain or 
loss on the sale of medical equipment or property that you 
deducted in an earlier year.
1. Enter the amount that the medical 
equipment or property sold for. ...... 1.  
2. Enter your selling expenses ......... 2.  
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........... 3.  
4. Enter the adjusted basis of the 
equipment or property from Worksheet 
D, line 5, or line 12, if 
applicable. ........................ 4.  
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the 
total gain or loss from the sale of the 
medical equipment or property. ..... 5.  
If you have a loss, it is not deductible. If you have a 
gain, it is includible in your income. The part of the gain 
that is a recovery of an amount you previously deducted is 
taxable as ordinary income. Enter it on Form 1040, 
line 21. Any part of the gain that is more than the recovery 
of an amount you previously deducted is taxable as a cap-
ital gain. Enter it on Form 8949, Sales and Other Disposi-
tions of Capital Assets, and Schedule D (Form 1040), 
Capital Gains and Losses.
For more information about the recovery of an amount 
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier 
year, see Recoveries in Publication 525.
Example. You have a heart condition and difficulty 
breathing. Your doctor prescribed oxygen equipment to 
help you breathe. Last year, you bought the oxygen equip-
ment for $3,000. You itemized deductions and included it 
in your medical expense deduction.
Last year you also paid $10,750 for deductible medical 
services and $6,400 for other itemized deductions. Your 
AGI was $15,000.
Taking into account the 7.5% limit on medical expen-
ses, your allowable itemized deductions totaled $19,025, 
figured as follows:
Oxygen equipment ........................ 3,000
Medical services .......................... 10,750
Total medical expenses ..................... 13,750
7.5% of AGI (.075 × $15,000) .................. −1,125
Allowable medical expense deduction ............ 12,625
Other itemized deductions .................... 6,400
Allowable itemized deductions ................. 19,025
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 23

Page 24 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
 You figure your adjusted basis as shown on the filled-in 
Worksheet D.
Adjusted Basis of 
Medical Equipment or 
Property 
Sold—Illustrated
Worksheet D.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of medical 
equipment or property in one year and sold the equipment or 
property in a later year. This worksheet will give you the adjusted 
basis of the equipment or property you sold.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment or 
property. ...................... 1. 3,000  
2. Enter your total includible medical 
expenses for the year you included 
the cost in your medical 
expenses. ..................... 2. 13,750  
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............ 3. .218  
4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the year 
the cost was included in your 
medical expenses ($15,000 
x .075). ....................... 4. 1,125  
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your 
allowable itemized deductions for 
the year you purchased the 
equipment or property were not 
more than your AGI for that year, 
stop here. This is the adjusted basis 
of the equipment or property. If your 
allowable itemized deductions for 
the year you purchased the 
equipment or property were more 
than your AGI for that year, 
complete lines 6 through 11. ...... 5. 245  
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ........ 6. 2,755  
7. Enter your total allowable itemized 
deductions for the year the cost was 
included in your medical 
expenses. ..................... 7. 19,025  
8. Divide line 6 by line 7 ............ 8. .145  
9. Enter your AGI for the year the cost 
was included in your medical 
expenses. ..................... 9. 15,000  
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7 ........ 10. 4,025  
11. Multiply line 8 by line 10. ......... 11. 584  
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your 
allowable itemized deductions for 
the year you purchased the 
equipment or property were more 
than your AGI for that year, this is 
the adjusted basis of the equipment 
or property. .................... 12. 829  
This year you sold the oxygen equipment for $2,025 
and you had selling expenses of $25. You must report on 
this year's tax return part of the $2,000 as ordinary in-
come. To compute the part of the sales price that is taxa-
ble, you must determine the gain by subtracting the total 
adjusted basis from the selling price.
Gain or Loss On the 
Sale of Medical 
Equipment or 
Property—Illustrated
Worksheet E. 
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure gain or loss 
on the sale of medical equipment or property that you deducted 
in an earlier year.
1. Enter the amount that the medical 
equipment or property sold for. ...... 1. 2,025  
2. Enter your selling expenses ......... 2. 25  
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........... 3. 2,000  
4. Enter the adjusted basis of the 
equipment or property from Worksheet 
D, line 5, or line 12, if 
applicable. ........................ 4. 829  
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the 
total gain or loss from the sale of the 
medical equipment or property. ..... 5. 1,171  
Damages for Personal Injuries
If you receive an amount in settlement of a personal injury 
suit, part of that award may be for medical expenses that 
you deducted in an earlier year. If it is, you must include 
that part in your income in the year you receive it to the ex-
tent it reduced your taxable income in the earlier year. See 
What If You Receive Insurance Reimbursement in a Later 
Year, discussed earlier under How Do You Treat Reim­
bursements.
Example. You sued this year for injuries you suffered 
in an accident last year. You sought $10,000 for your inju-
ries and did not itemize your damages. Last year, you 
paid $500 for medical expenses for your injuries. You de-
ducted those expenses on last year's tax return. This year 
you settled your lawsuit for $2,000. Your settlement did 
not itemize or allocate the damages. The $2,000 is first 
presumed to be for the medical expenses that you deduc-
ted. The $500 is includible in your income this year be-
cause you deducted the entire $500 as a medical ex-
pense deduction last year.
Future medical expenses.  If you receive an amount in 
settlement of a damage suit for personal injuries, part of 
that award may be for future medical expenses. If it is, you 
Page 24 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 25 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must reduce any future medical expenses for these inju-
ries until the amount you received has been completely 
used.
Example. You were injured in an accident. You sued 
and sought a judgment of $50,000 for your injuries. You 
settled the suit for $45,000. The settlement provided that 
$10,000 of the $45,000 was for future medical expenses 
for your injuries. You cannot include the first $10,000 that 
you pay for medical expenses for those injuries.
Workers' compensation. If you received workers' com-
pensation and you deducted medical expenses related to 
that injury, you must include the workers' compensation in 
income up to the amount you deducted. If you received 
workers' compensation, but did not deduct medical ex-
penses related to that injury, do not include the workers' 
compensation in your income.
Impairment-Related Work 
Expenses
If you are a person with disabilities, you can take a busi-
ness deduction for expenses that are necessary for you to 
be able to work. If you take a business deduction for these 
impairment-related work expenses, they are not subject to 
the 7.5% limit that applies to medical expenses.
You have a disability if you have:
A physical or mental disability (for example, blindness 
or deafness) that functionally limits your being em-
ployed, or
A physical or mental impairment (for example, a sight 
or hearing impairment) that substantially limits one or 
more of your major life activities, such as performing 
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breathing, learning, 
or working.
Impairment-related expenses defined.  Impairment-re-
lated expenses are those ordinary and necessary busi-
ness expenses that are:
Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily,
For goods and services not required or used, other 
than incidentally, in your personal activities, and
Not specifically covered under other income tax laws.
Where to report.  If you are self-employed, deduct the 
business expenses on the appropriate form (Schedule C, 
C-EZ, E, or F) used to report your business income and 
expenses.
If you are an employee, complete Form 2106, Em-
ployee Business Expenses, or Form 2106-EZ, Unreim-
bursed Employee Business Expenses. Enter on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), line 28, that part of the amount on 
Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is rela-
ted to your impairment. Enter the amount that is unrelated 
to your impairment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. 
Your impairment-related work expenses are not subject to 
the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies to 
other employee business expenses.
Example. You are blind. You must use a reader to do 
your work. You use the reader both during your regular 
working hours at your place of work and outside your reg-
ular working hours away from your place of work. The 
reader's services are only for your work. You can deduct 
your expenses for the reader as business expenses.
Health Insurance Costs for 
Self-Employed Persons
If you were self-employed and had a net profit for the year, 
you may be able to deduct, as an adjustment to income, 
amounts paid for medical and qualified long-term care in-
surance on behalf of yourself, your spouse, your depend-
ents, and your children who were under age 27 at the end 
of 2012. For this purpose, you were self-employed if you 
were a general partner (or a limited partner receiving guar-
anteed payments) or you received wages from an S cor-
poration in which you were more than a 2% shareholder. 
The insurance plan must be established under your trade 
or business and the deduction cannot be more than your 
earned income from that trade or business.
You cannot deduct payments for medical insurance for 
any month in which you were eligible to participate in a 
health plan subsidized by your employer, your spouse's 
employer or an employer of your dependent or your child 
under age 27 at the end of 2012. You cannot deduct pay-
ments for a qualified long-term care insurance contract for 
any month in which you were eligible to participate in a 
long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your em-
ployer or your spouse's employer.
If you qualify to take the deduction, use the Self-Em-
ployed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in the 
Form 1040 instructions to figure the amount you can de-
duct. But if any of the following applies, do not use that 
worksheet.
You had more than one source of income subject to 
self-employment tax.
You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or Form 
2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.
You are using amounts paid for qualified long-term 
care insurance to figure the deduction.
If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-
tions, use the worksheet in Publication 535, Business Ex-
penses, to figure your deduction.
If, during 2012, you were an eligible trade adjustment 
assistance (TAA) recipient, alternative TAA (ATAA) recipi-
ent, reemployment TAA (RTAA) recipient, or Pension 
Benefit Guaranty Corporation pension recipient, see the 
instructions for Form 8885 to figure the amount to enter on 
line 1 of the worksheet.
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 25

Page 26 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
When figuring the amount you can deduct for insurance 
premiums, do not include amounts paid for health insur-
ance coverage with retirement plan distributions that were 
tax-free because you are a retired public safety officer.
Where to report. You take this deduction on Form 1040, 
line 29. If you itemize your deductions and do not claim 
100% of your self-employed health insurance costs on 
line 29, include any remaining premiums with all other 
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to 
the 7.5% limit.
Child under age 27.  If the insurance policy covers your 
nondependent child who was under age 27 at the end of 
2012, you can claim the premiums for that coverage on 
Form 1040, line 29. If you cannot claim 100% of your 
self-employed health insurance costs on line 29, any ex-
cess amounts attributable to that child are not eligible to 
be claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Generally, family health insurance premiums do not in-
crease if coverage for an additional child is added. If this 
is the situation, no allocation would be necessary. If the 
premiums did increase (such as where coverage was ex-
panded from single to family to add the non-dependent 
child), you can allocate the amount on line 29 to the 
non-dependent child and any excess amounts not attribut-
able to that child would be eligible to be claimed on 
Schedule A.
Example 1.  Naomi is self-employed in 2012 and has 
self-only coverage for health insurance. Her premium for 
that coverage was $5,000 for the year. She changes to 
family coverage only to add her 26-year-old nondepend-
ent child to the plan. Her health insurance premium in-
creases to $10,000 for the year. After completing the 
Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet for 
Form 1040, line 29, she can only deduct $4,000 on 
line 29. The $4,000 is allocable to the nondependent 
child. On Schedule A, she can only claim the $5,000 allo-
cable to her coverage. She cannot claim the $1,000 ex-
cess premiums allocable to the nondependent child.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except that Naomi had family coverage when she added 
her 26-year-old nondependent child to the policy. There 
was no increase in the $10,000 premium. In this case, she 
could claim $4,000 on line 29 and $6,000 on Schedule A.
More information. For more information, see Publication 
535.
COBRA Premium Assistance
The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 
1985 (COBRA) provides that if you were covered under a 
group health plan and you would lose coverage because 
of a qualifying event, you should be allowed an opportu-
nity to elect COBRA continuation health coverage under 
the plan. If there was no available election, your employer 
or the plan was subject to an excise tax. You can be re-
quired to pay the full premium for the COBRA continuation 
coverage.
If you are an assistance eligible individual, you pay 
35% of the premium otherwise payable for this coverage 
and are treated as having paid the full premium. You are 
an assistance eligible individual if:
You are a qualified beneficiary as a result of an invol-
untary termination that occurred during the period be-
ginning on September 1, 2008, and ending on May 
31, 2010, or had a reduction of hours during that pe-
riod, which was followed by a termination of your em-
ployment that occurred after March 1, 2010, and be-
fore June 1, 2010,
You are eligible for COBRA continuation coverage re-
lated to the qualifying event occurring during the pe-
riod beginning on September 1, 2008, and
You elect the coverage.
A qualified beneficiary is generally any individual who is 
covered under a group health plan on the day before the 
involuntary termination. This includes the covered em-
ployee, the employee’s spouse, and the employee’s de-
pendent.
The premium assistance (the 65% reduction of the pre-
mium) applies to the first period of coverage beginning af-
ter February 16, 2009. The reduction applies until the ear-
liest of:
1. The first date the assistance eligible individual be-
comes eligible for other group health plan coverage or 
Medicare coverage,
2. The date that is 15 months after the first day of the 
first month for which the reduced premium applies to 
the individual, or
3. The date the individual ceases to be eligible for CO-
BRA continuation coverage.
The premium assistance is not included in your gross 
income. However, if your modified adjusted gross income 
(AGI) is more than $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing 
jointly) but not more than $145,000 ($290,000 if married 
filing jointly), your income tax for the year is increased by 
a percentage of the premium assistance. Use Worksheet 
F to figure the amount you must include as tax on your re-
turn. If your modified AGI is more than $145,000 
($290,000 if married filing jointly), your income tax for the 
tax year is increased by the total premium assistance. In-
clude the increase in your income tax on Form 1040, 
line 60, or Form 1040NR, line 59. On the dotted line next 
to that line, enter the amount of the tax and identify it as 
“COBRA.”
Page 26 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 27 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recapture of COBRA 
Premium Assistance 
for Higher Income 
Taxpayers
Worksheet F. 
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure the taxable 
portion of your COBRA premium if your modified AGI (line 3 
below) is more than $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly) 
but less than $145,000 ($290,000 if married filing jointly). 
1. Enter your AGI (Form 1040, line 38 or 
Form 1040NR, line 36) ............. 1.  
2. Enter the total of any amounts from 
Form 2555, lines 45 and 50; Form 
2555-EZ, line 18; and Form 4563, 
line 15, and any exclusion of income 
from American Samoa and Puerto 
Rico .............................. 2.  
3. Modified AGI. Add lines 1 and 2 ...... 3.  
4. Enter $125,000 ($250,000 if married 
filing jointly) ....................... 4.  
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3 ........... 5.  
6. Enter $20,000 ($40,000 if married filing 
jointly) ............................ 6.  
7. Divide line 5 by line 6. Enter the result 
as a decimal (rounded to at least 3 
places) ........................... 7. .    
8. Enter the amount of the COBRA 
premium assistance* you received in 
2012 ............................. 8.  
9. Multiply line 8 by line 7. Enter result 
here and include it on Form 1040, 
line 60 or Form 1040NR, line 59. On 
the dotted line next to that line, enter 
the amount shown on line 9 and 
identify it as “COBRA.” .............. 9.  
*Contact your former employer or health insurance plan to 
obtain the total premium assistance, if unknown.
You may elect to permanently waive the right to the 
premium assistance. You will not receive the premium as-
sistance and you will not have to include the assistance in 
your income tax if your modified AGI is more than 
$125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly). To make this 
election, give a signed and dated notification (include a 
reference to “permanent waiver”) to the person to whom 
premiums are payable.
You will not qualify for the health coverage tax credit 
(discussed next) for any month for which you receive pre-
mium assistance.
For more information see Notice 2009-27, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2009­16_irb/ar09.
Health Coverage Tax Credit
If you paid the premiums for qualified health insurance 
coverage, you may be able to claim the health coverage 
tax credit (HCTC). If you are eligible, you can get monthly 
HCTC (advance payments), a yearly HCTC, or a combi-
nation of these methods (see How To Take the Credit , 
later). The HCTC is 72.5% of the payments made in 2012.
More information.  For a complete discussion of the 
HCTC, visit IRS.gov and enter “HCTC” in the search box. 
Also, see Form 8885.
Who Can Take This Credit?
You can take this credit for any month in which all of the 
following were true on the first day of the month.
1. You were an eligible:
a. Trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient,
b. Alternative TAA recipient,
c. Reemployment TAA recipient,
d. Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) 
pension payee, or
e. You were a qualifying family member of an individ-
ual described in a, b, c, or d when he or she enrol-
led in Medicare, died, or got divorced. See Family 
members in certain life events (enrollment in Medi­
care, death, or divorce), later.
2. You paid the premium for qualified health insurance 
coverage for yourself or a qualifying family member. 
See Qualified Health Insurance, later.
3. You were not imprisoned under federal, state, or local 
authority.
4. You did not have other specified coverage. See Other 
Specified Coverage, later.
If you were an eligible individual described in 1a, 1b, 1c, 
or 1d, your state’s workforce agency (unemployment of-
fice) or the PBGC will notify the HCTC Program that you 
may be eligible for the credit. When notified, the HCTC 
Program will mail you an HCTC Eligibility Kit. If you have 
not received the Eligibility Kit, you may not be an eligible 
individual and not qualify for the credit. If you believe you 
are eligible for the HCTC and have not received an Eligi-
bility Kit, go to IRS.gov and enter “HCTC” in the search 
box for information on how to contact the HCTC Program.
It can take the state or PBGC time to notify the 
HCTC Program about the event. You should 
make the full premium payments to your health 
plan until you are enrolled in the HCTC Program. You may 
be able to claim the yearly HCTC for these premiums 
when you file your tax return.
CAUTION
!
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 27

Page 28 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
No credit if dependent of another taxpayer.  You can-
not take this credit if you can be claimed as a dependent 
on someone else's tax return.
Qualifying Family Member
You can include the premiums you pay for qualified health 
insurance for qualifying family members in figuring your 
credit. A qualifying family member is:
Your spouse (but see Both spouses eligible below), or
Anyone whom you can claim as a dependent on your 
tax return. (For children whose parents are divorced, 
see Children of divorced or separated parents, later.)
However, anyone who has other specified coverage (de-
fined later) is not a qualifying family member.
Both spouses eligible.  Your spouse is not treated as a 
qualifying family member if all of the following are true.
You are married at the end of the year.
You and your spouse are both eligible recipients dur-
ing the year.
You file separate tax returns.
Married and living apart.  For purposes of this credit, 
you are not considered married on the last day of the year 
if all of the following apply.
You file a separate return.
Your home is the home for more than half the year of a 
dependent under age 13 or a dependent who is physi-
cally or mentally not able to care for himself or herself.
You pay more than half the cost of keeping up your 
home for the year.
Your spouse does not live in your home for the last 6 
months of the year.
Legally separated. You are not considered married if 
you are legally separated from your spouse under a de-
cree of divorce or separate maintenance.
Children of divorced or separated parents.  Under the 
rules for medical expenses, a child of divorced or separa-
ted parents can be treated as a dependent of both parents 
if certain requirements are met. See Qualifying Child un-
der Whose Medical Expenses Can You Include , earlier. 
However, for purposes of the HCTC, only the custodial 
parent can treat the child as a qualifying family member, 
even if the other parent can claim the child as a depend-
ent. The custodial parent is the parent having custody for 
the greater portion of the tax year.
Family members in certain life events (enrollment in 
Medicare, death, or divorce).  Qualifying family mem-
bers (spouses and dependents) are considered recipients 
and are eligible to receive the HCTC in the event that the 
TAA, ATAA, RTAA recipient or PBGC payee enrolls in 
Medicare, dies, or gets divorced. Qualifying family mem-
bers can receive the tax credit for up to 24 months from 
the month of the event, or until January 1, 2014, which-
ever comes first. Eligible taxpayers who plan to claim this 
credit because of these life events must call the HCTC 
Program prior to filing Form 8885 to ensure the form is 
processed correctly. See State­qualified health insurance, 
later, for the phone number.
Qualified Health Insurance
The following health insurance qualifies for the credit.
COBRA continuation coverage. (This is coverage that 
employers with 20 or more employees must offer to 
employees or former employees and their beneficia-
ries who have lost coverage because of certain 
events.) See the caution below.
Coverage under a group health plan that is available 
through the employment of your spouse. (But see 
Other Specified Coverage, later.)
Coverage under a non-group (individual) health insur-
ance plan, if the first day of your coverage started at 
least 30 days before you left your job that qualified you 
for TAA, ATAA, RTAA, or PBGC benefits, or the date 
of Medicare enrollment, death of or divorce from the 
original TAA recipient or PBGC payee that provided 
you with extended eligibility as a qualified family mem-
ber. Individual health insurance does not include any 
insurance connected with a group health plan of fed-
eral or state based health insurance coverage.
COBRA continuation coverage allows individuals 
who had lost their jobs to receive a reduction in 
health insurance premiums. You do  not qualify 
for the HCTC for any month that you received a reduction 
in premium.
Voluntary Employee's Beneficiary Association 
(VEBA) A health plan purchased through a VEBA that 
was established through the bankruptcy of your former 
employer.
State-qualified health insurance.  Certain state quali-
fied health insurance can qualify for a credit. To find out 
which plans are qualified for your state, you can:
Visit IRS.gov, and type “hctc” in the search box, and 
then, click on HCTC: List of State­Qualified Health 
Plans, or
You can call 1-866-628-4282 (tollfree) (or TTY/TDD 
1-866-626-4282).
Nonqualified Health Insurance
The following health insurance does not qualify for the 
credit.
1. Medicare supplemental (Medigap) insurance, Tricare 
supplemental insurance, or similar supplemental in-
surance to an employer-sponsored group health plan.
2. Any insurance if substantially all of the coverage is:
a. Coverage for on-site medical clinics,
CAUTION
!
Page 28 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 29 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Hospital indemnity or other fixed indemnity insur-
ance,
c. Accident or disability income insurance (or a com-
bination of the two),
d. Liability insurance,
e. A supplement to liability insurance,
f. Workers' compensation or similar insurance,
g. Automobile medical payment insurance,
h. Credit-only insurance,
i. Limited scope dental or vision benefits,
j. Benefits for long-term care, nursing home care, 
home health care, community-based care (or any 
combination), or
k. Coverage for only a specified disease or illness.
3. Coverage under a flexible spending or similar ar-
rangement.
Insurance that covers other individuals.  If you have 
qualified health insurance that covers anyone besides 
yourself and your qualifying family member(s) (defined 
earlier), you may not be able to take into account all of 
your payments. You cannot treat an amount as paid for in-
surance for yourself and qualifying family members unless 
all of the following requirements are met.
The charge for insurance for yourself and qualifying 
family members is either separately stated in the con-
tract or furnished to you by the insurance company in 
a separate statement.
The amount you paid for insurance for yourself and 
qualifying family members is not more than the charge 
that is stated in the contract or furnished by the insur-
ance company.
The amount stated in the contract or furnished by the 
insurance company is not unreasonably large in rela-
tion to the total charges under the contract.
Eligible Coverage Month
Eligibility for the credit is determined on a monthly basis. 
An eligible coverage month is any month in which, as of 
the first day of the month, you:
1. Are an eligible recipient or a qualified family member 
in certain life events (defined earlier),
2. Are covered by qualified health insurance (defined 
earlier) that you pay for,
3. Do not have other specified coverage (defined later), 
and
4. Are not imprisoned under federal, state, or local au-
thority.
If you file a joint return, only one spouse has to satisfy 
the requirements.
COBRA premium assistance.  An individual who re-
ceives COBRA premium assistance (discussed earlier) for 
a month is disqualified from receiving the HCTC for that 
month.
Other Specified Coverage
Even if you or your qualifying family member are other-
wise eligible, you or your qualifying family member are not 
eligible for the credit for a month if, as of the first day of the 
month, you or your qualifying family member have other 
specified coverage. Other specified coverage is coverage 
under the following.
1. Any insurance which constitutes medical care (unless 
substantially all of that insurance is for benefits listed 
earlier under (1) or (2) under Nonqualified Health In­
surance) if at least 50% of the cost of the coverage is 
paid by an employer (or former employer) of you or 
your spouse.
2. Any of the following government health programs:
a. Medicare Part A, B, or C,
b. Medicaid, or the Children's Health Insurance Pro-
gram (CHIP),
c. The Federal Employees Health Benefit Program 
(FEHBP), or
d. Tricare, the medical and dental care program for 
members and certain former members of the uni-
formed services and their dependents.
Benefits from the Veterans Administration.  Entitle-
ment to or receipt of benefits from the Veterans Adminis-
tration is not other specified coverage.
How To Take the Credit
If you claim this credit, you cannot take the same expen-
ses that you use to figure your HCTC into account in de-
termining your:
Medical and dental expenses on Schedule A (Form 
1040), or
Self-employed health insurance deduction.
You cannot use payments you made with funds from 
the following accounts to figure the credit:
Health Savings Accounts (HSAs), or
Archer Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs).
Yearly HCTC
The HCTC is 72.5% for payments made in 2012. To claim 
the yearly HCTC, complete Form 8885, and attach it to 
your Form 1040, Form 1040NR, U.S. Nonresident Alien 
Income Tax Return; Form 1040-SS, U.S. Self-Employ-
ment Tax Return; or Form 1040-PR, Planilla para la De-
claración de la Contribución Federal sobre al Trabajo por 
Cuenta Propia. You cannot claim the credit on Form 
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 29

Page 30 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1040A, Form 1040EZ, or Form 1040NR-EZ, U.S. Income 
Tax Return for Certain Nonresident Aliens With No De-
pendents.
You may claim the yearly HCTC if you were an eligible 
recipient and:
Did not receive monthly HCTC (advanced payments), 
or
Received advanced payments and also made eligible 
payments directly to your health plan.
Required documents.  You must attach to your tax re-
turn the documents listed in the Form 8885 instructions.
If you e­file, you must attach a copy of Form 8885 and 
the required documents to Form 8453, U.S. Individual In-
come Tax Transmittal for an IRS e­file Return. Mail Form 
8453 and the attachments to the address shown in the 
Form 8453 instructions.
Refundable credit.  The HCTC is refundable. You can 
claim the full credit even if you do not owe any taxes or 
earn any income. To get the credit, you must:
1. Qualify for the credit, and
2. File a tax return, even if you:
a. Do not owe any tax,
b. Did not earn enough money to file a return, or
c. Did not have income taxes withheld from your pay.
Monthly HCTC
Under monthly HCTC (advance payments), you only pay 
part of the premium for health insurance and the HCTC 
Program pays the rest of the premium. The part paid by 
the HCTC Program is your monthly HCTC.
You pay your part of the premium to the HCTC Pro-
gram. The program adds the advance payment and pays 
the total premium to your health plan.
If you want to receive the monthly HCTC, you must fill 
out the registration form and send it and any supporting 
documents to the HCTC Program. Once you are enrolled 
in the HCTC Program, you will receive a monthly invoice 
stating the amount you must pay to the program and the 
due date.
If you receive a monthly HCTC, you will get Form 
1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance 
Payments. The form shows you the total of your advance 
payments and for which months payments were made (in-
cluding months for which reimbursement credits were 
paid to you). You cannot claim the yearly HCTC for any 
month for which you received a monthly HCTC.
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free 
publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get 
information from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the 
method that is best for you, you will have quick and easy 
access to tax help.
Free help with your tax return.  Free help in preparing 
your return is available nationwide from IRS-certified vol-
unteers. The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) 
program is designed to help low-moderate income, eld-
erly, disabled, and limited English proficient taxpayers. 
The Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) program is de-
signed to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their tax 
returns. Most VITA and TCE sites offer free electronic fil-
ing and all volunteers will let you know about credits and 
deductions you may be entitled to claim. Some VITA and 
TCE sites provide taxpayers the opportunity to prepare 
their return with the assistance of an IRS-certified volun-
teer. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, visit IRS.gov or 
call 1-800-906-9887 or 1-800-829-1040.
As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the Tax-Aide 
counseling program. To find the nearest AARP Tax-Aide 
site, visit AARP's website at www.aarp.org/money/taxaide 
or call 1-888-227-7669.
For more information on these programs, go to IRS.gov 
and enter “VITA” in the search box.
Internet. You can access the IRS website at 
IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to:
E­file your return. Find out about commercial tax prep-
aration and e­file services available free to eligible tax-
payers.
Check the status of your 2012 refund. Go to IRS.gov 
and click on Where’s My Refund. Information about 
your return will generally be available within 24 hours 
after the IRS receives your e-filed return, or 4 weeks 
after you mail your paper return. If you filed Form 8379 
with your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed 
electronically). Have your 2012 tax return handy so 
you can provide your social security number, your fil-
ing status, and the exact whole dollar amount of your 
refund.
Where's My Refund? has a new look this year! The 
tool will include a tracker that displays progress 
through three stages: (1) return received, (2) refund 
approved, and (3) refund sent. Where's My Refund? 
will provide an actual personalized refund date as 
soon as the IRS processes your tax return and appro-
ves your refund. So in a change from previous filing 
seasons, you won't get an estimated refund date right 
away. Where's My Refund? includes information for 
the most recent return filed in the current year and 
does not include information about amended returns.
You can obtain a free transcript online at IRS.gov by 
clicking on Order a Return or Account Transcript un-
der “Tools.” For a transcript by phone, call 
1-800-908-9946 and follow the prompts in the recor-
ded message. You will be prompted to provide your 
SSN or Individual Taxpayer Identification Number 
(ITIN), date of birth, street address and ZIP code.
Page 30 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 31 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Download forms, including talking tax forms, instruc-
tions, and publications.
Order IRS products.
Research your tax questions.
Search publications by topic or keyword.
Use the Internal Revenue Code, regulations, or other 
official guidance.
View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published in 
the last few years.
Figure your withholding allowances using the IRS 
Withholding Calculator at www.irs.gov/individuals.
Determine if Form 6251 (Alternative Minimum Tax— 
Individuals), must be filed by using our Alternative 
Minimum Tax (AMT) Assistant available at IRS.gov by 
typing Alternative Minimum Tax Assistant in the 
search box.
Sign up to receive local and national tax news by 
email.
Get information on starting and operating a small busi-
ness.
Phone. Many services are available by phone.
Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call 
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676) to order cur-
rent-year forms, instructions, and publications, and 
prior-year forms and instructions (limited to 5 years). 
You should receive your order within 10 days.
Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax ques-
tions at 1-800-829-1040.
Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help solv-
ing tax problems most business days in IRS Taxpayer 
Assistance Centers (TAC). An employee can explain 
IRS letters, request adjustments to your account, or 
help you set up a payment plan. Call your local Tax-
payer Assistance Center for an appointment. To find 
the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in 
the phone book under United States Government, In­
ternal Revenue Service.
TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/TDD 
equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions 
or to order forms and publications. The TTY/TDD tele-
phone number is for individuals who are deaf, hard of 
hearing, or have a speech disability. These individuals 
can also access the IRS through relay services such 
as the Federal Relay Service at www.gsa.gov/
fedrelay.
TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to 
pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
Checking the status of your 2012 refund. To check the 
status of your 2012 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 or 
1-800-829-4477 (automated Where's My Refund? in-
formation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week). Information 
about your return will generally be available within 24 
hours after the IRS receives your e-filed return, or 4 
weeks after you mail your paper return. If you filed 
Form 8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks 
if you filed electronically). Have your 2012 tax return 
handy so you can provide your social security num-
ber, your filing status, and the exact whole dollar 
amount of your refund. Where's My Refund? will pro-
vide an actual personalized refund date as soon as 
the IRS processes your tax return and approves your 
refund. Where's My Refund? includes information for 
the most recent return filed in the current year and 
does not include information about amended returns.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To 
ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, and 
professional answers, we use several methods to evalu-
ate the quality of our telephone services. One method is 
for a second IRS representative to listen in on or record 
random telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to 
complete a short survey at the end of the call.
Walk-in. Some products and services are availa-
ble on a walk-in basis.
Products. You can walk in to some post offices, libra-
ries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms, instruc-
tions, and publications. Some IRS offices, libraries, 
and city and county government offices have a collec-
tion of products available to photocopy from reprodu-
cible proofs. Also, some IRS offices and libraries have 
the Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Rev-
enue Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for 
research purposes.
Services. You can walk in to your local TAC most 
business days for personal, face-to-face tax help. An 
employee can explain IRS letters, request adjust-
ments to your tax account, or help you set up a pay-
ment plan. If you need to resolve a tax problem, have 
questions about how the tax law applies to your indi-
vidual tax return, or you are more comfortable talking 
with someone in person, visit your local TAC where 
you can talk with an IRS representative face-to-face. 
No appointment is necessary—just walk in. Before 
visiting, check www.irs.gov/localcontacts for hours of 
operation and services provided. If you have an ongo-
ing, complex tax account problem or a special need, 
such as a disability, an appointment can be requested 
by calling your local TAC. You can leave a message 
and a representative will call you back within 2 busi-
ness days. All other issues will be handled without an 
appointment. To call your local TAC, go to
www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone book 
under United States Government, Internal Revenue 
Service.
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 31

Page 32 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
tions, and publications to the address below. You 
should receive a response within 10 days after 
your request is received.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
Taxpayer Advocate Service.  The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) is your voice at the IRS. Its job is to ensure 
that every taxpayer is treated fairly, and that you know and 
understand your rights. TAS offers free help to guide you 
through the often-confusing process of resolving tax prob-
lems that you haven’t been able to solve on your own. Re-
member, the worst thing you can do is nothing at all.
TAS can help if you can’t resolve your problem with the 
IRS and:
Your problem is causing financial difficulties for you, 
your family, or your business.
You face (or your business is facing) an immediate 
threat of adverse action.
You have tried repeatedly to contact the IRS but no 
one has responded, or the IRS has not responded to 
you by the date promised.
If you qualify for help, they will do everything they can 
to get your problem resolved. You will be assigned to one 
advocate who will be with you at every turn. TAS has offi-
ces in every state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto 
Rico. Although TAS is independent within the IRS, their 
advocates know how to work with the IRS to get your 
problems resolved. And its services are always free.
As a taxpayer, you have rights that the IRS must abide 
by in its dealings with you. The TAS tax toolkit at 
www.TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov can help you understand 
these rights.
If you think TAS might be able to help you, call your lo-
cal advocate, whose number is in your phone book and on 
our website at www.irs.gov/advocate. You can also call 
the toll-free number at 1-877-777-4778. Deaf and hard of 
hearing individuals who have access to TTY/TDD equip-
ment can call 1-800-829-4059. These individuals can also 
access the IRS through relay services such as the Federal 
Relay Service at www.gsa.gov/fedrelay.
TAS also handles large-scale or systemic problems 
that affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of these 
broad issues, please report it through the Systemic Advo-
cacy Management System at www.irs.gov/advocate.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs).  Low Income 
Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are independent from the IRS. 
Some clinics serve individuals whose income is below a 
certain level and who need to resolve a tax problem. 
These clinics provide professional representation before 
the IRS or in court on audits, appeals, tax collection dis-
putes, and other issues for free or for a small fee. Some 
clinics can provide information about taxpayer rights and 
responsibilities in many different languages for individuals 
who speak English as a second language. For more infor-
mation and to find a clinic near you, see the LITC page on 
www.irs.gov/advocate or IRS Publication 4134, Low In­
come Taxpayer Clinic List . This publication is also availa-
ble by calling 1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676) or at 
your local IRS office.
Free tax services.  Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free 
Tax Services, is your guide to IRS services and resour-
ces. Learn about free tax information from the IRS, includ-
ing publications, services, and education and assistance 
programs. The publication also has an index of over 100 
TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) you can listen to 
on the telephone. The majority of the information and 
services listed in this publication are available to you free 
of charge. If there is a fee associated with a resource or 
service, it is listed in the publication.
Accessible versions of IRS published products are 
available on request in a variety of alternative formats for 
people with disabilities.
DVD for tax products. You can order Publica-
tion 1796, IRS Tax Products DVD, and obtain:
Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.
Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.
Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.
Tax law frequently asked questions.
Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response system.
Internal Revenue Code—Title 26 of the U.S. Code.
Links to other Internet-based tax research materials.
Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.
Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Toll-free and email technical support.
Two releases during the year.
– The first release will ship the beginning of January 
2013.
– The final release will ship the beginning of March 
2013.
Purchase the DVD from National Technical Information 
Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no han-
dling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD 
for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee).
Page 32 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 33 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
A
Abortion .................. .................. 5
Acupuncture ............... ............... 5
Adopted child's medical 
expenses ............... ............... 4
AGI limitation ............ ............. 2, 3
Alcoholism ............... ................ 5
Ambulances .............. ............... 5
Archer MSAs:
Health coverage tax credit .... .... 29
Medical expenses paid for 
decedent from .......... ........... 5
Artificial limbs .............. .............. 5
Artificial teeth ............. .............. 6
Aspirin .................. ................. 17
Assistance (See Tax help)
Assisted living homes ....... ....... 12
Athletic club dues ......... .......... 16
Autoette ................. ................ 15
Automobiles (See Cars)
B
Baby sitting .............. .............. 15
Bandages ................. ................. 6
Basis:
Medical equipment or property 
(Worksheet D) .......... .......... 23
Birth control pills ............ ........... 6
Body scan ................ ................ 6
Braille books and magazines ... ... 6
Breast pumps and supplies .... .... 6
Breast reconstruction surgery .. .. 6
C
Calculation of deduction ..... ..... 21
Capital expenses ............ ............ 6
Improvements to rented 
property .............. ............... 7
Operation and upkeep ....... ....... 7
Worksheet A .............. .............. 7
Cars .................... .................... 7
Out-of-pocket expenses ..... ..... 14
Standard medical mileage 
rates ............... ................ 14
Child care ................ ............... 15
Children's medical expenses:
Adopted child ............ ............. 4
Dependents .............. .............. 3
Chiropractor .............. ............... 8
Christian Scientist practitioner .. .. 8
Chronically ill persons ...... ....... 11
COBRA assistance:
Recapture of COBRA premium 
assistance ............ ............ 27
COBRA premium assistance ...... 26
Community property states .... .... 3
Computer banks to track medical 
information ............. ............. 12
Contact lenses ............. ............. 8
Controlled substances ....... ....... 15
Cosmetic surgery .......... .......... 16
Credit (See Health coverage tax 
credit)
Crutches ................. ................. 8
D
Dancing lessons .......... ........... 16
Decedent's medical expenses .. ... 5
Deductible amount .......... .......... 3
Deductible expenses ...... ...... 3, 15
Definition of medical expenses:
Doctor .................. .................. 2
Physician ............... ................ 2
Dental treatment ........... ............ 8
Artificial teeth ............. ............. 6
Teeth whitening ........... .......... 17
Dentures ................. ................. 6
Dependent's medical expenses:
Adopted child ............ ............. 4
Multiple support agreement .... .... 4
Qualifying child ............ ............ 3
Qualifying relative .......... .......... 3
Dependents:
Disabled dependent care ... ... 8, 11
Diagnostic devices .......... .......... 8
Diaper services ............ ........... 16
Disabilities, persons with:
Dependent care expenses .. .. 8, 11
Improvements to rented 
property .............. ............... 7
Special education ......... ......... 13
Divorced taxpayers:
Medical expenses of child ..... ..... 4
Drug addiction ............. ............. 8
Drugs (See Medicines)
Dues:
Health club .............. ............. 16
E
Education, special .......... ......... 13
Electrolysis .............. .............. 16
Employer-sponsored health 
insurance plans ........... ........... 9
Employment taxes .......... ......... 13
Equipment (See Medical equipment 
or property)
Excluded expenses:
Insurance premiums ........ ........ 10
Eyeglasses ................ ................ 8
Eye surgery ............... ............... 8
F
Fertility enhancement:
Eggs, temporary storage of .... .... 8
Fertility ................. ................. 8
In vitro fertilization .......... .......... 8
Figuring the deduction .... .... 21, 22
Final return for decedent:
Medical expenses paid ....... ....... 5
Flexible spending account .... .... 16
Food (See Weight-loss programs)
Form 1040:
Form 1040, Schedule A:
Impairment-related work 
expenses ............ ............. 25
Medical and dental 
expenses ........... ........... 2, 21
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs ......... ......... 25
Form 1040, Schedule C:
Impairment-related work 
expenses ............ ............. 25
Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:
Impairment-related work 
expenses ............ ............. 25
Form 1040, Schedule E:
Impairment-related work 
expenses ............ ............. 25
Form 1040, Schedule F:
Impairment-related work 
expenses ............ ............. 25
Health coverage tax credit .... .... 29
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs ......... ......... 25
Form 1040NR:
Health coverage tax credit .... .... 29
Form 1040X:
Amended return ........... ........... 3
Deceased taxpayer ......... ......... 5
Form 1099-H:
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs ......... ......... 25
Form 2106:
Impairment-related work 
expenses ............ ............. 25
Form 2106-EZ:
Impairment-related work 
expenses ............ ............. 25
Form 2555:
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs ......... ......... 25
Form 2555-EZ:
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs ......... ......... 25
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 33

Page 34 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 8453:
Health coverage tax credit .... .... 29
Form 8885:
Health coverage tax credit .... .... 29
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs ......... ......... 25
Founder's fee (See Lifetime care, 
advance payments)
Free tax services ........... .......... 30
Funeral expenses .......... .......... 16
Future medical care ...... ...... 11, 16
G
Glasses .................. .................. 8
Guide dog or other animal ..... ..... 8
H
Hair:
Removal ............... ............... 16
Transplants ............. ............. 16
Wigs .................. ................. 15
Health club dues ........... ........... 16
Health coverage tax credit .... .... 16
Health Coverage Tax Credit:
Advanced payments ........ ....... 30
Alternative TAA recipient .... ..... 27
Alternative TAA recipient .... ..... 27
Archer MSAs ............ ............ 29
Both spouses eligible ....... ....... 28
Children of divorced 
parents ............ ........... 27, 28
Eligible coverage month ..... ..... 29
Insurance that covers other 
individuals ............ ............ 29
Legally separated ......... ......... 28
Married persons filing separate 
returns ............... .............. 28
Monthly HCTC ........... ........... 30
Nonqualified health 
insurance ............. ............. 28
Other specified coverage:
Benefits from the Veterans 
Administration ........ ........ 29
PBGC pension payee ...... ....... 27
Pension Benefit Guaranty 
Corporation (PBGC) 
recipient .............. ............. 27
Qualified health insurance .... .... 28
Qualifying family member ..... .... 28
Reimbursement credit ....... ...... 30
Reporting ............... .............. 29
State-qualified health 
insurance ............. ............. 28
TAA recipient ............ ............ 27
TAA recipient ............ ............ 27
Yearly HCTC ............ ............ 29
Health institutes ............ ............ 9
Health insurance:
Credit (See Health coverage tax 
credit)
Employer-sponsored plan ..... ..... 9
Premiums:
Deductible ............. ............. 9
Nondeductible .......... ......... 10
Paid by employer ....... ........ 19
Paid by employer and you .. .. 18
Paid by you ............ ........... 18
Prepaid .............. .............. 10
Unused sick leave used to 
pay ............... ............... 10
Reimbursements (See Reimbursem
ents)
Self-employed persons ..... ...... 25
Health maintenance organizations 
(HMOs) ................. ................. 9
Health reimbursement 
arrangements (HRAs) ...... ..... 18
Health savings accounts (HSAs):
Payments from ........... ........... 16
Hearing aids .............. ............... 9
Hearing-impaired persons:
Guide dog or other animal for ... ... 8
Help (See Tax help)
HMOs (Health maintenance 
organizations) ........... ............ 9
Home care (See Nursing services)
Home improvements (See Capital 
expenses:)
Hospital services ............ ........... 9
Hotels .................. .................. 11
Household help ............ ........... 16
HRAs (Health reimbursement 
arrangements) ........... .......... 18
I
Illegal operations and 
treatments ............. ............. 16
Illegal substances ......... .......... 15
Impairment-related work 
expenses .............. .............. 25
Reporting of ............ ............. 25
Insulin ................. .................. 17
Insurance (See Health insurance)
Intellectually and developmentally 
disabled persons:
Mentally retarded .......... ......... 10
Special homes for ......... ......... 10
L
Laboratory fees ............ ........... 10
Lactation expenses (See Breast 
pumps and supplies)
Laser eye surgery ........... ........... 8
Lead-based paint removal .... .... 10
Learning disabilities ........ ........ 13
Legal fees ............... ............... 11
Lessons, dancing and 
swimming .............. .............. 16
Lifetime care:
Advance payments for ...... ...... 11
Lodging (See also Trips) .... ... 11, 15
Long-term care ........... ............ 11
Chronically ill individuals ..... ..... 11
Maintenance and personal care 
services .............. .............. 12
Qualified insurance contracts .. .. 12
Qualified services ......... ......... 11
M
Maintenance and personal care 
services .............. ............... 12
Maternity clothes ........... .......... 17
Meals (See also Weight-loss 
programs) ............ ........... 12, 15
Medical conferences ........ ........ 12
Medical equipment or property:
Adjusted basis (Worksheet 
D) .................. ................. 23
Gain or loss (Worksheet E) .... ... 24
Sale of ................ ................ 22
Medical expense records ..... ..... 21
Medical information plans .... .... 12
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs) ................ ................ 17
Medicare:
Medicare A, deductible 
expense ............... ............... 9
Medicare B, deductible 
expense .............. ............. 10
Medicare D, deductible 
expense .............. ............. 10
Medicines ................ ............... 12
Imported ............. ............ 12, 17
Nonprescription drugs and 
medicines ............. ............ 17
Missing children, photographs of in 
IRS publications .......... .......... 1
More information (See Tax help)
Multiple support agreement .... .... 4
N
Nondeductible expenses ... .. 15, 17
Nonprescription drugs and 
medicines .............. ............. 17
Nursing homes ........... ............ 12
Nursing services ........ ........ 12, 15
Chronically ill individuals ..... ..... 11
Nutritional supplements:
Natural medicines ......... ......... 17
O
Operations ............... ............... 13
Cosmetic surgery .......... ......... 16
Eye surgery .............. .............. 8
Illegal operations and 
treatments ............ ............ 16
Optometrist .............. .............. 13
Optometrist services ........ ......... 8
Organ donors ............ ............. 14
Page 34 Publication 502 (2012)

Page 35 of 35  Fileid: Publications/P502/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 10:50 - 10-Dec-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Osteopath ............... ............... 13
Oxygen ................. ................. 13
P
Paint removal, for lead-based .. .. 10
Parking fees and tolls ....... ....... 14
Personal injury damages ..... ..... 24
Personal use items ......... ......... 17
Photographs of missing children in 
IRS publications .......... .......... 1
Physical examination ........ ....... 13
Physical therapy .......... ........... 14
Plastic surgery ............ ............ 16
Pregnancy test kit ......... .......... 13
Premiums (See Health insurance)
Prepaid insurance premiums .. .. 10
Prosthesis ................ ................ 5
Psychiatric care ........... ........... 13
Psychoanalysis ............ ........... 13
Psychologists ............. ............ 13
Publications (See Tax help)
R
Radial keratotomy .......... ........... 8
Recordkeeping ........... ............ 21
Rehabilitation facilities ....... ...... 12
Reimbursements ........ ........ 17, 21
Excess includible in income:
More than one policy (Worksheet 
C) ................ ................ 20
One policy (Worksheet B) ... .. 19
Excess may be taxable (Figure 
1) .................. .................. 18
Health Reimbursement 
Arrangement (HRA) ...... ...... 18
Insurance ............ ............ 17, 18
Medical expenses not 
deducted ............. ............. 20
More than one policy ....... ....... 19
Received in later year ...... ....... 21
Rental property:
Improvements to ........... ........... 7
Reporting:
Health coverage tax credit .... .... 29
Impairment-related work 
expenses ............ ............. 25
Medical and dental expenses ... 21
Medical deduction (See Form 1040, 
Schedule A)
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs ......... ......... 25
S
Sale of medical equipment or 
property .............. ............... 22
Adjusted basis (Worksheet 
D) .................. ................. 23
Gain or loss (Worksheet E) .... ... 24
Schedules (See Form 1040)
Seeing-eye dogs ........... ............ 8
Self-employed persons:
Health coverage tax credit .... .... 29
Health insurance costs ...... ...... 25
Senior housing ........... ............ 12
Separated taxpayers:
Health coverage tax credit .... .... 28
Medical expenses of child ..... ..... 4
Separate returns:
Community property states ..... .... 3
Medical and dental expenses .. ... 3
Service animals ............ ............ 8
Sick leave:
Used to pay health insurance 
premiums ............. ............. 10
Special education .......... .......... 13
Spouse's medical expenses .... .... 3
Deceased spouse .......... .......... 5
Sterilization .............. .............. 14
Stop-smoking programs ...... ..... 14
Surgery (See Operations)
Swimming lessons ......... ......... 16
T
Tables and figures:
Medical equipment or property:
Adjusted basis (Worksheet 
D) ................ ................ 23
Gain or loss (Worksheet E) .... 24
Reimbursements, excess includible 
in income:
More than one policy (Worksheet 
C) ................ ................ 20
One policy (Worksheet B) ... .. 19
Reimbursements, excess may be 
taxable (Figure 1) ........ ........ 18
Tax help ................. ................ 30
Taxpayer Advocate ......... ......... 32
Teeth:
Artificial ................ ................. 6
Dental treatment ........... ........... 8
Whitening .............. .............. 17
Telephone ............... ............... 14
Television ............... ............... 14
Therapy ................ ................. 14
Transplants .............. .............. 14
Travel and transportation 
expenses .............. .............. 14
Car expenses ........... ............ 14
Includible expenses ...... ..... 14, 15
Parking fees and tolls ....... ....... 14
Trips ................... ................... 15
TTY/TDD information ....... ........ 30
Tuition .................. .................. 15
V
Vasectomy .............. ............... 15
Veterinary fees ............ ............ 17
Vision correction surgery ..... ...... 8
Visually impaired persons:
Guide dog or other animal for ... ... 8
Vitamins or minerals ........ ........ 17
Voluntary Employee's Beneficiary 
Association (VEBA):
Qualified health insurance .... .... 28
W
Weight-loss programs ..... .... 15, 17
What's new:
COBRA continuous coverage .. ... 1
Health coverage tax credit ..... ..... 1
Standard medical mileage rate .. .. 1
Wheelchairs ............. .............. 15
Wigs ................... ................... 15
Workers' compensation ..... ...... 25
Work expenses:
Disabled dependent care ...... ...... 8
Impairment-related ......... ........ 25
Worksheets:
Capital expenses (Worksheet 
A) .................. ................... 7
Medical equipment or property:
Adjusted basis (Worksheet 
D) ................ ................ 23
Gain or loss (Worksheet E) .... 24
Reimbursements, excess includible 
in income:
More than one policy (Worksheet 
C) ................ ................ 20
One policy (Worksheet B) ... .. 19
X
X-rays .................. .................. 15
Publication 502 (2012)   Page 35