Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P17.cvt ( 5-May-2003) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\MSHowl00\documents\Epicfiles\PUB172002\02p17.sgm
Page 1 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17
Your Federal Catalog Number 10311G
Income Tax
Department For use inFor Individualsof the
Treasury preparing
Internal
2002Revenue
Service
Returns

Page 2 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Federal
Income Tax
Department For Individualsof the
Treasury
Internal
ContentsRevenue
Service
Introduction.......................... 1 Part Five. Standard Deduction and Itemized
Deductions
Important Changes for 2002.............. 1 21 Standard Deduction................ 142
22 Limit on Itemized Deductions......... 145
Important Changes for 2003.............. 3 23 Medical and Dental Expenses......... 147
24 Taxes ......................... 153Important Reminders................... 3 25 Interest Expense.................. 157
26 Contributions.................... 164Part One. The Income Tax Return 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft1 Filing Information.................. 5 Losses ........................ 1722 Filing Status..................... 21 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents . . .26 Business Expenses............... 1784 Decedents ...................... 35 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax..... 41 Education...................... 196
30 Miscellaneous Deductions........... 201Part Two. Income
6 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings.... 49 Part Six. Figuring Your Taxes and Credits7 Tip Income...................... 56 31 How To Figure Your Tax............ 2078 Interest Income................... 58 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain9 Dividends and Other Corporate Minor Children................... 210Distributions.................... 66 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit....... 21710 Rental Income and Expenses......... 69 34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled.... 22711 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and 35 Child Tax Credit.................. 235Annuities...................... 79 36 Education Credits................. 24012 Social Security and Equivalent 37 Earned Income Credit.............. 245Railroad Retirement Benefits......... 85 38 Other Credits.................... 25913 Other Income.................... 89
2002 Tax Table........................ 263Part Three. Gains and Losses
14 Basis of Property................. 97 2002 Tax Rate Schedules................ 27515 Sale of Property.................. 102
16 Selling Your Home................ 108 Your Rights as a Taxpayer............... 276
17 Reporting Gains and Losses.......... 114
How To Get Tax Help................... 277
Part Four. Adjustments to Income
18 Individual Retirement Arrangements Index............................... 279
(IRAs) ........................ 121
19 Moving Expenses................. 134 Order Blank
20 Alimony........................ 139 (Inside back cover)
All material in this The explanations and examples in this publication reflect This publication covers some subjects on which a
publication may be the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) court may have made a decision more favorable to tax-
reprinted freely. A of: payers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until thesecitation to Your Federal differing interpretations are resolved by higher court deci-Income Tax (2002) • Tax laws enacted by Congress sions or in some other way, this publication will continuewould be appropriate. • Treasury regulations, and to present the interpretations by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working with• Court Decisions. the IRS. These rights are described in Your Rights as a
Taxpayer in the back of this publication.However, the information given does not cover every
situation and is not intended to replace the law or change
its meaning.

Page 3 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Introduction
This publication can help you pre- ple forms and schedules show youing crafts, see the following Comments and suggestions.
pare your tax return by taking you how to report certain items on your publications for more information.We welcome your comments about
through each part of the return. It return. Also throughout the publica- this publication and your sugges-• Publication 334, Tax Guidesupplements the information in tion are flowcharts and tables that tions for future editions.for Small Business (For Indi-your tax form instruction booklet. Itpresent tax information in an viduals Who Use Schedule C You can e-mail us while visitingexplains the tax law and will help easy-to-understand manner. or C–EZ). our web site at www.irs.gov.you understand your taxes so thatThe index in the back of the
you pay only the tax you owe and • Publication 533, Self-Employ-publication will help you find the You can write to us at the fol-no more. ment Tax.information you need. lowing address:The publication begins with theSome material that you may • Publication 535, Business Ex-rules for filing a tax return. It ex-find helpful is not included in thispenses. Internal Revenue Serviceplains who must file a return, whichpublication but can be found in yourtax form to use, when the return is Tax Forms and Publications• Publication 587, Businesstax form instruction booklet. It in-due, and other general information. Use of Your Home (Including W:CAR:MP:FPcludes the following information.It will help you identify which filing Use by Day-Care Providers). 1111 Constitution Ave. NW
status you qualify for, whether you• List of where to report certain Washington, DC 20224can claim any dependents, and items listed on information For information on how you can
whether the income you are receiv-documents. get free IRS publications and
ing is taxable. The publication goes forms, see How To Get Tax Help in• List of mailing addresses for We respond to many letters byon to explain the standard deduc- the back of this publication.where to file returns. telephone. Therefore, it would betion, the kinds of expenses you
helpful if you would include yourmay be able to deduct, and the IRS mission. Provide America’s• List of recorded tax informa-
daytime phone number, includingvarious kinds of credits you may be taxpayers top quality service bytion topics (TeleTax).
the area code, in your correspond-able to take to reduce your tax. helping them understand and meet
Throughout the publication are If you operate your own business their tax responsibilities and by ap-ence.
examples showing how the tax law or have other self-employment in- plying the tax law with integrity and
applies in typical situations. Sam- come, such as babysitting or sell- fairness to all. ■
Important Changes for 2002
This section summarizes importantexample, you can file Form IRA into a qualified plan. See chap- equipment, and other equipment
tax changes that took effect in ter 18.1040EZ for 2002 if your taxable in- and materials used in the class-
2002. Most of these changes areterest income is $1,500 or less and room. See your form instructionsRollovers of distributions
discussed in more detail through-you meet all the other requirements for more information.from employer plans. For distri-
out this publication. listed in chapter 1. butions after 2001, you can rollInterest on student loans.TwoChanges are also discussed in over both the taxable and nontax-Retirement savings plans.The changes apply to the deduction forPublication 553, Highlights of 2002 able part of a distribution from a
following paragraphs highlight student loan interest.Tax Changes. qualified plan into a traditional IRA.
changes that affect individual re-See chapter 11. • The provision that limitedFree electronic filing. You may tirement arrangements (IRAs) and Limit on elective deferrals. your deduction to interestbe able to file your 2002 taxes on-pension plans. The maximum amount of elective paid during the first 60line for free thanks to a new elec-New retirement savings con- deferrals under a salary reductionmonths that payments are re-tronic filing agreement. See tributions credit. If you make eligi-agreement that can be contributed quired is repealed.chapter 1. ble contributions to an to a qualified plan is increased to
• The modified adjusted grossemployer-sponsored retirement $11,000 ($12,000 if you are age 5010% tax rate.The 10% tax rate is income phaseout amountsplan or to an IRA, you may be ableor over). However, for SIMPLEreflected in the tax tables and tax are increased.to take a tax credit. See chapter 38.plans, the amount is increased torate schedules. You do not have to
Traditional IRA income limits.$7,000 ($7,500 if you are age 50 ormake a separate computation or For more information on the deduc-
Generally, if you have a traditionalover). See Publication 590, Individ-figure a credit to get the benefits of tion for student loan interest, see
IRA and are covered by an em- ual Retirement Arrangementsthis rate. Publication 970, Tax Benefits for
ployer retirement plan, the amount(IRAs), for more information. Education.Tax rates reduced.The 27.5%, of income you can have and not be
Self-employed health insurance30.5%, 35.5%, and 39.1% tax rates Tuition and fees deduction.affected by the deduction phaseout
deduction. The part of yourare reduced to 27%, 30%, 35%, You may be able to deduct as anis increased. The amounts vary de-
self-employed health insuranceand 38.6%, respectively. adjustment to income up to $3,000pending on filing status. See chap-
premiums that you can deduct asof qualified higher education tuitionter 18.Reporting interest and divi- an adjustment to income increasedand related expenses you paid.Increased IRA contributiondends. Previously, if you had in- to 70%. The expenses can be for you, yourand deduction limit. Your maxi-terest or dividend income of more spouse, or your dependent. Seemum contribution (and any allowa-Educator expenses. If you werethan $400, you had to file Schedule Publication 970.ble deduction) limit is increased.an eligible educator, you can de-1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B
The limit depends on your age atduct as an adjustment to income up(Form 1040) with your tax return. Coverdell education savings ac-the end of the year. See chapterto $250 in unreimbursed qualifiedAlso, you could not file Form counts (ESAs). Changes to18. expenses you paid or incurred dur-1040EZ if you had more than $400 Coverdell ESAs include the follow-Rollovers of IRAs into quali-ing 2002 for books, supplies (otherof taxable interest income. Begin- ing.fied plans. For distributions afterthan nonathletic supplies forning with your 2002 tax return, the
2001, you may be able to roll overcourses of instruction in health or• Contribution limit increased to$400 threshold amount is in-
tax free, a distribution from yourphysical education), computer $2,000 per beneficiary.creased to $1,500. This means, for

Page 4 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The income phaseout in- penses of a special needs tax-free withdrawal from a Cover- mum tax shown on your re-
creased for joint filers. beneficiary necessary for thatdell education savings account or a turn.
person’s enrollment or attend-qualified tuition program. However,• Qualified education expenses ance at an eligible institution.the qualified higher education ex-Health insurance credit.If youinclude certain elementary penses you pay with these fundsare an eligible individual, you canand secondary school ex- • You can make contributions cannot be the same expenses forclaim a tax credit equal to 65% ofpenses. to a Coverdell ESA and a which you claim an education the amount you pay for qualifiedQTP in the same year for the• Age limits do not apply to credit. health insurance coverage. Seesame beneficiary.special needs beneficiaries. The amount of your educationchapter 38.
See Publication 970 for more infor-• Contributions may be made credit is reduced (phased out) if
mation. Certain amounts increased.until April 15 of the following your modified adjusted gross in-
Some tax items that are indexed foryear. come (MAGI) is more than $41,000Foreign earned income exclu- inflation increased for 2002.($82,000 if you file a joint return).• Tax free distributions can besion. The amount of foreign Standard deduction.  TheYou cannot claim the credit if yourused for special needs serv-earned income that you can ex- standard deduction for taxpayersMAGI is $51,000 or moreices. clude increased to $80,000. See who do not itemize deductions on($102,000 or more if you file a jointPublication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.• The definition of family mem- Schedule A (Form 1040) is higherreturn).Citizens and Resident Aliensber is expanded to include in 2002 than it was in 2001. TheSee chapter 36 for more infor-Abroad.first cousins of the designated amount depends on your filing sta-mation.beneficiary. tus. See chapter 21.Benefits for public safety
Tax benefits for adoption.The Exemption amount. You areofficer’s survivors.A survivorSee Publication 970 for more infor-
adoption credit and the exclusionallowed a $3,000 deduction forannuity received by the spouse,mation.
from income of benefits under aneach exemption to which you areformer spouse, or child of a public
Employer-provided educational adoption assistance program areentitled. However, your exemptionsafety officer killed in the line of
assistance. The exclusion from made permanent. In addition, theamount could be phased out if youduty will generally be excludedincome of employer-provided edu- maximum adoption credit and ex-have high income. See chapter 3.from the recipient’s income regard-cational assistance benefits for clusion amounts increased toless of the date of the officer’s Limit on itemized deductions.undergraduate-level courses has $10,000. The modified adjusteddeath. The provision applies to a Some of your itemized deductionsbeen extended through 2010. Be- gross income (AGI) limit has alsochaplain killed in the line of duty may be limited if your adjustedginning in 2002, the exclusion also increased. See Adoption Credit inafter September 10, 2001. The gross income is more thanapplies to benefits for chapter 38 and Publication 968,chaplain must have been respond- $137,300 ($68,650 if you are mar-graduate-level courses. See chap- Tax Benefits for Adoption.ing to a fire, rescue, or emergency ried filing separately). See chapterter 29 for more information. as a member or employee of a fire 22.Earned income credit (EIC).or police department. See chapterQualified tuition programs Social security and MedicareThe following paragraphs highlight13.(QTPs). The qualified tuition pro- taxes. The maximum wages sub-changes that apply to EIC. Seegram (formerly qualified state tui- ject to social security tax (6.2%) ischapter 37 for details.Standard mileage rates. Thetion program) is expanded to increased to $84,900. All wagesstandard mileage rate for the costinclude programs established and are subject to Medicare tax• The maximum amount of in-of operating your car increased tomaintained by one or more eligible (1.45%).come you can earn and still361/2 cents a mile for all businesseducational institutions. Other get the earned income creditmiles driven. See chapter 28. Meal expenses when subject tochanges that affect this program increased.The standard mileage rate al- “hours of service” limits.If youinclude the following.
• The maximum amount of in-lowed for use of your car for medi- are subject to the Department of• A distribution from a QTP es- vestment income you cancal reasons increased to 13 cents a Transportation’s “hours of service”tablished and maintained by a have and still be eligible formile. See chapter 23. limits, the percentage of yourstate (or an agency or instru- the credit increased. business-related meal expensesThe standard mileage rate formentality of the state) can be that you can deduct has increased.use of your car for determiningexcluded from your income if • Earned income no longer in-For 2002 and 2003, you can deductmoving expenses increased to 13the amount distributed is not cludes nontaxable employee 65% if the meals take place duringcents a mile. See chapter 19.more than your qualified compensation. or incident to the period subject tohigher education expenses. Medical expenses. You can in- •  EIC is based, in part, on ad-those limits. See chapter 28.
• Amounts in a QTP can be clude as a medical expense the justed gross income (AGI),
rolled over, tax free, to an- Customer service for taxpayersunreimbursed cost of participationnot modified AGI.
other QTP set up for the expanded.  The Internal Reve-in a weight-loss program as treat-•  New rules determine whichsame beneficiary. However, ment for a specific disease (includ- nue Service has expanded cus-person can claim a qualifyingsuch a rollover cannot applying obesity). However, the cost of tomer service for taxpayers.child when two or more per-to more than one transfer purchasing reduced-calorie diet Through the agency’s Everyday
sons may be able to claim thewithin any 12-month period.foods is not a medical expense if Tax Solutions service, you can set
same child.these foods substitute for food you up a personal appointment at the• The definition of family mem-
would normally consume to satisfy most convenient Taxpayer Assis-• An eligible foster child has tober is expanded to include
your nutritional requirements. See tance Center, on the most conve-live with you for more thanfirst cousins of the designated
chapter 23. nient business day. See How Tohalf of the year, instead of thebeneficiary.
Get Tax Help in the back of thiswhole year.Education credits.You may be• The definition of qualified publication.• EIC is not reduced by theable to claim an education credit inhigher education expenses is
amount of alternative mini-expanded to include ex- the same year in which you take a ■
Page 2

Page 5 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Important Changes for 2003
This section summarizes importantEstimated tax safe harbor for • The amount of income that isemployer plan (retirement plan)
changes that take affect in 2003 treated as having been can maintain a separate account orhigher income individuals.For
and that could affect your esti- earned by a spouse who is annuity under the plan (a deemedestimated tax payments for tax
mated tax payments for 2003. either a full-time student or IRA) to receive voluntary employeeyears beginning in 2003, the esti-
More information on these and not able to care for himself or contributions. An employee’s ac-mated tax safe harbor for higher
other changes can be found in Pub- herself increases. This count can be treated as a tradi-income individuals (other than
lication 553. amount increases to $250 a tional IRA or a Roth IRA.farmers and fishermen) has been
month if there is one qualify-Limit on electivemodified. If your 2002 adjustedStandard mileage rates. For tax ing individual and $500 a deferrals.The maximum amount ofgross income is more thanyears beginning in 2003, the stan- month if there are two or elective deferrals under a salary re-$150,000 ($75,000 if you are mar-dard mileage rate for the cost of more qualifying individuals. duction agreement that can be con-ried filing a separate return foroperating your car decreases to: tributed to a qualified plan2003), you must have deposited increases to $12,000 ($14,000 If• 36 cents a mile for all busi- Tax benefits for adoption.Be-the smaller of 90% of your ex- you are age 50 or over). However,ness miles driven, ginning in 2003, the adoption creditpected tax for 2003 or 110% of the for SIMPLE plans, the amount in-and the exclusion from income oftax shown on your 2002 return to• 12 cents a mile for the use of creases to $8,000 ($9,000 if youbenefits under an adoption assis-avoid an estimated tax penalty.your car for medical reasons, are age 50 or over).tance program for the adoption of aand Simplified rules for requiredChild and dependent care credit.child with special needs is $10,160
minimum distributions. There• 12 cents a mile for the use of regardless of the amount of quali-Significant changes to the child and
are new rules for determining theyour car for determining mov- fied adoption expenses. The modi-dependent care credit take effect in
amount of a required minimum dis-ing expenses. fied adjusted gross income limit will2003.
tribution for a year beginning afterbe adjusted annually for inflation.
• The credit amount can be as 2002. The new rules, including newLifetime learning credit.Begin- much as 35% (previously Retirement savings plans. The life expectancy tables, are in Publi-ning in 2003, the amount of quali- following paragraphs highlight30%) of your qualifying ex- cation 590, Individual Retirementfied tuition and related expenses changes that affect individual re-Arrangements (IRAs).penses.you may take into account in figur- tirement arrangements (IRAs) anding your lifetime learning credit in-• The maximum adjusted gross Self-employed health insurancepension plans.creases from $5,000 to $10,000. income amount that qualifies deduction. You can deductTraditional IRA income limits.The credit will equal 20% of thesefor the highest rate increases 100% of your self-employed healthIf you have a traditional IRA andqualified expenses, with the maxi-to $15,000 (previously insurance premiums as an adjust-are covered by a retirement plan atmum credit being $2,000. $10,000). ment to income.work, the amount of income you
• The limit on the amount of can have and not be affected by theStudent loan interest deduction.
deduction phaseout increases. Thequalifying expenses in-Beginning in 2003, the modified ad-
amounts vary depending on filingcreases to $3,000 for onejusted gross income ranges for
status.qualifying individual andphasing out the student loan inter-
$6,000 for two or more quali-est deduction may be adjusted an- Deemed IRAs.  For plan years
nually for inflation. fying Individuals. beginning after 2002, a qualified ■
Important Reminders
Listed below are important remind-person’s social security number tember 10, 2001, and before See Publication 501, Exemptions,
ers and other items that may help(SSN). See chapter 1. Standard Deduction, and Filing In-January 2, 2002.
you file your 2002 tax return. Many formation and Publication 596,
Child tax credit.You may beof these items are explained in The Act also exempts from fed-Earned Income Credit (EIC).
able to claim a tax credit for each ofmore detail later in this publication. eral income tax certain amounts re-
your qualifying children under age Payments to Holocaust victims.ceived by survivors.Write in your social security 17 at the end of the year. This Restitution payments received af- For more information, see Pub-number. To protect your privacy,credit can be as much as $600 for ter 1999 (and certain interestlication 3920, Tax Relief for Victimssocial security numbers (SSNs) are earned on the payments) are noteach qualifying child. See chapterof Terrorist Attacks.not printed on the peel-off label that taxable and do not affect the taxa-35.
comes in the mail with your tax in- bility of certain benefits, such asParent of a kidnapped child.Tax relief for victims of terroriststruction booklet. This means you social security benefits. For moreThe parent of a child who is pre-attacks.  Under the Victims ofmust enter your SSN  in the space details, see chapter 13.sumed by law enforcement authori-Terrorism Tax Relief Act of 2001,provided on your tax form. If you ties to have been kidnapped by Advance earned income credit.the federal income tax liability offiled a joint return for 2001 and are someone who is not a family mem-If a qualifying child lives with youthose killed in the following attacksfiling a joint return for 2002 with the ber may be able to take the childand you expect to qualify for theis forgiven for certain tax years.same spouse, enter your names into account in determining his orearned income credit in 2003, youand SSNs in the same order as on her eligibility for the following.• The April 19, 1995, terrorist may be able to get part of the credityour 2001 return. See chapter 1. attack on the Alfred P. Murrah paid to you in advance throughout• Head of household or qualify-Federal Building (OklahomaTaxpayer identification num- the year (by your employer) insteading widow(er) with dependentCity).bers. You must provide the tax- of waiting until you file your tax re-child filing status.payer identification number for turn. See chapter 37.• The September 11, 2001 ter-each person for whom you claim • Exemption for dependents.rorist attacks. Sale of your home. Generally,certain tax benefits. This applies • Child tax credit.• The terrorist attacks involving you will only need to report the saleeven if the person was born in
2002. Generally, this number is the anthrax occurring after Sep-• Earned income credit. of your home if your gain is more
Page 3

Page 6 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
than $250,000 ($500,000 if married as well as unearned income (such to perform certain actions. SeeRestructuring and Reform Act of
filing a joint return). See chapter 16.as interest, dividends, capitalyour income tax package for de-1998, the Privacy Act of 1974, and
gains, pensions, rents and royal-tails. the Paperwork Reduction Act ofIndividual retirement arrange- ties). 1980 require that when we ask youments (IRAs). The following Payment of taxes. Make yourIf you reside outside the United for information we must first tell youparagraphs highlight important re- check or money order payable toStates, you may be able to exclude what our legal right is to ask for theminders that relate to IRAs. See “United States Treasury.” You canpart or all of your foreign source information, why we are asking forchapter 18 for details. pay your taxes by credit card or, ifearned income. For details, see it, how it will be used, what couldIndividual retirement ar- you file electronically, by electronicPublication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.rangement (IRA) for spouse. A happen if we do not receive it, andfunds withdrawal. See chapter 1.Citizens and Resident Aliensmarried couple filing a joint return whether your response is volun-Abroad.can contribute up to the maximum tary, required to obtain a benefit, orFaster ways to file your return.
amount each to their IRAs, even if mandatory under the law. A com-The IRS offers fast, accurate waysJoint return responsibility.one spouse had little or no income. to file your tax return information plete statement on this subject canGenerally, both spouses are re-Spouse covered by plan. without filing a paper tax return.be found in your tax form instruc-sponsible for the tax and any inter-Even if your spouse is covered byest or penalties on a joint tax return.You can use IRS e-file (electroniction booklet.an employer-sponsored retirementIn some cases, one spouse may befiling). For details, see chapter 1.plan, you may be able to deduct Treasury Inspector General forrelieved of that responsibility forcontributions to your traditional IRA Mailing your return.If you are Tax Administration.If you wantitems of the other spouse that wereif you are not covered by an em- filing a paper return, you may beto confidentially report misconduct,incorrectly reported on the joint re-ployer plan. mailing your return to a differentwaste, fraud, or abuse by an IRSturn. For details, see Joint respon- Roth IRA. You may be able to address because the IRS has employee, you can callsibility in chapter 2.establish a Roth IRA. In this type of changed the filing location for sev-1–800–366–4484 (1–800–877–IRA, contributions are not deducti-Include your phone number on eral areas. If you received an en-8339 for TTY/TDD users). You canble but earnings grow tax free andyour return.To promptly resolvevelope with your tax package, remain anonymous.qualified withdrawals are not taxa-any questions we have in process-please use it. Otherwise, see yourble. You may also be able to con-ing your tax return, we would like to Photographs of missing chil-tax form instructions.vert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA,be able to call you. Please enter dren. The Internal Revenuebut you must include all or part ofyour daytime telephone number onPrivate delivery services.You Service is a proud partner with thethe taxable converted amount in in-your tax form next to your signa-may be able to use a designatedcome. National Center for Missing andture. private delivery service to mail yourExploited Children. Photographs ofForeign source income. If you tax returns and payments. See missing children selected by theThird party designee.You canare a U.S. citizen with income from chapter 1 for more information.Center may appear in this publica-check the “Yes” box in the “Thirdsources outside the United States tion on pages that would otherwiseParty Designee” area of your returnRefund on a late filed return.If(foreign income), you must report
be blank. You can help bring theseto authorize the IRS to discuss youryou were due a refund but you didall such income on your tax return
return with a friend, family member, children home by looking at theunless it is exempt by U.S. law. not file a return, you generally must
or any other person you choose. photographs and callingThis is true whether you reside in- file within 3 years from the date the
This allows the IRS to call the per-side or outside the United States 1–800–THE–LOSTreturn was originally due to get that
son you identified as your designeeand whether or not you receive a (1–800–843–5678) if you recog-refund.
to answer any questions that mayForm W–2 or 1099 from the for- nize a child.
Privacy Act and paperwork re-arise during the processing of youreign payer. This applies to earned
income (such as wages and tips) return. It also allows your designeeduction information. The IRS ■
Page 4

Page 7 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part One.
The five chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system.The Income Tax They take you through the first steps of filling out a tax return— such as
deciding what your filing status is, how many exemptions you can take, andReturn what form to file. They also discuss recordkeeping requirements, IRS e-file
(electronic filing), certain penalties, and the two methods used to pay tax
during the year: withholding and estimated tax.
a joint return, please write the SSNs in the same• What happens if you pay too little or too
order as the names. much tax,
• What records you should keep and how1. Direct Deposit of refund.Instead of getting a
long you should keep them, andpaper check, you may be able to have your
refund deposited directly into your account at a• How you can change a return you have
bank or other financial institution. See Direct already filed.Filing Deposit under Refunds, later.
Alternative payment methods. If you oweInformation additional tax, you may be able to pay electroni-
cally. See How To Pay, later.
Do I Have To
Installment agreement.If you cannot pay theImportant Changes full amount due with your return, you may ask toFile a Return?
make monthly installment payments. See In-
Who must file. Generally, the amount of in-stallment Agreement, later, under Amount You You must file a federal income tax return if youcome you can receive before you must file aOwe. are a citizen or resident of the United States or areturn has been increased. See Table 1–1, Ta- resident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filingble 1–2, and Table 1–3 for the specific Service in combat zone.You are allowed ex-requirements for any of the following categoriesamounts. tra time to take care of your tax matters if you are that apply to you.a member of the Armed Forces who served in a
Form 1040EZ interest threshold.Previously, combat zone, or if you served in the combat1) Individuals in general. (There are specialyou could not file Form 1040EZ if you had morezone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi- rules for surviving spouses, executors, ad-than $400 of taxable interest income. Beginningviduals Serving in Combat Zone, later, under ministrators, legal representatives, U.S.with your 2002 tax return, this threshold amountWhen Do I Have To File. citizens living outside the United States,is increased to $1,500. This means you can file residents of Puerto Rico, and individualsForm 1040EZ for 2002 if your taxable interestAdoption taxpayer identification number.If with income from U.S. possessions.)income is $1,500 or less and you meet all the a child has been placed in your home for pur-
2) Dependents.other requirements listed under Form 1040EZ. poses of legal adoption and you will not be able
to get a social security number for the child in3) Child under age 14.Mailing your return.You may be mailing yourtime to file your return, you may be able to get an
return to a different address this year because 4) Self-employed persons.adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN).
the IRS has changed the filing location for sev-For more information, see Social Security Num- 5) Aliens.eral areas. If you received an envelope with yourber, later.
tax package, please use it. Otherwise, see your The filing requirements for each category are
form instructions for where to file. Taxpayer identification number for aliens.explained in this chapter.
If you or your dependent is a nonresident orThe filing requirements apply even if you doFree electronic filing.You may be able to fileresident alien who does not have and is notnot owe tax.your 2002 taxes online free thanks to a neweligible to get a social security number, file Form Even if you do not have to file a return,electronic filing agreement. See New–free In- W–7 with the IRS to apply for an Individual it may be to your advantage to do so.ternet filing options under IRS e-file, later. Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN). For more See Who Should File, later.
TIP
information, see Social Security Number, later.
Third party designee.You can allow the IRSOne return. File only one federal income taxto discuss your tax return with a friend, familyImportant Reminders return for the year regardless of how many jobsmember, or any other person you choose byyou had, how many Forms W–2 you received,checking the “Yes” box in the “third party desig-or how many states you lived in during the year.Alternative filing methods.Rather than filingnee” area of your return. See Third Party Desig-a return on paper, you may be able to file elec-nee.tronically using IRS e-file. Create your own per- Individuals—In Generalsonal identification number (PIN) and file a
completely paperless tax return. For more infor- If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether you
mation, see Does My Return Have To Be On must file a return depends on three factors:IntroductionPaper, later.
1) Your gross income,This chapter discusses:Change of address. If you change your ad-
2) Your filing status, anddress, you should notify the IRS. See Change of • Whether you have to file a return,
Address, later, under What Happens After I File. 3) Your age.• Which form to use,
Write in your social security number. You To find out whether you must file, see Table• How to file electronically,must write your social security number (SSN) in 1–1, Table 1–2, and Table 1–3. Even if no
the spaces provided on your tax return. If you file• When, how, and where to file your return, table shows that you must file, you may need to
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 5

Page 8 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gross income than other taxpayers before youTable 1–1. 2002 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayers
must file. See Table 1–1. You are considered
65 on the day before your 65th birthday. ForTo use this table, first find your marital status at the end of 2002. Then, read across
example, if your 65th birthday was on January 1,the line that shows your filing status and age at the end of 2002. You must file a
2003, you are considered 65 for 2002.return if your gross income was at least the amount shown in the last column.
Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods,
property, and services that is not exempt from tax, including any income fromSurviving Spouses,sources outside the United States (even if you may exclude part or all of it).
Executors, Administrators,When using this table, do not include social security benefits as gross income
and Legal Representativesunless you are married filing a separate return and lived with your spouse at any
time in 2002. (If you must include the benefits, see chapter 12 for the amount to
You must file a final return for a decedent (ainclude.)
person who died) if both of the following are true.Also, see Table 1–2 and Table 1–3 for other situations when you must file a
return. • You are the surviving spouse, executor,
administrator, or legal representative.Marital Status Filing Status Age * Gross Income
• The decedent met the filing requirementsSingle under 65  $7,700 at the date of death.Single (including 65 or older $8,850
divorced and legally For more information on rules for filing aHead of under 65  $9,900separated) decedent’s final return, see chapter 4.household 65 or older $11,050
Married, with a child,
living apart from your Head of under 65 $9,900 U.S. Citizens Living
spouse during the last household 65 or older $11,050 Outside the United States
6 months of 2002
If you are a U.S. citizen living outside the United
under 65 States, you must file a return if you meet the
(both spouses) $13,850 filing requirements. For information on special
Married, joint 65 or older tax rules that may apply to you, get PublicationMarried, living with yourreturn (one spouse) $14,750 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Residentspouse at the end of 65 or older Aliens Abroad. It is available at most U.S. em-2002 (or on the date (both spouses) $15,650 bassies and consulates. Also see How To Getyour spouse died)
Tax Help in the back of this publication.Married, separateany age  $3,000return
Residents of Puerto RicoMarried, not living with
your spouse at end of Married, joint orany age  $3,000 Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi-2002 (or on the date separate return dent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. incomeyour spouse died) tax return if you meet the filing requirements.
This is in addition to any legal requirement youunder 65  $7,700Single may have to file an income tax return for Puerto65 or older  $8,850
Rico.
Widowed before 2002 If you are a resident of Puerto Rico for theunder 65  $9,900and not remarried in Head of household entire year, gross income does not include in-65 or older $11,0502002 come from sources within Puerto Rico, except
for amounts received as an employee of theQualifying under 65 $10,850
United States or a U.S. agency. If you receivewidow(er) with 65 or older $11,750
income from Puerto Rican sources that is notdependent child
subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your stan-
*If your 65th birthday is on January 1, 2003, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2002. dard deduction. As a result, the amount of in-
come you must have before you are required to
file to get money back. (See Who Should File, Self-employed individuals. If you are file a U.S. income tax return is lower than the
self-employed, your gross income includes thelater.) applicable amount in Table 1–1 or Table 1–2.
amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040),See U.S. taxation and its discussion, Standard
Profit or Loss From Business, or line 1 of Sched-deduction, under The Commonwealth of PuertoGross income. This includes all income youule C–EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Busi-Rico in Publication 570, Tax Guide for Individu-receive in the form of money, goods, property,ness. See Self-Employed Persons, later, forals With Income From U.S. Possessions, forand services that is not exempt from tax. It alsomore information about your filing requirements.further information.includes income from sources outside the
If you do not report all of your self-em-United States (even if you may exclude all or
ployment income, your social securitypart of it). Common types of income are dis-
Individuals With Incomebenefits may be lower when you retire.CAUTION
!
cussed in the chapters in Part Two of this publi-
From U.S. Possessionscation.
Filing status.Your filing status depends onCommunity property. If you are married If you had income from Guam, the Common-whether you are single or married and on yourand your permanent home is in a community wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-family situation. Your filing status is determinedproperty state, half of any income described by can Samoa, or the Virgin Islands, special ruleson the last day of your tax year, which is Decem-state law as community income may be consid- may apply when determining whether you mustber 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 for anfile a U.S. federal income tax return. In addition,ered yours. This affects your federal taxes, in-explanation of each filing status. you may have to file a return with the individualcluding whether you must file if you do not file a
island government. See Publication 570 forjoint return with your spouse. See PublicationAge. If you are 65 or older at the end of the
more information.555, Community Property, for more information.year, you generally can have a higher amount of
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 9 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
parent’s return. If this election is made, the childTable 1–2. 2002 Filing Requirements for Dependents
does not have to file a return. See Parent’sSee chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim
Election To Report Child’s Interest and Divi-you as a dependent. dends in chapter 32.
If your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, and any of the
Self-Employed Personssituations below apply to you, you must file a return. (See Table 1–3 for other
situations when you must file.)
You are self-employed if you:In this table, earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, and professional fees.
It also includes taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See Scholarship and • Carry on a trade or business as a sole
Fellowship Grants in chapter 13.) Unearned income includes investment-type proprietor,
income such as interest, dividends, and capital gains. It also includes unemployment• Are an independent contractor,compensation, taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions
• Are a member of a partnership, orof unearned income from a trust. Gross income is the total of your earned and
unearned income. • Are in business for yourself in any other
Caution: If your gross income was $3,000 or more, you generally cannot beway.
claimed as a dependent unless you were under age 19 or a full-time student under
age 24. For details, see Gross Income Test in chapter 3. Self-employment can include work in addition
to your regular full-time business activities. ItSingle dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind? also includes certain part-time work that you do
❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. at home or in addition to your regular job.
• Your unearned income was more than $750. You must file a return if your gross income is
at least as much as the filing requirement• Your earned income was more than $4,700.
amount for your filing status and age (shown in• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
Table 1–1). Also, you must file Form 1040 and1) $750, or
Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Employment2) Your earned income (up to $4,450) plus $250. Tax, if: ❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Your earned income was more than $5,850 ($7,000 if 65 or older and blind). 1) Your net earnings from self-employment
(excluding church employee income) were• Your unearned income was more than $1,900 ($3,050 if 65 or older and
$400 or more, orblind).
• Your gross income was more than: 2) You had church employee income of
1) The larger of $750, or your earned income (up to $4,450) plus $250, plus$108.28 or more. (See Table 1–3.)
2) $1,150 ($2,300 if 65 or older and blind). Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure your
self-employment tax. Self-employment tax isMarried dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
comparable to the social security and Medicare❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
tax withheld from an employee’s wages. For• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate returnmore information about this tax, get Publicationand itemizes deductions. 533, Self-Employment Tax.
• Your earned income was more than $3,925.
Foreign governments or international or-• Your unearned income was more than $750. ganizations.If you are a U.S. citizen who• Your gross income was more than the larger of: works in the United States for an international
1) $750, or organization, a foreign government, or a wholly
2) Your earned income (up to $3,675) plus $250. owned instrumentality of a foreign government,
❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. and your employer is not required to withhold
social security and Medicare taxes from your• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return
wages, you must include your earnings fromand itemizes deductions.
services performed in the United States when• Your earned income was more than $4,825 ($5,725 if 65 or older and blind). figuring your net earnings from self-employ-• Your unearned income was more than $1,650 ($2,550 if 65 or older and ment.blind).
Ministers.You must include income from• Your gross income was more than:
services you performed as a minister when fig-1) The larger of $750 or your earned income (up to $3,675) plus $250, plusuring your net earnings from self-employment,2) $900 ($1,800 if 65 or older and blind). unless you have an exemption from self-em-
ployment tax. This also applies to Christian Sci-
ence practitioners and members of a religiousthe child’s name followed by the words “By (sig-order who have not taken a vow of poverty. For
Dependents nature), parent (or guardian) for minor child.”more information, get Publication 517, Social
If you are a dependent (one who meets the Security and Other Information for Members ofChild’s earnings.Amounts a child earns by
dependency tests in chapter 3), see Table 1–2 the Clergy and Religious Workers.performing services are his or her gross income.
to find whether you must file a return. You alsoThis is true even if under local law the child’s
must file if your situation is described in Table parents have the right to the earnings and mayAliens1–3. actually have received them. If the child does not
pay the tax due on this income, the parent isYour status as an alien—resident, nonresident,
liable for the tax.Responsibility of parent.Generally, a child or dual-status—determines whether and how
is responsible for filing his or her own tax return you must file an income tax return.
and for paying any tax on the return. But if a The rules used to determine your alien statusChild Under Age 14
dependent child who must file an income tax are discussed in Publication 519, U.S. Tax
return cannot file it for any reason, such as age,If a child’s only income is interest and dividendsGuide for Aliens.
a parent, guardian, or other legally responsible(including Alaska Permanent Fund dividends)
person must file it for the child. If the child cannot Resident alien.If you are a resident alien forand certain other conditions are met, a parent
the entire year, you must file a tax return follow-sign the return, the parent or guardian must signcan elect to include the child’s income on the
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 7

Page 10 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
arship and fellowship grants, and taxableTable 1–3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2002 Return
interest of $1,500 or less.
If any of the four conditions listed below apply, you must file a return, even if your6) You did not receive any advance earned
income is less than the amount shown in Table 1–1 or Table 1–2. income credit (EIC) payments.
1. You owe any special taxes, such as: 7) You do not claim any adjustments to in-• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer.come, such as a deduction for IRA contri-
(See chapter 7.) butions or student loan interest.
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you8) You do not claim any credits other than thereported to your employer. (See chapter 7.) earned income credit.• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on your
You must meet all of these requirements togroup-term life insurance.
use Form 1040EZ. If you do not, you must use• Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter 31.)
Form 1040A or Form 1040.• Tax on a qualified retirement plan, including an individual retirement
arrangement (IRA). (See chapter 18.) Figuring tax.On Form 1040EZ, you can only• Tax on an Archer MSA. (See Publication 969, Medical Savings Accounts use the tax table to figure your tax. You cannot
(MSAs).) use Form 1040EZ to report any other tax.
• Tax on a Coverdell ESA or on qualified tuition program earnings. (See
Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education.) Form 1040A• Recapture of an investment credit or a low-income housing credit. (See the
instructions for Form 4255, Recapture of Investment Credit, or Form 8611, If you do not qualify to use Form 1040EZ, you
Recapture of Low-Income Housing Credit.) may be able to use Form 1040A.
• Recapture tax on the disposition of a home purchased with a
You can use Form 1040A if all of the follow-federally-subsidized mortgage. (See chapter 16.)
ing apply.• Recapture of the qualified electric vehicle credit. (See chapter 38.)
• Recapture of an education credit. (See chapter 36.) 1) Your income is only from wages, salaries,
• Recapture of the Indian employment credit. tips, IRA distributions, pensions and annui-
• Recapture of the new markets credit. (See Form 8874, New Markets Credit.) ties, taxable social security and railroad
retirement benefits, taxable scholarship2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your
and fellowship grants, interest, ordinaryemployer. This amount should be shown in box 9 of your Form W–2. (See
dividends (including Alaska Permanentchapter 37.)
Fund dividends), capital gain distributions,3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Self-Employed
and unemployment compensation.Persons in this chapter.)
2) Your taxable income is less than $50,000.4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled
organization that is exempt from employer social security and Medicare taxes.3) Your adjustments to income are for only(See Publication 533.) the following items.
a) Educator expenses.
ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens. b) IRA deduction.Use the forms discussed in this publication.Which Form c) Student loan interest deduction.
d) Tuition and fees deduction.Should I Use?Nonresident alien.If you are a nonresident
alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to you 4) You do not itemize your deductions.You must use one of three forms to file yourare different from those that apply to U.S. citi-return: Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 5) Your taxes are from only the followingzens and resident aliens. See Publication 519 to1040. (But also see Does My Return Have To Be items.find out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you andOn Paper, later.)which forms you should file. a) Tax Table.
Form 1040EZ b) Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter
Dual-status taxpayer.If you were a resident 31.)
Form 1040EZ is the simplest form to use.alien for part of the tax year and a nonresident c) Advance earned income credit (EIC)alien for the rest of the year, you are a dual-sta- payments, if you received any. (SeeYou can use Form 1040EZ if all of the follow-tus taxpayer. Different rules apply for each part chapter 37.)ing apply.of the year. For information on dual-status tax-
d) Recapture of an education credit.payers, see Publication 519.
1) Your filing status is single or married filinge) Form 8615, Tax for Children Under Agejointly. If you were a nonresident alien at14 Who Have Investment Income ofWho Should File any time in 2002, your filing status must beMore Than $1,500.married filing jointly.Even if you do not have to file, you should file a f) Capital Gain Tax Worksheet.2) You (and your spouse if married filing afederal income tax return to get money back if
joint return) were under age 65 and notany of the following conditions apply. 6) You claim only the following credits.blind at the end of 2002. If you were born
on January 1, 1938, you are considered toa) The credit for child and dependent care1) You had income tax withheld from your
be age 65 at the end of 2002. expenses. (See chapter 33.)pay.
3) You do not claim any dependents. b) The credit for the elderly or the dis-2) You qualify for the earned income credit.
abled. (See chapter 34.)See chapter 37 for more information. 4) Your taxable income is less than $50,000.
c) The child tax credit. (See chapter 35.)3) You qualify for the additional child tax5) Your income is only from wages, salaries,
credit. See chapter 35 for more informa- tips, unemployment compensation, Alaska d) The additional child tax credit. (See
Permanent Fund dividends, taxable schol-tion. chapter 35.)
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 11 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
e) The education credits. (See chapter cludes gain from the sale of property, bar- h) Form 8814, Parents’ Election To Report
36.) Child’s Interest and Dividends.ter income, alimony income, taxable
refunds of state and local income taxes,f) The retirement savings contributions i) Form 8853, Archer MSAs andself-employment income (including farmcredit. (See chapter 38.) Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts.income), qualified tuition program earn-
g) The earned income credit. (See chapterings, Coverdell ESA distributions, and in-
37.) come received as a partner in a
partnership, a shareholder in an S corpo-h) The adoption credit. (See chapter 38.)ration, or a beneficiary of an estate or
Does My Return Havetrust.You must meet all of the above requirements
to use Form 1040A. If you do not, you must use8) You are reporting original issue discount inTo Be On Paper?Form 1040. an amount more or less than the amount
If you meet the above requirements, you canshown on Form 1099–OID. IRS e-file (electronic filing) is the preferreduse Form 1040A even if you received method of filing. It’s so easy, 47 million people9) You sold or exchanged capital assets oremployer-provided adoption benefits or depen- use it. You may be able to file a paperless return.business property.dent care benefits. This section explains IRS e-file:
10) You claim any adjustments to gross in-If you receive a capital gain distribution • Using an Authorized IRS e-file Provider,come other than the adjustments listedthat includes 28% rate gain, qualifiedearlier under Form 1040A. • Using your personal computer, or5-year gain, unrecaptured sectionCAUTION
!
1250 gain, or section 1202 gain, you cannot use11) Your Form W–2 shows uncollected em- • Using a telephone (TeleFile).Form 1040A. You must use Form 1040. ployee tax (social security and Medicare
tax) on tips or group-term life insurance in
box 12. (See chapter 7.)
IRS e-fileForm 1040
12) You received $20 or more in tips in any
one month and did not report all of them toIf you cannot use Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A,
your employer. (See chapter 7.)you must use Form 1040. You can use Form
1040 to report all types of income, deductions,13) You must pay tax on self-employment in-and credits. come. (See Schedule SE (Form 1040), Table 1–4 lists the benefits of IRS e-file. IRSYou may have received Form 1040A or Form Self-Employment Tax.) e-file uses automation to replace most of the1040EZ in the mail because of the return you manual steps needed to process paper returns.14) You must pay household employmentfiled last year. If your situation has changed this As a result, the processing of e-file returns istaxes. (See Schedule H (Form 1040).)year, it may be to your advantage to file Form faster and more accurate than the processing of1040 instead. You may pay less tax by filing15) You have to recapture an investment paper returns. As with a paper return, you areForm 1040 because you can take itemized de- credit, a low-income housing credit, a qual-responsible for making sure your return containsductions and some adjustments to income and ified electric vehicle credit, or an Indianaccurate information and is filed on time.credits you cannot take on Form 1040A or Formemployment credit. Using e-file does not affect your chances of1040EZ. an IRS examination of your return.16) You have to recapture tax on the disposi-
You must use Form 1040 if any of the follow-tion of a home purchased with a Electronic signatures.Paperless filing ising apply. federally-subsidized mortgage. (See chap-easier than you think and it’s available to mostter 16.) taxpayers who file electronically—including1) Your taxable income is $50,000 or more.
17) You have to pay tax on an excess goldenthose first-time filers who were 16 or older at the2) You itemize your deductions. parachute payment. end of 2002. If you file electronically using tax
preparation software or a tax professional, you3) You received or paid interest on securities18) You claim any credits other than the cred-may be able to participate in the Self-Select PINtransferred between interest payment its listed earlier under Form 1040A. (personal identification number) program. If youdates.
19) You have to file other forms with your re-are married filing jointly, you and your spouse4) You received nontaxable distributions re-turn to report certain exclusions, taxes, orwill each need to create a PIN and enter thesequired to be reported as capital gains. transactions. This includes the followingPINs as your electronic signatures.
forms.  To create a PIN, you must know your ad-5) You received capital gain distributions that
justed gross income (AGI) from your originallyincluded 28% rate gain, qualified 5-year a) Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income. filed 2001 income tax return (not from angain, unrecaptured section 1250 gain, or
amended return, Form 1040X, or any math errorsection 1202 gain. b) Form 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned In-
notice from the IRS). You will also need to pro-come Exclusion.6) You have to complete Part III of Schedule vide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure yourB (Form 1040) because: c) Form 4563, Exclusion of Income for DOB is accurate and matches the information
Bona Fide Residents of American Sa-on record with the Social Security Administrationa) You received a distribution from a for- moa. before you e-file. To do this, check your annualeign trust, or
Social Security Statement.d) Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Distri-b) You had a bank, securities, or other fi- If you use a Self-Select PIN, there’s nothingbution of Trusts.nancial account in a foreign country at to sign and nothing to mail—not even your
e) Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distribu-any time during the year. Forms W-2. For more details on the Self-Select
tions. (See chapter 11.)Note. If the combined value of the PIN program, visit the IRS Web Site at
foreign account(s) was $10,000 or www.irs.gov.f) Form 5329, Additional Taxes on Quali-less during all of 2002, or if the fied Plans (Including IRAs) and OtherForms 8453 and 8453-OL. Your return is notaccount(s) was with a U.S. military Tax-Favored Accounts. complete without your signature. If you are notbanking facility operated by a U.S. Note. Do not file Form 1040 onlyeligible or choose not to sign your return elec-financial institution, you may be able because you have to file Form 5329.tronically, you must complete, sign, and fileto use Form 1040A or Form File Form 5329 by itself. (See chap-Form 8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declara-1040EZ. ters 11 and 18.) tion for an e-file Return, or Form 8453-OL, U.S.
7) You had income that cannot be reported g) Form 8271, Investor Reporting of Tax Individual Income Tax Declaration for an IRS
on Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A. This in- Shelter Registration Number. e-file On–Line Return, whichever applies.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 9

Page 12 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
State returns.In most states, you can file an You will be asked to complete Form 8879 to touch-tone telephone. Only taxpayers who met
authorize the provider to enter your self-selected the qualifications for Form 1040EZ in the priorelectronic state return simultaneously with your
PIN on your return. year are eligible to receive the TeleFile tax pack-federal return. For more information, check with
age for the current year. A TeleFile tax packageyour local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro-Depending on the provider and the specific
is automatically mailed to you if you are eligible.fessional, or the IRS web site at www.irs.gov. services requested, a fee may be charged. To
TeleFile is completely paperless–there are nofind an authorized IRS e-file provider near you,
forms to mail in. Just follow the instructions ingo to www.irs.gov or look for an “AuthorizedRefunds. You can have a refund check mailed
the TeleFile tax package. TeleFile is filed di-IRS e-file Provider” sign.to you, or you can have your refund deposited
rectly with the IRS, usually in 10 minutes, and it’sdirectly to your checking or savings account.
FREE.With e-file, your refund will be issued in half
Using Your Personal Computerthe time as when filing on paper. Most refunds Parents: If your children receive a
are issued within 3 weeks. If you choose Direct TeleFile tax package, please en-A computer with a modem or Internet access isDeposit, you can receive your refund in as few courage them to use TeleFile.
TIP
all you need to file your tax return using IRSas 10 days. e-file. Best of all, when you use your personal
Offset against debts.As with a paper re-computer, you can e-file your return from the
turn, you may not get all of your refund if youcomfort of your home any time of the day orThrough Employers and Financialowe certain past-due amounts, such as federalnight. Sign your return electronically using aInstitutionstax, state tax, a student loan, or child support.self-selected PIN to complete the process.
See Offset Against Debts under Refunds, later. There is no signature form to submit or FormsSome businesses offer free e-file to their em-
W-2 to send in. ployees, members, or customers. Others offer it
Refund inquiries.If you do not receive your for a fee. Ask your employer or financial institu-
New–free Internet filing options.More tax-refund within 3 weeks after your return was tion if they offer IRS e-file as an employee,
payers can now prepare and e-file their individ-accepted by IRS, see Past–Due Refund later. member, or customer benefit.
ual income tax returns free using commercial tax
preparation software–accessible throughBalance due. If you owe tax, you must pay itwww.irs.gov or www.firstgov.gov. The IRS isby April 15, 2003, to avoid late-payment penal- Free Help With Your Returnpartnering with the tax software industry to offerties and interest. You can make your paymentfree preparation and filing services to a signifi-Free help in preparing your return is availableelectronically by scheduling an electronic fundscant number of taxpayers. Security and privacynationwide from IRS-trained volunteers. Thewithdrawal from your checking or savings ac-certificate programs will assure tax data is safeVolunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) pro-count or by credit card. and secure. To see if you qualify for these serv-gram is designed to help low-income taxpayersSee How To Pay, later, for information onices, visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage atand the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)how to pay the balance due. www.irs.gov. program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60
or older with their tax returns. Some locationsIf you cannot use the free services, you can
offer free electronic filing.buy tax preparation software at various electron-Using an Authorized IRS e-file ics stores or computer and office supply stores.Provider You can also download software from the In-
ternet or prepare and file your return completelyMany tax professionals can electronically fileon-line by using a tax preparation softwarepaperless returns for their clients. You have two When Do Ipackage available on the Internet.options.
Have To File?1. You can prepare your return, take it to an
authorized IRS e-file provider, and have the pro-Using a Telephone (TeleFile) April 15, 2003, is the due date for filing yourvider transmit it electronically to the IRS.
2002 income tax return if you use the calendar2. You can have an authorized IRS e-file For millions of eligible taxpayers, TeleFile is theyear. For a quick view of due dates for filing aprovider prepare your return and transmit it foreasiest way to file. TeleFile allows you to filereturn with or without an extension of time to fileyou electronically. your simple Federal tax return using a (discussed later), see Table 1–5.
If you use a fiscal year (a year ending on theTable 1–4. Benefits of IRS e-file last day of any month except December, or a
52–53 week year), your income tax return isAccuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS isdue by the 15th day of the 4th month after thesignificantly reduced. close of your fiscal year.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured. When the due date for doing any act for tax
Electronic • Create your own Personal Identification Number (PIN) andpurposes—filing a return, paying taxes, etc.—
Signatures file a completely paperless return through your tax falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the
due date is delayed until the next business day.preparation software or tax professional. There is nothing to
mail!
Filing on time.Your paper return is filed onProof of • You receive an electronic acknowledgement within 48 hours
time if it is mailed in an envelope that is properlyAcceptance that the IRS has accepted your return for processing.addressed and postmarked by the due date.Fast Refunds • You get your refund in half the time, even faster with DirectThe envelope must have enough postage. If youDeposit—in as few as 10 days. send your return by registered mail, the date ofNew–Free Internet• Use the IRS Web Site www.irs.gov, to access commercial the registration is the postmark date. The regis-
Filing Options tax preparation and e-file services available at no cost totration is evidence that the return was delivered.
eligible taxpayers. If you send a return by certified mail and have
Electronic • Convenient, safe and secure electronic payment options areyour receipt postmarked by a postal employee,
Payment Options available. E-file and pay your taxes in a single step. the date on the receipt is the postmark date. The
postmarked certified mail receipt is evidenceSchedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your checking
that the return was delivered.or savings account (up to and including April 15, 2003) or
pay by credit card. Private delivery services.If you use a pri-
Federal/State • Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns togethervate delivery service designated by the IRS to
Filing and double the benefits you get from e-file. send your return, the postmark date generally is
the date the private delivery service records in
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 13 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
its database or marks on the mailing label. The you complete the transaction. Keep the number• April 15, 2003, if you use a calendar year,private delivery service can tell you how to get with your records.orwritten proof of this date. Complete Form 4868, Application for Auto-
• The 15th day of the 4th month after theThe following are designated private delivery matic Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual
end of your fiscal year if you use a fiscalservices. Income Tax Return, to use as a worksheet. If
year. you think you may owe tax when you file your• Airborne Express (Airborne): Overnight Air return, use Part III of the form to estimate yourExpress Service, Next Afternoon Service,If you do not earn wages subject to U.S. in-balance due. Do not send Form 4868 to the IRS.and Second Day Service. come tax withholding, your return is due by:
E-file by phone.You can file Form 4868 by• DHL Worldwide Express (DHL): DHL • June 16, 2003, if you use a calendar year,phone any time from February 13 through April“Same Day” Service and DHL USA Over- or 15, 2003. You will need to provide certain infor-night. mation from your tax return for 2001. If you wish• The 15th day of the 6th month after the
• Federal Express (FedEx): FedEx Priority to make a payment by electronic funds with-end of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal
Overnight, FedEx Standard Overnight, drawal, see Electronic payment options, underyear.
FedEx 2Day, FedEx International Priority, How To Pay, later in this chapter.
Get Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens,and FedEx International First. E-file using your personal computer or afor more filing information.
• United Parcel Service (UPS): UPS Next tax professional. You can use a tax software
Day Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPS package with your personal computer or a taxFiling for a decedent.If you must file a final
2nd Day Air, UPS 2nd Day Air A.M, UPS professional to file Form 4868 electronically.income tax return for a taxpayer who died during
Worldwide Express Plus, and UPS World- You will need to provide certain information fromthe year (a decedent), the return is due by the
wide Express. your tax return for 2001. If you wish to make a15th day of the 4th month after the end of the
payment by electronic funds withdrawal, seedecedent’s normal tax year. In most cases, for a
Electronic payment options, under How To Pay,2002 return, this will be April 15, 2003. See FinalPrivate delivery services cannot deliver later in this chapter.Return for the Decedent in chapter 4.items to P.O. boxes. You must use the
U.S. Postal Service to mail any item to E-file and pay by credit card.You can get
CAUTION
!
an IRS P.O. box address. an extension by paying part or all of your esti-Extensions of Time To File
mate of tax due by using a credit card. You can
You may be able to get an extension of time todo this by phone or over the Internet. You do notElectronically filed returns.If you use IRS
file your return. Special rules apply if you were:file Form 4868. See Payment by credit card,e-file, your return is considered filed on time if
under How To Pay, later in this chapter.the authorized electronic return transmitter post-• Outside the United States, or
marks the transmission by the due date. An
Filing a paper Form 4868.You can get an• Serving in a combat zone.authorized electronic return transmitter is a par-
extension of time to file by filing a paper Formticipant in the IRS e-file program that transmitsThese rules are discussed separately. 4868. Mail it to the address shown in the formelectronic tax return information directly to the
instructions.IRS. Automatic extension.If you cannot file yourIf you want to make a payment with the form,The electronic postmark is a record of when2002 return by the due date, you may be able tomake your check or money order payable to thethe authorized electronic return transmitter re-get an automatic 4-month extension of time to“United States Treasury.” Write your social se-ceived the transmission of your electronicallyfile. curity number, daytime phone number, andfiled return on its host system. The date and time
“2002 Form 4868” on your check or money or-in your time zone controls whether your elec-Example. If your return is due on April 15,
der.tronically filed return is timely. 2003, you will have until August 15, 2003, to file.
If you do not pay the tax due by theWhen to file.You must request the automaticFiling late.If you do not file your return by the
regular due date (generally, April 15),extension by the due date for your return. Youdue date, you may have to pay a failure-to-file
you will owe interest. You may also becan file your return any time before the 4-monthCAUTION
!
penalty and interest. For more information, see
charged penalties, discussed later. extension period ends.Penalties, later. Also see Interest under Amount
You Owe.
How to get the automatic extension.You When you file your return.Enter any pay-If you were due a refund but you did not file acan get the automatic extension by: ment you made related to the extension of timereturn, you generally must file within 3 years
to file on line 67, Form 1040. If you file Formfrom the date the return was originally due to get1) Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), or 1040EZ or Form 1040A, include that payment inthat refund.
your total payments on line 9 of Form 1040EZ or2) Filing a paper form.
line 43 of Form 1040A. Also print “Form 4868”Nonresident alien.If you are a nonresident
and the amount paid in the space to the left ofalien and earn wages subject to U.S. income taxE-file options. There are three options for us-
line 9 or line 43.withholding, your 2002 U.S. income tax return ing e-file to get an extension of time to file. If you
(Form 1040NR or Form 1040NR–EZ) is due by:e-file, you will get a confirmation number when
Extension beyond 4 months. If you get the
4-month extension and you later find that youTable 1–5. When To File Your 2002 Return are not able to file within the 4-month extension (For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns period, you may be able to get 2 more months to
 on a calendar year) file, for a total of 6 months.
You can apply for an extension beyond the
For Most Taxpayers For Certain Taxpayers 4-month extension either by writing a letter to the
Outside the U.S. IRS or by filing Form 2688,Application for Addi-
tional Extension of Time To File U.S. IndividualNo extension requested April 15, 2003 June 16, 2003 Income Tax Return. You should ask for the ex-Automatic extension August 15, 2003 August 15, 2003 tension early so that, if it is not approved, youForm 4868 filed, or credit card still will be able to file on time. Except in cases ofpayment made undue hardship, a request for additional time will
2nd extension October 15, 2003 October 15, 2003 not be approved unless you have first used the
Form 2688 filed after getting automatic 4-month extension. Form 2688 or
automatic extension your letter will not be considered if you file it after
the extended due date.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 11

Page 14 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To get an extension beyond the automatic charged from that date until the date the tax isSee Publication 3, Armed Forces’ Tax
paid. Guide, for information about other tax benefits4-month extension, you must give all the follow-
See When To File and Pay in Publication 54 available to military personnel serving in a com-ing information.
for more information. bat zone.• The reason for requesting the extension.If you served in a combat zone, see Individu-
Extension period.The deadline for filing yourals Serving in Combat Zone, later, for special• The tax year to which the extension ap-
return, paying any tax due, and filing a claim forrules that apply to you.plies.
refund is extended for at least 180 days after the
• The length of time needed for the exten-Married taxpayers.If you file a joint return,later of:
sion. only one spouse has to qualify for this automatic
extension. If you and your spouse file separate1) The last day you are in a combat zone (or• Whether another extension of time to filereturns, this automatic extension applies only tothe last day the area qualifies as a combathas already been requested for this taxthe spouse who qualifies. zone), oryear.
How to get the extension.To use this special 2) The last day of any continuous qualifiedYou must sign the request for this extension, or itautomatic extension, you must attach a state- hospitalization for injury from service in themay be signed by your attorney, CPA, enrolledment to your return explaining what situation combat zone.agent, or a person with a power of attorney. Ifqualified you for the extension. (See the situa-you are unable to sign the request because of In addition to the 180 days, your deadline istions listed under (2), earlier.)illness or for another good reason, a person with also extended by the number of days you had
a close personal or business relationship to you left to take action with the IRS when you enteredExtensions beyond 2 months. If you cannot
can sign for you, stating why you could not sign the combat zone. For example, you have 31/2file your return within the automatic 2-month
the request. months (January 1 – April 15) to file your taxextension period, you may be able to get an
return. Any days left in this period when youadditional 2-month extension, for a total of 4E-file.Refer to your tax software package or entered the combat zone (or the entire 31/2months. Generally, you must file a paper Formtax preparer for ways to file Form 2688 electroni- months if you entered it before the beginning of4868 by the end of the automatic extensioncally. You will need to provide certain informa- the year) are added to the 180 days. See Exten-period (usually June 15) to get this additionaltion from your tax return for 2001. Do not mail sion of Deadline in Publication 3 for more infor-2-month extension.the Form 2688 if you file electronically. mation.This additional 2-month extension of time to
Extension approved. If your application forfile is not an extension of time to pay. You can
this extension is approved, you will be notified byuse a credit card to pay your estimate of tax due.
the IRS. See How To Pay, later in this chapter.
If the IRS later determines that the state- How Do IExtension beyond 4 months. If you are stillments made on your request for this extension
unable to file your return within the 4-monthare false or misleading and an extension would Prepare My Return?extension period, you may be able to get annot have been approved at the time based onextension for 2 more months, for a total of 6the true facts, the extension will be null and void. This section explains how to get ready to fill inmonths. See Extension beyond 4 months, ear-You will have to pay the failure-to-file penalty your tax return and when to report your incomelier.(discussed later). and expenses. It also explains how to complete
No further extension.An extension of morecertain sections of the form. You may find TableExtension not approved. If your applica-
than 6 months will generally not be granted.1–6 helpful when you prepare your return.tion for this extension is not approved, you must
However, if you are outside the United StatesIn most cases, the IRS will mail you Formfile your return by the extended due date of the
and meet certain tests, you may be granted a1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ with relatedautomatic extension. You may be allowed to file
longer extension. See When To File and Pay in instructions, or a TeleFile package, based onwithin 10 days of the date of the notice you get
Publication 54 for more information. what you filed last year. Before you fill in thefrom the IRS if the end of the 10-day period is
form, look it over to see if you need additionallater than the due date. The notice will tell you if
forms or schedules. You may also want to readthe 10-day grace period is granted.
Individuals Serving Does My Return Have To Be On Paper, earlier.
No further extensions.An extension of morein Combat Zone If you do not receive a tax return package in
than 6 months will not be approved if you are in the mail, or if you need other forms, you canThe deadline for filing your tax return, payingthe United States. order them. See How To Get Tax Help in theany tax you may owe, and filing a claim forback of this publication.refund is automatically extended if you serve in a
combat zone. This applies to members of theIndividuals Outside Table 1–6. Six Steps for PreparingArmed Forces, as well as Red Cross personnel,the United States Your Returnaccredited correspondents, and civilians under
the direction of the Armed Forces in support ofYou are allowed an automatic 2-month exten- 1—Get your records together forthe Armed Forces.sion (until June 16, 2003, if you use the calendar income and expenses.year) to file your 2002 return and pay any federalCombat zone. For purposes of the automatic2—Get the forms, schedules, andincome tax due if: extension, the term “combat zone” includes thepublications you need.following areas.1) You are a U.S. citizen or resident, and 3—Fill in your return.
1) The Persian Gulf Area, effective August 2,4—Check your return to make sure it is2) On the due date of your return:
1990. correct.
a) You are living outside of the United 5—Sign and date your return.2) The qualified hazardous duty area of Bos-States and Puerto Rico, and your main 6—Attach all required forms andnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Mace-place of business or post of duty is schedules.donia, effective November 21, 1995.outside the United States and
Puerto Rico, or 3) The qualified hazardous duty area of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia/b) You are in military or naval service on Substitute tax forms.You cannot use yourMontenegro), Albania, the Adriatic Sea,duty outside the United States and own version of a tax form unless it meets theand the Ionian Sea north of the 39th paral-Puerto Rico. requirements explained in Publication 1167,lel, effective March 24, 1999. Substitute Printed, Computer-Prepared, and
However, if you pay the tax due after the due4) Afghanistan, effective September 19, Computer-Generated Tax Forms and Sched-
date (generally, April 15), interest will be2001. ules.
Page 12 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 15 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form W–2. If you are an employee, you Cash method. If you use this method, reportAccrual method. If you use an accrual
should receive Form W–2 from your employer. method, you generally report income when youall items of income in the year in which you
You will need the information from this form earn it, rather than when you receive it. Youactually or constructively receive them. Deduct
before you prepare your return. See Form W–2 generally deduct your expenses when you incurall expenses in the year you actually pay them.
under Credit for Withholding and Estimated Tax them, rather than when you pay them.This is the method most individual taxpayers
in chapter 5. use. Income paid in advance. Prepaid incomeIf you do not receive Form W–2 by January is generally included in gross income in the yearConstructive receipt.You constructively31, 2003, contact your employer. If you still do you receive it. Your method of accounting doesreceive income when it is credited to your ac-not get the form by February 15, the IRS can not matter as long as the income is available tocount or set apart in any way that makes ithelp you by requesting the form from your em- you. Prepaid income includes rents or interestavailable to you. You do not need to have physi-ployer. When you request IRS help, be prepared you receive in advance and pay for services youcal possession of it. For example, interestto provide the following. will perform later.credited to your bank account on December 31,
• Your name, address (including zip code),2002, is taxable income to you in 2002 if youAdditional information.For more informationand phone number. could have withdrawn it in 2002 (even if theon accounting methods, including how to
amount is not entered in your passbook or with-change your accounting method, get Publication• Your social security number. drawn until 2003). 538.• Your dates of employment. Garnisheed wages. If your employer uses
• Your employer’s name, address (includingyour wages to pay your debts, or if your wagesSocial Security Numberzip code), and phone number. are attached or garnisheed, the full amount is
constructively received by you. You must in-You must enter your social security number
clude these wages in income for the year you(SSN) in the space provided on your return. BeForm 1099. If you received certain types of
would have received them. sure the SSN on your return is the same as theincome, you may receive a Form 1099. For
SSN on your social security card. If you areexample, if you received taxable interest of $10Brokerage and other accounts. Profits married, enter the SSNs for both you and youror more, the payer generally must give you afrom a brokerage account, or similar account,spouse, whether you file jointly or separately.Form 1099–INT. If you have not received it byare fully taxable in the year you earn them. ThisIf you are filing a joint return, write the SSNsJanuary 31, 2003, contact the payer. If you stillis true even if: in the same order as the names. Please use thisdo not get the form by February 15, call the IRS
same order in submitting other forms and docu-for help. 1) You do not withdraw the earnings, ments to the IRS.
2) The credit balance in the account may beName change. If you changed your name be-When Do I Report My reduced or eliminated by losses in latercause of marriage, divorce, etc., immediatelyyears, orIncome and Expenses? notify your Social Security Administration (SSA)
3) Current profits are used to reduce or elimi-office so the name on your tax return is the sameYou must figure your taxable income on the nate a debit balance from previous years.as the one the SSA has on its records. This maybasis of a tax year. A “tax year” is an annual prevent delays in issuing your refund and safe-accounting period used for keeping records andDebts paid for you. If another person guard your future social security benefits.reporting income and expenses. You must ac-cancels or pays your debts (but not as a gift orcount for your income and expenses in a way Dependent’s social security number.Youloan), you have constructively received thethat clearly shows your taxable income. The way must provide the SSN of each dependent youamount and generally must include it in youryou do this is called an accounting method. This claim, regardless of the dependent’s age. Thisgross income for the year. See Canceled Debtssection explains which accounting periods and requirement applies to all dependents (not justin chapter 13 for more information.methods you can use. your children) claimed on your tax return.
Payment to third party.If a third party isException. If your child was born and diedpaid income from property you own, you havein 2002 and you do not have an SSN for theconstructively received the income. It is theAccounting Periods child, you may attach a copy of the child’s birthsame as if you had actually received the incomecertificate instead. If you do, enter “DIED” inMost individual tax returns cover a calendar and paid it to the third party. column 2 of line 6c.year—the 12 months from January 1 through Payment to an agent.Income an agent re-December 31. If you do not use a calendar year, No social security number.File Form SS–5ceives for you is income you constructively re-your accounting period is a fiscal year. A regu- with your local SSA office to get an SSN forceived in the year the agent receives it. If yoular fiscal year is a 12-month period that ends on yourself or your dependent. It usually takesindicate in a contract that your income is to bethe last day of any month except December. A about 2 weeks to get an SSN. If you or yourpaid to another person, you must include the52–53 week fiscal year varies from 52 to 53 dependent is not eligible for an SSN, see Individ-amount in your gross income when the otherweeks and always ends on the same day of the ual taxpayer identification number, later.person receives it.week. If you are a U.S. citizen, you must show proof
You choose your accounting period (tax Check received or available.A valid checkof age, identity, and citizenship with your Form
year) when you file your first income tax return. Ityou received or that was made available to youSS–5. If you are 18 or older, you must appear in
cannot be longer than 12 months. before the end of the tax year is constructivelyperson with this proof at an SSA office.
received by you in that year, even if you do notForm SS–5 is available at any SSA office. If
More information. For more information oncash the check or deposit it in your account untilyou have any questions about which documents
accounting periods, including how to changethe next year. you can use as proof of age, identity, or citizen-
your accounting period, see Publication 538, ship, contact your SSA office.No constructive receipt.There may beAccounting Periods and Methods. If your dependent does not have an SSN byfacts to show that you did not constructivelythe time your return is due, you may want to askreceive income. for an extension of time to file, as explained
Accounting Methods earlier under When Do I Have To File.Example. Alice Johnson, a teacher, agreedIf you do not provide a required SSN or if youto her school board’s condition that, in her ab-Your accounting method is the way you account provide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in-sence, she would receive only the differencefor your income and expenses. Most taxpayers creased and any refund may be reduced.between her regular salary and the salary of ause either the cash method or an accrual
substitute teacher hired by the school board.method. You choose a method when you file Adoption taxpayer identification number
Therefore, Alice did not constructively receiveyour first income tax return. If you want to (ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting a
the amount by which her salary was reduced tochange your accounting method after that, you child who is a U.S. citizen or resident and cannot
generally must get IRS approval. pay the substitute teacher. get an SSN for the child until the adoption is
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 13

Page 16 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
final, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead of 1040EZ. If you are filing a joint return, your Form 1040A in order by number. If you are filing
an SSN. spouse may also have $3 go to the fund. If you Schedule EIC, put it last. Do not attach items
File Form W–7A with the IRS to get an ATIN check Yes, it will not change the tax you pay orunless required to do so.
if all of the following are true. the refund you will receive.
Form 1040. Attach any forms and schedules• You have a child living with you who was
behind Form 1040 in order of the “AttachmentComputationsplaced in your home for legal adoption by
Sequence Number” shown in the upper rightan authorized placement agency.
corner of the form or schedule. Then arrange allThe following information on entering numbers• You cannot get the child’s existing SSN other statements or attachments in the sameon your tax return may be useful in making theeven though you have made a reasonablereturn easier to complete. order as the forms and schedules they relate toattempt to get it from the birth parents, the and attach them last. Do not attach items unlessRounding off dollars.You may round offplacement agency, and other persons. required to do so.cents to whole dollars on your return and sched-• You cannot get an SSN for the child fromules. If you do round to whole dollars, you mustthe SSA because, for example, the adop-round all amounts. To round, drop amountsThird Party Designeetion is not final. under 50 cents and increase amounts from 50 to
You can authorize the IRS to discuss your return99 cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39• You cannot get an Individual Taxpayer
with a friend, family member, or any other per-becomes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3.Identification Number (ITIN) (discussed
son you choose. If you check the “Yes” box inIf you have to add two or more amounts tolater) for the child.
the third party designee area of your 2002 taxfigure the amount to enter on a line, include• You are eligible to claim the child as a return and provide the information required, youcents when adding the amounts and round offdependent on your tax return. are authorizing:only the total.
After the adoption is final, you must apply for an
1) The IRS to call the designee to answerExample. You receive two W–2 forms: oneSSN for the child. You cannot continue using the
any questions that arise during theshowing wages of $5,000.55 and one showingATIN.
processing of your return, andwages of $18,500.73. On Form 1040, line 7, youSee Form W–7A for more information. would enter $23,501 ($5,000.55 + $18,500.73 =2) The designee to:$23,501.28), not $23,502 ($5,001 + $18,501).Nonresident alien spouse.If your spouse is
a nonresident alien and you file a joint or sepa- a) Give information that is missing fromEqual amounts. If you are asked to enter therate return, your spouse must have either an your return to the IRS,smaller or larger of two equal amounts, enterSSN or an ITIN. If your spouse is not eligible forthat amount. b) Call the IRS for information about thean SSN, see the next discussion. processing of your return or the status
Example. Line 1 is $500. Line 3 is $500. of your refund or payments, andIndividual taxpayer identification number
Line 5 asks you to enter the smaller of line 1 or 3.(ITIN).The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are c) Respond to certain IRS notices that youEnter $500 on line 5.a nonresident or resident alien and you do not have shown the designee. These no-have and are not eligible to get an SSN. ToNegative amounts. If you need to enter a tices about math errors, offsets (seeapply for an ITIN, file Form W–7 with the IRS. Itnegative amount, put the amount in parentheses Refunds, later), and return preparationusually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to get an ITIN.rather than using a minus sign. To combine will be sent to you, not the designee.Enter this number on your tax return whereverpositive and negative amounts, add all the posi-
your SSN is requested. tive amounts together and then subtract theThe authorization cannot be revoked. How-
negative amounts.Alien dependent. If your dependent is a ever, it will automatically end no later than the
nonresident or resident alien who does not have due date (without any extensions) for filing your
and is not eligible to get a social security number 2003 tax return. This is April 15, 2004, for mostAttachments
(SSN), file Form W–7 with the IRS to apply for people.
an ITIN. Enter this number on your return wher-Depending on the form you file and the itemsSee your form instructions for more informa-
ever the dependent’s SSN is requested. reported on your return, you may have to com-tion.
plete additional schedules and forms and attachAn ITIN is for tax use only. It does not If you want to allow the paid preparerthem to your return.entitle you or your dependent to social who signed your return to discuss itsecurity benefits or change the em- IRS e-file is paperless. There’s nothingCAUTION
!
with the IRS, just enter “Preparer” in
TIP
ployment or immigration status of either of you to sign, attach, or mail, not even yourthe space for the designee’s name.under U.S. law. Forms W–2.
TIP
Penalty for not providing social security SignaturesForm W–2. Form W–2, Wage and Tax State-
number. If you do not include your SSN or thement, is a statement from your employer of
SSN of your spouse or dependent as required, You must sign and date your return. If you file awages and other compensation paid to you and
you may have to pay a penalty. See the discus- joint return, both you and your spouse must signtaxes withheld from your pay. You should have a
sion on Penalties, later, for more information. the return, even if only one of you had income.Form W–2 from each employer. Be sure to
attach a copy of Form W–2 in the place indi-SSN on correspondence. If you write to the If you file a joint return, both spouses
cated on the front page of your return. Attach itIRS about your tax account, be sure to include are generally liable for the tax, and the
only to the front page of your return, not to anyyour SSN (and the name and SSN of your entire tax liability may be assessedCAUTION
!
attachments. For more information, see Formspouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre- against either spouse. See chapter 2.
W–2 in chapter 5.spondence. Because your SSN is used to iden-
If you received a Form 1099–R, Distribu-tify your account, this helps the IRS respond to If you e-file your return, you can use an
tions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement oryour correspondence promptly. electronic signature to sign your return.
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con- See Does My Return Have To Be On
TIP
tracts, etc., showing federal income tax with-Paper, earlier.Presidential Election held, attach a copy of that form in the place
If you are due a refund, it cannot be issuedindicated on the front page of your return.Campaign Fund unless you have signed your return.
Form 1040EZ. There are no additional sched-Enter your occupation in the space providedThis fund was set up to help pay for presidentialules to file with Form 1040EZ. in the signature section. If you file a joint return,election campaigns. You may have $3 of your
enter both your occupation and your spouse’stax liability go to this fund by checking the Yes Form 1040A. Attach the additional schedules
occupation. Entering your daytime telephonebox on Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form and forms that you had to complete behind the
Page 14 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 17 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
number may help speed the processing of your you overpaid or, if you file Form 1040 or Form
1) File a joint return,return. 1040A, you can choose to apply all or part of the
overpayment to your next year’s (2003) esti-2) Have reported income (such as wages, in-When someone can sign for you. You can mated tax. You cannot have your overpayment terest, etc.),appoint an agent to sign your return if you are:applied to your 2003 estimated tax if you file
3) Have made and reported tax paymentsForm 1040EZ.1) Unable to sign the return because of dis- (such as federal income tax withheld from
ease or injury, If you choose to have a 2002 overpay-wages or estimated tax payments), or
ment applied to your 2003 estimated claimed the earned income credit or other2) Absent from the United States for a contin- tax, you cannot change your mind and refundable credit, and
CAUTION
!
uous period of at least 60 days before thehave any of it refunded to you after the due datedue date for filing your return, or 4) Have an overpayment, all or part of whichof your 2002 return.
may be applied against the past-due3) Given permission to do so by the IRS of-Follow the form instructions to complete theamount.fice in your area. entries to claim your refund and/or to apply your
If you are an injured spouse, you can obtainoverpayment to your 2003 estimated tax.Power of attorney.A return signed by an your portion of the joint refund by completing
agent in any of these cases must have a power If your refund for 2002 is large, youForm 8379, Injured Spouse Claim and Alloca-
of attorney (POA) attached that authorizes the may want to decrease the amount oftion. Follow the instructions on the form.
agent to sign for you. You can use a POA that income tax withheld from your pay in
TIP
states that the agent is granted authority to sign2003. See chapter 5 for more information.
Amount You Owethe return, or you can use Form 2848, Power of
Attorney and Declaration of Representative.Direct Deposit.Instead of getting a paperWhen you complete your return, you will deter-Part I of Form 2848 must state that the agent ischeck, you may be able to have your refundmine if you have paid the full amount of tax thatgranted authority to sign the return. deposited directly into your account at a bank oryou owe. If you owe additional tax, you shouldother financial institution. Follow the form in-Unable to sign.If the taxpayer is mentally pay it with your return.structions to request Direct Deposit.incompetent and cannot sign the return, it must If the IRS figures your tax for you, you willIf the Direct Deposit cannot be done, the IRSbe signed by a court-appointed representative receive a bill for any tax that is due. You shouldwill send a check instead.who can act for the taxpayer. pay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date of
If the taxpayer is mentally competent butOverpayment less than one dollar.If your your return, if later). See Tax Figured by IRS in
physically unable to sign the return or POA, aoverpayment is less than one dollar, you will notchapter 31.
valid “signature” is defined under state law. Itget a refund unless you ask for it in writing. If you do not pay your tax when due,can be anything that clearly indicates theCashing your refund check.Cash your tax you may have to pay a failure-to-paytaxpayer’s intent to sign. For example, therefund check soon after you receive it. Checks penalty. See Penalties, later. For moreCAUTION
!
taxpayer’s “X” with the signatures of two wit-not cashed within 12 months of the date they areinformation about your balance due, see Publi-nesses might be considered a valid signatureissued will be canceled and the proceeds re-cation 594, The IRS Collection Process.under a state’s law. turned to the IRS.
If your check has been canceled, you can If the amount you owe for 2002 is large,Spouse unable to sign.If your spouse is una-
apply to the IRS to have it reissued. you may want to increase the amountble to sign for any reason, see Signing a joint
of income tax withheld from your pay orreturn in chapter 2.
TIP
Refund more or less than expected.If you make estimated tax payments for 2003. Seereceive a check for a refund you are not entitledChild’s return.If a child has to file a tax return chapter 5 for more information.to, or for an overpayment that should have beenbut cannot sign the return, the child’s parent,credited to estimated tax, do not cash the check.guardian, or another legally responsible personCall the IRS.must sign the child’s name, followed by theIf you receive a check for more than theHow To Paywords “By (signature), parent (or guardian) forrefund you claimed, do not cash the check untilminor child.” If you have an amount due on your tax return,you receive a notice explaining the difference.
you can pay by check, money order, or creditIf your refund check is for less than you
Paid Preparer card. If you filed electronically, you also may beclaimed, it should be accompanied by a notice
able to make your payment by electronic fundsexplaining the difference. Cashing the checkGenerally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist in withdrawal.does not stop you from claiming an additionalpreparing, or review your tax return must sign itamount of refund. You do not have to pay if the amountand fill in the other blanks in the paid preparer’sIf you did not receive a notice and you have you owe is less than $1.area of your return. Signature stamps and labelsany questions about the amount of your refund,
TIP
are not acceptable. you should wait 2 weeks. If you still have not
If the preparer is self-employed (that is, notreceived a notice, call the IRS.
employed by any person or business to prepare Payment by check or money order. If youOffset against debts.If you are due a refundthe return), he or she should check the self-em- pay by check or money order, make it out to thebut have not paid certain amounts you owe, allployed box in the Paid Preparer’s Use Only “United States Treasury.” Please show your cor-or part of your refund may be used to pay all orspace on the return. rect name, address, social security number,part of the past-due amount. This includes The preparer must give you a copy of your daytime telephone number, and the tax year andpast-due federal income tax, other federal debtsreturn in addition to the copy filed with the IRS. form number on the front of your check or money(such as student loans), state income tax, andIf you prepare your own return, leave this order.child and spousal support payments. You will bearea blank. If another person prepares your re- For example, if you file Form 1040 for 2002notified if the refund you claimed has been offsetturn and does not charge you, that person and you owe additional tax, show your name,against your debts.should not sign your return. address, social security number, daytime tele-
If you have questions about whether a phone number, and “2002 Form 1040” on theJoint return and injured spouse.When apreparer must sign your return, please contact front of your check or money order. If you file anjoint return is filed and only one spouse owes aany IRS office. amended return (Form 1040X) for 2001 and youpast-due amount, the other spouse can be con-
owe tax, show your name, address, social se-sidered an injured spouse. An injured spouse
curity number, daytime telephone number, andcan get a refund for his or her share of theRefunds
“2001 Form 1040X” on the front of your check oroverpayment that would otherwise be used to
money order.When you complete your return, you will deter- pay the past-due amount.
mine if you paid more income tax than you To be considered an injured spouse, you Enclose your payment with your return, but
owed. If so, you can get a refund of the amount must: do not attach it to the form. If you filed Form
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 15

Page 18 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1040, please complete Form 1040–V, Payment electronic funds withdrawal from your checking The interest can be forgiven only if you are
Voucher, and enclose it with your payment andor savings account. This option is availablenot responsible in any important way for the
return. Form 1040–V will help us process yourthrough tax software packages, tax profession-error or delay and the IRS has notified you in
payment more accurately and efficiently. Followals, and TeleFile. If you select this paymentwriting of the deficiency or payment. For more
the instructions that come with the form.option, you will need to have your account num-information, get Publication 556, Examination ofDo not mail cash with your return. If you payber, your financial institution’s routing transitReturns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund.cash at an IRS office, keep the receipt as part ofnumber, and account type (checking or sav- Interest and certain penalties may also beyour records. ings). You can schedule the payment for any
suspended for a limited period if you filed yourfuture date up to and including the return duePayment not honored. If your check or return by the due date (including extensions)date (April 15, 2003).money order is not honored by your bank (or and the IRS does not provide you with a noticeother financial institution) and the IRS does notBe sure to check with your financialspecifically stating your liability and the basis forreceive the funds, you still owe the tax. In addi-institution to make sure that an elec-it before the close of the 18-month period begin-tion, you may be subject to a dishonored check tronic funds withdrawal is allowed andCAUTION
!
ning on the later of:penalty. to get the correct routing and account numbers.
• The date the return is filed, orPayment by credit card.You can use your Credit card.You can e-file and pay in aAmerican Express , Discover , MasterCard , • The due date of the return without regardsingle step by authorizing a credit card payment.or Visa credit card. to extensions.This option is available through some taxTo pay by credit card, call a service providersoftware packages and tax professionals. Youand follow the recorded instructions. You can For more information, get Publication 556.can also pay by credit card using the telephonealso pay by credit card over the Internet using aor the Internet. See Payment by credit card,service provider’s web site. Installment Agreementearlier.The service providers charge a convenience
If you cannot pay the full amount due with yourfee based on the amount you are paying. FeesElectronic Federal Tax Payment System
may vary between the providers. You will be told return, you can ask to make monthly installment(EFTPS). EFTPS offers another way to pay
what the fee is during the transaction and will payments. However, you will be charged inter-your federal taxes. Best of all, it’s free and avail-
have the option to continue or end the transac-able to business and individual taxpayers. In est and may be charged a late payment penalty
tion. You may also obtain the convenience feefact, it’s recommended for estimated tax pay-on the tax not paid by April 15, 2003, even if your
by calling the service provider’s automated cus-ments (Form 1040-ES) and installment agree-request to pay in installments is granted. If yourtomer service telephone number or visiting theirment payments. For details on how to enroll,request is granted, you must also pay a fee. Torespective web site. visit www.EFTPS.gov  or call EFTPS Customerlimit the interest and penalty charges, pay as
Service at 1-800-555-4477 or 1-800-945-8400.Do not add the convenience fee to your much of the tax as possible with your return. But
tax payment. before requesting an installment agreement,Estimated tax payments.Do not include anyCAUTION
!
you should consider other less costly alterna-2003 estimated tax payment in the payment fortives, such as a bank loan.If you pay by credit card, write the confirma-your 2002 income tax return. See chapter 5 for
To ask for an installment agreement, use tion number you were given at the end of theinformation on how to pay estimated tax.
transaction and the tax payment amount in the Form 9465, Installment Agreement Request.
upper left corner of page 1 of your tax return. You should receive a response to your request
within 30 days. But if you file your return afterInterest
Service Providers March 31, it may take longer for a reply.
Interest is charged on tax you do not pay by theYou can use a credit card to make install-Official due date of your return. Interest is charged evenment agreement payments. See Payment byPayments if you get an extension of time for filing.Corporation credit card, under How To Pay, earlier.
If the IRS figures your tax for you, inter-
To make a est cannot start earlier than the 31st
payment, call . . 1–800–2PAY–TAXSM Guaranteed availability of installment agree-day after the IRS sends you a bill. For
TIP
o r ..........1 – 8 0 0 – 2 7 2 –9829 ment. The IRS must agree to accept the pay-information, see Tax Figured by IRS in chapter
ment of your tax liability in installments if, as of31.
For Customer the date you offer to enter into the agreement:
Service ......1 – 8 7 7 – 7 5 4 –4413
Interest on penalties.Interest is charged on1) Your total taxes (not counting interest,the failure-to-file penalty, the accuracy-relatedWeb Address . .www.officialpayments.com penalties, additions to the tax, or additionalpenalty, and the fraud penalty from the due dateamounts) do not exceed $10,000,of the return (including extensions) to the date of
Link2Gov payment. Interest on other penalties starts on2) In the last 5 years, you (and your spouse ifCorporation the date of notice and demand, but is not the liability relates to a joint return) have
charged on penalties paid within 21 calendarTo make a not:
days from the date of the notice (or within 10payment, call . . 1–888–PAY–1040SM
a) Failed to file any required income taxbusiness days if the notice is for $100,000 oro r ..........1 – 8 8 8 – 7 2 9 –1040
more). return,
For Customer b) Failed to pay any tax shown on anyService ......1 – 8 8 8 – 6 5 8 –5465 Interest due to IRS error or delay.All or part such return, orof any interest you were charged can be forgiven
c) Entered into an installment agreementif the interest is due to an unreasonable error orWeb Address . .www.PAY1040.com
delay by an officer or employee of the IRS in for the payment of any income tax,
performing a ministerial or managerial act.
Electronic payment options.Electronic pay- 3) You show you cannot pay your income taxA ministerial act is a procedural or mechani-ment options are convenient, safe and secure in full when due,cal act that occurs during the processing of yourmethods for paying individual income taxes.case. A managerial act includes personnel 4) The tax will be paid in full in 3 years orThere’s no check to write, money order to buy,transfers and extended personnel training. Aless, andor voucher to mail. decision concerning the proper application of
5) You agree to comply with the tax lawsfederal tax law is not a ministerial or managerialElectronic funds withdrawal. You can
act.e-file and pay in a single step by authorizing an while your agreement is in effect.
Page 16 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 19 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) Province or state, and You may need to keep records relating to theGift To Reduce basis of property longer than the period of limita-3) Name of foreign country. (Do not abbrevi-the Public Debt tions. Keep those records as long as they areate the name of the country.) important in figuring the basis of the original or
Follow the country’s practice for entering thereplacement property. Generally, this means forYou can make a contribution (gift) to
postal code. as long as you own the property and, after youreduce the public debt. If you wish to do
dispose of it, for the period of limitations thatso, make a separate check payable to
applies to you. See chapter 14 for information on“Bureau of the Public Debt.” You can send it to:
basis.Bureau of the Public Debt
Department G Where Do I File? Note. If you receive a Form W–2, keepP.O. Box 2188
Copy C until you begin receiving social securityParkersburg, WV 26106-2188. After you complete your return, you must send itbenefits. This will help protect those benefits,to the IRS. You can mail it or you may be able tojust in case there is a question about your workfile it electronically. See Does My Return HaveOr, you can enclose the check in the envelope record or earnings in a particular year. ReviewTo Be On Paper, earlier.with your income tax return. Please do not add the information shown on your annual (for work-this gift to any tax you owe. ers over age 25) Social Security Statement.Mailing your return.If an addressed envel-
You can deduct this gift as a charitable con-ope came with your tax forms package, youCopies of returns.You should keep copies oftribution on next year’s tax return if you itemizeshould mail your return in that envelope.tax returns you have filed and the tax formsyour deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you do not have an addressed envelope orpackage as part of your records. They may beif you moved during the year, mail your return tohelpful in amending filed returns or preparingthe Internal Revenue Service Center for thePeel-Off Address Label future ones.area where you now live. A list of Service CenterIf you need a copy of a prior year tax return,addresses is shown in your tax forms package.After you have completed your return, peel off you can get it from the IRS. Use Form 4506 ,
the label with your name and address from the Request for Copy or Transcript of Tax Form.
inside of your tax return package and place it in There is a charge for a copy of a return, which
the appropriate area of the Form 1040, Form you must pay with Form 4506.
1040A, or Form 1040EZ you send to the IRS. IfWhat Happens Transcript.You can also use Form 4506 toyou have someone prepare your return, give
ask for a transcript of your return filed this yearthat person your label to use on your tax return.After I File? or during the 3 preceding years. It will show mostIf you file electronically and you are not eligi-
lines from your original return, including accom-ble or choose not to sign your return using yourAfter you send your return to IRS, you may havepanying forms and schedules.self-selected PIN, use your label on Form 8453some questions. This section discusses con-
or 8453-OL. (More information on electronic fil-cerns you may have about recordkeeping, yourTax account information.If you need a state-ing is found earlier in this chapter.) refund, and what to do if you move. ment of your tax account showing any laterThe label helps the IRS to correctly identify changes that you or the IRS made to the originalyour account. It also saves processing costs and return, you will need to ask for tax account infor-What Recordsspeeds up processing so that refunds can be mation.issued sooner. Should I Keep? Do not use Form 4506 for tax account infor-
mation. Instead, contact the IRS. You shouldYou must write your SSN in the spaces
have your name and address, social securityYou must keep records so that you canprovided on your tax return.
number or employer identification number (if ap-prepare a complete and accurate in-CAUTION
!
plicable), tax period, and form number available.come tax return. The law does not re-RECORDS
You will get the following information:quire any special form of records. However, youCorrecting the label.Make necessary name should keep all receipts, canceled checks orand address changes on the label. If you have • Type of return filed,other proof of payment, and any other records toan apartment number that is not shown on the • Filing status,support any deductions or credits you claim.label, please write it in. If you changed your
name, see the discussion under Social Security • Federal income tax withheld,If you file a claim for refund, you must be able
Number, earlier. to prove by your records that you have overpaid• Tax shown on return,your tax.No label. If you did not receive a tax return • Adjusted gross income,
package with a label, print or type your nameHow long to keep records. You must keep
• Taxable income,and address in the spaces provided at the top ofyour records for as long as they are important for
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you are marriedthe federal tax law. • Self-employment tax,
filing a separate return, do not enter yourKeep records that support an item of income
• Number of exemptions,spouse’s name in the space at the top. Instead,or a deduction appearing on a return until the
enter his or her name in the space provided onperiod of limitations for the return runs out. (A• Refund,
line 3. period of limitations is the period of time after• Earned income credit, andIf you file Form 1040EZ and you do not havewhich no legal action can be brought.) For as-
a label, print (do not type) this information in thesessment of tax you owe, this generally is 3• Mortgage interest deduction or real estate
spaces provided. years from the date you filed the return. For filingtax deduction.
a claim for credit or refund, this generally is 3P.O. box. If your post office does not deliveryears from the date you filed the original return,mail to your street address and you have a P.O. More information. For more information onor 2 years from the date you paid the tax, which-box, print your P.O. box number on the line for recordkeeping, get Publication 552, Record-ever is later. Returns filed before the due dateyour present home address instead of your keeping for Individuals.are treated as filed on the due date.street address. If you did not report income that you should
have reported on your return, and it is more thanInterest on RefundsForeign address. If your address is outside
25% of the income shown on the return, thethe United States or its possessions or territo-
period of limitations does not run out until 6 If you are due a refund, you may get interest onries, enter the information on the line for “City,
years after you filed the return. If a return is false it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly.town or post office, state, and ZIP code” in the
or fraudulent with intent to evade tax, or if no If the refund is made within 45 days after thefollowing order:
return is filed, an action can generally be brought due date of your return, no interest will be paid. If
1) City, at any time. you file your return after the due date (including
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 17

Page 20 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
extensions), no interest will be paid if the refund paid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filed
before the due date (without regard to exten-is made within 45 days after the date you filed. IfWhat If I Made
sions) are considered filed on the due datethe refund is not made within this 45-day period,
(even if the due date was a Saturday, Sunday, orinterest will be paid from the due date of thea Mistake?
legal holiday). These time periods are sus-return or from the date you filed, whichever is
pended while you are financially disabled, dis-later. Errors may delay your refund or result in notices
cussed later.being sent to you. If you discover an error, youAccepting a refund check does not change If the last day for claiming a credit or refund iscan file an amended return or claim for refund.your right to claim an additional refund and inter- a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you canest. File your claim within the period of time that file the claim on the next business day.applies. See Amended Returns and Claims forAmended Returns and If you do not file a claim within this period,Refund, later. If you do not accept a refundClaims for Refund you may not be entitled to a credit or a refund.check, no more interest will be paid on the over-
payment included in the check. Late-filed return.If you were due a refundYou should correct your return if, after you have
but you did not file a return, you generally mustfiled it, you find that:
file within 3 years from the date the return wasInterest on erroneous refund.All or part of1) You did not report some income, originally due to get that refund.any interest you were charged on an erroneous
2) You claimed deductions or credits yourefund generally will be forgiven. Any interest Limit on amount of refund.If you file yourshould not have claimed,charged for the period before demand for repay- claim within 3 years after the date you filed yourment was made will be forgiven unless: 3) You did not claim deductions or creditsreturn, the credit or refund cannot be more thanyou could have claimed, or the part of the tax paid within the 3-year period1) You, or a person related to you, caused (plus any extension of time for filing your return)4) You should have claimed a different filingthe erroneous refund in any way, or immediately before you filed the claim. This timestatus. (You cannot change your filing sta-
period is suspended while you are financially2) The refund is more than $50,000. tus from married filing jointly to married
disabled, discussed later.filing separately after the due date of theFor example, if you claimed a refund of $100original return. However, an executor mayTax paid. Payments made before the dueon your return, but the IRS made an error andbe able to make this change for a de-date (without regard to extensions) of the origi-sent you $1,000, you would not be charged ceased spouse.) nal return are considered paid on the due date.interest for the time you held the $900 differ-
If you need a copy of your return, see Copies of Examples include federal income tax withheldence. You must, however, repay the $900 when
returns under What Records Should I Keep, from wages and estimated income tax.the IRS asks.
earlier in this chapter.
Example 1. You made estimated tax pay-Form 1040X. Use Form 1040X, AmendedPast-Due Refund ments of $500 and got an automatic extension ofU.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to correct time to August 15, 2000, to file your 1999 in-You can check on the status of your 2002 refundthe return you have already filed. An amendedcome tax return. When you filed your return onif it has been at least 4 weeks from the date you tax return cannot be filed electronically underthat date, you paid an additional $200 tax. Onthe e-file system.filed your return (3 weeks if you filed electroni- August 15, 2003, you filed an amended returncally). Be sure to have a copy of your 2002 taxCompleting Form 1040X. On Form 1040X, and claimed a refund of $700. Because you filedreturn available because you will need to knowwrite your income, deductions, and credits asyour claim within 3 years after you filed yourthe filing status, the first social security numberyou originally reported them on your return, theoriginal return, you can get a refund of up toshown on the return, and the exact whole-dollarchanges you are making, and the corrected$700, the tax paid within the 3 years plus the
amount of the refund. To check on your refund,amounts. Then figure the tax on the corrected4-month extension period immediately before
do one of the following. amount of taxable income and the amount youyou filed the claim.
owe or your refund.
• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on Where’s If you owe tax, pay the full amount with FormExample 2. The situation is the same as inMy Refund. 1040X. The tax owed will not be subtracted fromExample 1, except you filed your return on Octo-
any amount you had credited to your estimatedber 27, 2000, 21/2 months after the extension• Call 1-800-829-4477 for automated refund
tax. period ended. You paid an additional $200 oninformation, and follow the recorded in-
If you cannot pay the full amount due withthat date. On October 27, 2003, you filed anstructions. your return, you can ask to make monthly install-amended return and claimed a refund of $700.• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours ment payments. See Installment Agreement,Although you filed your claim within 3 years fromshown in your form instructions. earlier. the date you filed your original return, the refund
If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part ofwas limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3
the overpayment refunded to you, or you canyears plus the 4-month extension period imme-Change of Address apply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If youdiately before you filed the claim. The estimatedchoose to get a refund, it will be sent separatelytax of $500 paid before that period cannot beIf you have moved, file your return using yourfrom any refund shown on your original return.refunded or credited.new address.
Filing Form 1040X. After you finish your If you file a claim more than 3 years afterIf you move after you filed your return, youForm 1040X, check it to be sure that it is com-you file your return,the credit or refund can-should give the IRS clear and concise writtenplete. Do not forget to show the year of yournot be more than the tax you paid within the 2notification of your change of address. The noti-original return and explain all changes youyears immediately before you file the claim.fication should be sent to the Internal Revenuemade. Be sure to attach any forms or schedules
Service Center serving your old address. Youneeded to explain your changes. Mail your FormExample. You filed your 1999 tax return oncan use Form 8822,Change of Address. If you1040X to the Internal Revenue Service CenterApril 17, 2000. You paid taxes of $500. Onare expecting a refund, also notify the post officeserving the area where you now live (as shownNovember 1, 2001, after an examination of yourserving your old address. This will help in for-in the instructions to the form). 1999 return, you had to pay an additional tax ofFile a separate form for each tax year in-warding your check to your new address (unless $200. On May 13, 2003, you file a claim for avolved.you chose Direct Deposit of your refund). refund of $300. However, because you filed your
Be sure to include your social security num- claim more than 3 years after you filed yourTime for filing a claim for refund.Generally,
ber (and the name and social security number of return, your refund will be limited to the $200 youyou must file your claim for a credit or refund
your spouse, if you filed a joint return) in any paid during the 2 years immediately before youwithin 3 years after the date you filed your origi-
filed your claim.correspondence with the IRS. nal return or within 2 years after the date you
Page 18 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 21 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Financially disabled.The time periods are Processing claims for refund.Claims are substantially understate your tax, file a frivolous
usually processed shortly after they are filed. return, or fail to supply your social security num-suspended for the period in which you are finan-
Your claim may be accepted as filed, disal- ber. If you provide fraudulent information oncially disabled. You are financially disabled if
lowed, or subject to examination. If a claim is your return, you may have to pay a civil fraudyou are unable to manage your financial affairs
examined, the procedures are the same as in penalty.because of a medically determinable physical or
the examination of a tax return.mental impairment which can be expected to
Filing late.If you do not file your return by theIf your claim is disallowed, you will receive anresult in death or which has lasted or can be
due date (including extensions), you may haveexplanation of why it was disallowed.expected to last for a continuous period of not
to pay a failure-to-file penalty. The penalty isless than 12 months. However, you are notTaking your claim to court.You can sue for abased on the tax not paid by the due date (with-treated as financially disabled during any periodrefund in court, but you must first file a timelyout regard to extensions). The penalty is usuallyyour spouse or any other person is authorized toclaim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows your5% for each month or part of a month that aact on your behalf in financial matters. claim or does not act on your claim within 6return is late, but not more than 25%.To claim that you are financially disabled,months after you file it, you can then take your
Fraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud,you must send in the following written state-claim to court. For information on the burden of
the penalty is 15% for each month or part of aments with your claim for refund. proof in a court proceeding, see Publication 556,
month that your return is late, up to a maximumExamination of Returns, Appeal Rights, and1) A statement from your qualified physician of 75%.Claims for Refund.that includes: The IRS provides a fast method to move yourReturn over 60 days late.If you file your
claim to court if: return more than 60 days after the due date ora) The name and a description of your
extended due date, the minimum penalty is thephysical or mental impairment, • You are filing a claim for a credit or refund
smaller of $100 or 100% of the unpaid tax.based solely on contested income tax orb) The physician’s medical opinion that on estate tax or gift tax issues consideredException. You will not have to pay thethe impairment prevented you from in your previously examined returns, andpenalty if you show that you failed to file on timemanaging your financial affairs,
because of reasonable cause and not because• You want to take your case to court in-c) The physician’s medical opinion that of willful neglect.stead of appealing it within the IRS.the impairment was or can be expected
to result in death, or that its duration Paying tax late. You will have to pay aWhen you file your claim with the IRS, you gethas lasted, or can be expected to last, failure-to-pay penalty of 1/2 of 1% (.50%) of yourthe fast method by requesting in writing that yourat least 12 months, unpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month,claim be immediately rejected. A notice of claimafter the due date that the tax is not paid. Thisdisallowance will then be promptly sent to you.d) The specific time period (to the best of penalty does not apply during the automaticYou have 2 years from the date of mailing ofthe physician’s knowledge), and 4-month extension of time to file period, if youthe notice of disallowance to file a refund suit ine) The following certification signed by the paid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on orthe United States District Court having jurisdic-physician: “I hereby certify that, to the before the due date of your return and pay thetion or in the United States Court of Federalbest of my knowledge and belief, the balance when you file the return.Claims.above representations are true, correct, The monthly rate of the failure-to-pay penalty
and complete.” is half the usual rate (.25% instead of .50%) if anInterest on refund.If you receive a refund
installment agreement is in effect for that month.because of your amended return, interest will be
2) A statement made by the person signing You must have filed your return by the due datepaid on it from the due date of your original
the claim for credit or refund that no per- (including extensions) to qualify for this reducedreturn or the date you filed your original return,
penalty.son, including your spouse, was author-whichever is later, to the date you filed the
ized to act on your behalf in financial If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the rateamended return. However, if the refund is not
will increase to 1% at the start of the first monthmatters during the period of disability (or made within 45 days after you file the amended
beginning at least 10 days after the day that thereturn, interest will be paid up to the date thethe exact dates that a person was author-
notice is issued. If a notice and demand forrefund is paid.ized to act for you).
immediate payment is issued, the rate will in-
Reduced refund. Your refund may be re- crease to 1% at the start of the first month
Exceptions for special types of refunds.If duced by an additional tax liability that has beenbeginning after the day that the notice and de-
you file a claim for one of the items listed below,assessed against you. mand is issued.
the dates and limits discussed earlier may notAlso, your refund may be reduced by This penalty cannot be more than 25% of
apply. These items, and where to get more infor- amounts you owe for past-due child support,your unpaid tax. You will not have to pay the
debts to another federal agency, or for state tax.mation, are as follows. penalty if you can show that you had a good
The refund procedures discussed in this chapterreason for not paying your tax on time.• A bad debt. (See Nonbusiness Bad Debts will not be available to you to get back the
in chapter 15.) reduction. See Offset against debts, earlier. Combined penalties. If both the failure-to-file
• A worthless security. (See Worthless se- penalty and the failure-to-pay penalty (dis-Effect on state tax liability.If your return iscussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (orcurities in chapter 15.) changed for any reason, it may affect your state15%) failure-to-file penalty is reduced by the• Foreign tax paid or accrued. (See Publica-income tax liability. This includes changes madefailure-to-pay penalty. However, if you file youras a result of an examination of your return bytion 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Individu- return more than 60 days after the due date orthe IRS. Contact your state tax agency for moreals.) extended due date, the minimum penalty is theinformation. smaller of $100 or 100% of the unpaid tax.• Net operating loss carryback. (See Publi-
cation 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs)
Accuracy-related penalty.You may have toPenaltiesfor Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.)
pay an accuracy-related penalty if:• Carryback of certain business tax credits.The law provides penalties for failure to file re-
(See Form 3800, General Business 1) You underpay your tax because of eitherturns or pay taxes as required.
Credit.) “negligence” or “disregard” of rules or reg-
ulations, or• A claim based on an agreement with the
Civil PenaltiesIRS extending the period for assessment 2) You substantially understate your income
of tax. tax.If you do not file your return and pay your tax by
• An injured spouse claim. (See Offset the due date, you may have to pay a penalty. The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay-
against debts, earlier.) You may also have to pay a penalty if you ment. The penalty will not be figured on any part
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 19

Page 22 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of an underpayment on which the fraud penalty In cases of substantial understatement only, ment, you will be subject to a penalty of $50 for
(discussed later) is charged. items that meet the requirements of Revenue each failure. You will also be subject to a penalty
Procedure 2002–66 (or later update) are con-of $50 if you do not give your SSN to anotherNegligence or disregard.The term “negli-sidered adequately disclosed on your returnperson when it is required on a return, state-gence” includes a failure to make a reasonablewithout filing Form 8275. ment, or other document.attempt to comply with the tax law or to exerciseUse Form 8275–R, Regulation Disclosure For example, if you have a bank account thatordinary and reasonable care in preparing aStatement, to disclose items or positions con-earns interest, you must give your SSN to thereturn. Negligence also includes failure to keeptrary to regulations. bank. The number must be shown on the Formadequate books and records. You will not have
1099–INT or other statement the bank sendsto pay a negligence penalty if you have a rea-Reasonable cause. You will not have to
sonable basis for a position you took. you. If you do not give the bank your SSN, youpay a penalty if you show a good reason (rea-
The term “disregard” includes any careless, will be subject to the $50 penalty. (You also maysonable cause) for the way you treated an item.
reckless, or intentional disregard. be subject to “backup” withholding of incomeYou must also show that you acted in good faith.
tax. See chapter 5.)Adequate disclosure. You can avoid the Frivolous return.You may have to pay a pen- You will not have to pay the penalty if you arepenalty for disregard of rules or regulations ifalty of $500 if you file a frivolous return. A frivo-able to show that the failure was due to reasona-you adequately disclose on your return a posi-lous return is one that does not include enoughble cause and not willful neglect.tion that has at least a reasonable basis. Seeinformation to figure the correct tax or that con-Disclosure statement, later. tains information clearly showing that the taxFailure to furnish tax shelter registrationSubstantial understatement of income tax.you reported is substantially incorrect. number. A person who sells (or otherwiseYou understate your tax if the tax shown on yourYou will have to pay the penalty if you filedtransfers) to you an interest in a tax shelter mustreturn is less than the correct tax. The under-this kind of return because of a frivolous positiongive you the tax shelter registration number orstatement is substantial if it is more than theon your part or a desire to delay or interfere withbe subject to a $100 penalty. If you claim anylarger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. How-the administration of federal income tax laws.deduction, credit, or other tax benefit because ofever, the amount of the understatement is re-This includes altering or striking out thethe tax shelter, you must attach  Form 8271,duced to the extent the understatement is duepreprinted language above the space providedInvestor Reporting of Tax Shelter Registrationto: for your signature. Number, to your return to report this number.This penalty is added to any other penalty1) Substantial authority, or You will have to pay a penalty of $250 for eachprovided by law. failure to report a tax shelter registration number2) Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba-The penalty must be paid in full upon noticeon your return. The penalty can be excused ifsis. and demand from IRS even if you protest theyou have a reasonable cause for not reportingpenalty. the number.Substantial authority.Whether there is or
was substantial authority for the tax treatment ofFraud. If there is any underpayment of tax on
an item depends on the facts and circum- your return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of theCriminal Penaltiesstances. Consideration will be given to courtunderpayment due to fraud will be added to your
opinions, Treasury regulations, revenue rulings,tax. You may be subject to criminal prosecutionrevenue procedures, and notices and an- (brought to trial) for actions such as:Joint return.The fraud penalty on a jointnouncements issued by the IRS and publishedreturn does not apply to a spouse unless somein the Internal Revenue Bulletin that involve the 1) Tax evasion,part of the underpayment is due to the fraud ofsame or similar circumstances as yours. that spouse. 2) Willful failure to file a return, supply infor-Disclosure statement.To adequately dis- mation, or pay any tax due,close the relevant facts about your tax treatmentFailure to supply social security number.If
3) Fraud and false statements, orof an item, use  Form 8275, Disclosure State-you do not include your social security number
ment. You must also have a reasonable basis (SSN) or the SSN of another person where re-4) Preparing and filing a fraudulent return.for treating the item the way you did. quired on a return, statement, or other docu-
Page 20 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 23 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
each other in the next tax year, you and your
spouse must file as married individuals. Single
Annulled marriages. If you obtain a court2. Your filing status is single if, on the last day ofdecree of annulment, which holds that no valid
the year, you are unmarried or legally separatedmarriage ever existed, you are considered un-
from your spouse under a divorce or separatemarried even if you filed joint returns for earlier
maintenance decree, and you do not qualify foryears. You must file amended returns (FormFiling Status another filing status. To determine your marital1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Taxstatus on the last day of the year, see MaritalReturn) claiming single or head of householdStatus, earlier.status for all tax years affected by the annulmentYour filing status may be single if you werethat are not closed by the statute of limitationsIntroduction widowed before January 1, 2002, and did notfor filing a tax return. The statute of limitationsremarry in 2002. However, you might be able toThis chapter helps you determine which filinggenerally does not expire until 3 years after youruse another filing status that will give you a lowerstatus to use. There are five filing statuses:original return was filed. tax. See Head of Household and Qualifying
• Single, Widow(er) With Dependent Child to see if youHead of household or qualifying widow(er)
qualify.with dependent child.If you are considered• Married Filing Jointly,
unmarried, you may be able to file as a head of• Married Filing Separately, household or as a qualifying widow(er) with aHow to file.You can file Form 1040EZ (if you
• Head of Household, and dependent child. See Head of Household and have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,
and meet other requirements), Form 1040A, orQualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child to• Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Formsee if you qualify.Child. 1040, show your filing status as single by check-
ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column ofMarried persons. If you are considered mar-
If more than one filing status applies to the Tax Table or Schedule X of the Tax Rateried for the whole year, you and your spouse can
you, choose the one that will give you Schedules to figure your tax.file a joint return, or you can file separate re-
the lowest tax.
TIP
turns.
You must determine your filing status beforeConsidered married. You are considered
you can determine your filing requirementsmarried for the whole year if on the last day ofMarried Filing Jointly(chapter 1), standard deduction (chapter 21),your tax year you and your spouse meet any one
and correct tax (chapter 31). You also use yourof the following tests. You can choose married filing jointly as yourfiling status in determining whether you are eligi- filing status if you are married and both you andble to claim certain deductions and credits.1) You are married and living together asyour spouse agree to file a joint return. On a jointhusband and wife. return, you report your combined income andUseful Items deduct your combined allowable expenses. You2) You are living together in a common law
You may want to see: can file a joint return even if one of you had nomarriage that is recognized in the state
income or deductions.where you now live or in the state where
Publication If you and your spouse decide to file a jointthe common law marriage began.
return, your tax may be lower than your com-❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, 3) You are married and living apart, but notbined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, yourand Filing Information legally separated under a decree of di-standard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc-
vorce or separate maintenance.❏ 519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax
benefits that do not apply to other filing statuses.4) You are separated under an interlocutory❏ 555 Community Property
(not final) decree of divorce. For purposes If you and your spouse each have in-
of filing a joint return, you are not consid-come, you may want to figure your tax
ered divorced. both on a joint return and on separate
TIP
returns (using the filing status of married filing
Spouse died. If your spouse died during theMarital Status separately). Choose the method that gives the
year, you are considered married for the wholetwo of you the lower combined tax.
year for filing status purposes.In general, your filing status depends on
whether you are considered unmarried or mar-If you did not remarry before the end of the
How to file.If you file as married filing jointly,ried. A marriage means only a legal union be-tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself
you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youtween a man and a woman as husband and and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,wife. years, you may be entitled to the special benefitsand meet other requirements, you can file Formdescribed later under Qualifying Widow(er) With1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A,Dependent Child.Unmarried persons. You are considered un- show this filing status by checking the box onIf you remarried before the end of the taxmarried for the whole year if, on the last day of line 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of theyear, you can file a joint return with your newyour tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa- Tax Table or Schedule Y–1 of the Tax Rate
rated from your spouse under a divorce or aspouse. Your deceased spouse’s filing status isSchedules to figure your tax.
separate maintenance decree. State law gov-married filing separately for that year.
erns whether you are married or legally sepa-Married persons living apart.If you liveSpouse died during the year.If your spouserated under a divorce or separate maintenanceapart from your spouse and meet certain tests,died during the year, you are considered mar-decree. you may be considered unmarried. If this ap-ried for the whole year and can choose married
Divorced persons. If you are divorced filing jointly as your filing status. See Spouseplies to you, you can file as head of household
under a final decree by the last day of the year, died, earlier, for more information.even though you are not divorced or legally
you are considered unmarried for the wholeseparated. If you qualify to file as head of house-
year. hold instead of as married filing separately, yourDivorced persons. If you are divorced under
standard deduction will be higher. Also, your taxDivorce and remarriage. If you obtain a a final decree by the last day of the year, you are
may be lower, and you may be able to claim thedivorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing considered unmarried for the whole year and
earned income credit. See Head of Household,tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the you cannot choose married filing jointly as your
later.time of divorce you intended to and did remarry filing status.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 21

Page 24 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Signing as guardian of spouse.If you arebined tax. However, you will generally pay moreFiling a Joint Return the guardian of your spouse who is mentallycombined tax on separate returns than you
incompetent, you can sign the return for yourwould on a joint return because the tax rate isBoth you and your spouse must include all ofspouse as guardian. higher for married persons filing separately.your income, exemptions, and deductions on
your joint return. Spouse in combat zone. If your spouse is
How to file.If you file a separate return, youunable to sign the return because he or she is
Accounting period.Both of you must use the generally report only your own income, exemp-serving in a combat zone (such as the Persian
same accounting period, but you can use differ- tions, credits, and deductions. You can claim anGulf Area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), or a
ent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri- exemption for your spouse if your spouse had noqualified hazardous duty area (Bosnia and Her-
ods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1. gross income and was not a dependent of an-zegovina, Croatia, and Macedonia), and you do
other person. However, if your spouse had anynot have a power of attorney or other statement,Joint responsibility.Both of you may be held gross income, or was the dependent of some-you can sign for your spouse. Attach a signedresponsible, jointly and individually, for the tax one else, you cannot claim an exemption for himstatement to your return that explains that yourand any interest or penalty due on your joint or her on your separate return.spouse is serving in a combat zone. For morereturn. One spouse may be held responsible for If you file as married filing separately, youinformation on special tax rules for persons whoall the tax due even if all the income was earned can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select thisare serving in a combat zone, or who are inby the other spouse. filing status by checking the box on line 3 ofmissing status as a result of serving in a combat
either form. You must also write your spouse’szone, get Publication 3, Armed Forces’ TaxDivorced taxpayer.You may be held jointly social security number and full name in theGuide.and individually responsible for any tax, interest, spaces provided. Use the Married filing sepa-and penalties due on a joint return filed beforeOther reasons spouse cannot sign. If rately column of the Tax Table or Schedule Y–2your divorce. This responsibility may apply evenyour spouse cannot sign the joint return for anyof the Tax Rate Schedules to figure your tax.if your divorce decree states that your formerother reason, you can sign for your spouse onlyspouse will be responsible for any amounts dueif you are given a valid power of attorney (a legalon previously filed joint returns. Special Rulesdocument giving you permission to act for your
spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copyRelief from joint liability.In some cases, Special rules apply if your filing status is marriedof it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848,one spouse may be relieved of joint liability for filing separately.Power of Attorney and Declaration of Represen-tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return for
tative.items of the other spouse that were incorrectly Community property states.If you live in Ari-
reported on the joint return. You can ask for zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien.Arelief no matter how small the liability. New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsin
joint return generally cannot be filed if eitherThere are three types of relief available. and file separately, your income may be consid-
spouse is a nonresident alien at any time duringered separate income or community income for1) Innocent spouse relief, which applies to the tax year. However, if one spouse was aincome tax purposes. See Publication 555.all joint filers. nonresident alien or dual-status alien who was
Deductions, credits, and certain income.Ifmarried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of2) Separation of liability, which applies to your filing status is married filing separately:the year, the spouses can choose to file a jointjoint filers who are divorced, widowed, le-return. If you do file a joint return, you and yourgally separated, or have not lived together 1) You should itemize deductions if yourspouse are both treated as U.S. residents for thefor the 12 months ending the date election spouse itemizes deductions, because youentire tax year. For information on this choice,of this relief is filed. cannot claim the standard deduction.see chapter 1 of Publication 519.
3) Equitable relief, which applies to all joint 2) You cannot deduct interest paid on a quali-filers who do not qualify for innocent fied student loan.spouse relief or separation of liability and
3) You cannot take the credit for child andto married couples filing separate returns
Married Filing dependent care expenses in most cases,in community property states.
and the amount that you can exclude fromYou must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-Separately income under an employer’s dependentcent Spouse Relief, to request any of these care assistance program is limited tokinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spouse You can choose married filing separately as $2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed aRelief, explains these kinds of relief and whoyour filing status if you are married. This methodjoint return).may qualify for them. may benefit you if you want to be responsible4) You cannot take the earned income credit.only for your own tax or if this method results inSigning a joint return.For a return to be less tax than a joint return. If you and your5) You cannot exclude any interest incomeconsidered a joint return, both husband and wifespouse do not agree to file a joint return, youfrom qualified U.S. savings bonds that youmust generally sign the return. If your spousemay have to use this filing status. used for higher education expenses.died before signing the return, see Signing the If you live apart from your spouse and meetreturn in chapter 4. 6) You cannot take the credit for the elderlycertain tests, you may be considered unmar- or the disabled unless you lived apart fromSpouse away from home. If your spouse isried and may be able to file as head of house-your spouse for the entire year.away from home, you should prepare the return, hold. This can apply to you even if you are not
sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so that divorced or legally separated. If you qualify to file7) You cannot take the education credits (the
it can be filed on time. as head of household, instead of as married Hope credit and the lifetime learning
filing separately, your tax may be lower, you maycredit).Injury or disease prevents signing.If your be able to claim the earned income credit andspouse cannot sign because of disease or injury 8) You cannot take the exclusion or credit forcertain other credits, and your standard deduc-and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse’s adoption expenses in most cases.tion will be higher. The head of household filingname in the proper space on the return followedstatus allows you to choose the standard deduc- 9) You will become subject to the limit on theby the words “By (your name), Husband (ortion even if your spouse chooses to itemize child tax credit, the limit on itemized de-Wife).” Be sure to also sign in the space pro-deductions. See Head of Household, later, for ductions, and the phaseout of the deduc-vided for your signature. Attach a dated state-more information. tion for personal exemptions at incomement, signed by you, to the return. The levels that are half of those for a joint re-statement should include the form number of the Unless you are required to file sepa-turn.return you are filing, the tax year, the reason rately, you should figure your tax both
your spouse cannot sign, and a statement that ways (on a joint return and on separate10) You may have to include in income more
TIP
your spouse has agreed to your signing for himreturns). This way you can make sure you areof your social security benefits (or
or her. using the method that results in the lowest com-equivalent railroad retirement benefits)
Page 22 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 25 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
than you would on a joint return. For infor- in chapter 3 for situations where the non-
mation on social security and railroad re- custodial parent is allowed to claim the ex-Head of Householdtirement benefits, see chapter 12. emption for the child.
You may be able to file as head of household if11) You cannot roll over amounts from a tradi- The general rules for claiming an exemption
you meet all of the following requirements.tional IRA into a Roth IRA during the year, for a dependent are explained in chapter 3.
unless you did not live with your spouse at If you were considered married for part1) You are unmarried or considered unmar-any time during the year. of the year and lived in a communityried on the last day of the year.
12) Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 property state (listed earlier under Mar-CAUTION
!
2) You paid more than half the cost of keep-(instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re- ried Filing Separately), special rules may applying up a home for the year.turn). in determining your income and expenses. See
Publication 555 for more information.3) A qualifying person lived with you in the13) You cannot claim the credit for contribu-home for more than half the year (excepttions to certain qualified plans, includingfor temporary absences, such as school).IRAs (discussed next), if your adjusted Nonresident alien spouse.You are consid-However, your dependent parent does notgross income is more than $25,000 (in- ered unmarried for head of household purposeshave to live with you. See Special rule forstead of $50,000 if you filed a joint return). if your spouse was a nonresident alien at anyparent, later, under Qualifying Person. A time during the year and you do not choose tofoster child must live with you all year.Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). treat your nonresident spouse as a resident
You may not be able to deduct all or part of your alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifyingIf you qualify to file as head of house-contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your person for head of household purposes. Youhold, your tax rate usually will be lowerspouse were covered by an employee retire- must have another qualifying person and meetthan the rates for single or married fil-
TIP
ment plan at work during the year. Your deduc- the other tests to be eligible to file as a head ofing separately. You will also receive a highertion is reduced or eliminated if your income is household.standard deduction than if you file as single ormore than a certain amount. This amount ismarried filing separately. Earned income credit.Even if you are con-lower for married individuals who file separately sidered unmarried for head of household pur-and lived together at any time during the year. poses because you are married to a nonresidentKidnapped children.A child may qualify youFor more information, see How Much Can I to file as head of household, even if the child has alien, you are still considered married for pur-Deduct? in chapter 18. For more information onbeen kidnapped. For more information, seeposes of the earned income credit (unless youthe credit for contributions to an IRA, see chap-Publication 501. meet the five tests listed earlier). You are notter 38. entitled to the credit unless you file a joint return
How to file.If you file as head of household,with your spouse and meet other qualifications.Rental activity losses.If you actively partici-you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040.See chapter 37 for more information.pated in a passive rental real estate activity thatIndicate your choice of this filing status byproduced a loss, you generally can deduct the Choice to treat spouse as resident.Youchecking the box on line 4 of either form. Use theloss from your nonpassive income, up to are considered married if you choose to treatHead of a household column of the Tax Table or$25,000. This is called a special allowance. your spouse as a resident alien.Schedule Z of the Tax Rate Schedules to figureHowever, married persons filing separate re-your tax.turns who lived together at any time during the
Keeping Up a Homeyear cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-
ried persons filing separate returns who livedConsidered Unmarried
To qualify for head of household status, youapart at all times during the year are each al-
must pay more than half of the cost of keepingYou are considered unmarried on the last day oflowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance
up a home for the year. You can determinethe year if you are legally separated from yourfor losses from passive real estate activities.
whether you paid more than half of the cost ofspouse, according to your state law, under aSee Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 10.
keeping up a home by using the Cost of Keepingdivorce or separate maintenance decree.
Up a Home worksheet, shown below.You are also considered unmarried on the
last day of the tax year if you meet all of theJoint Return After
following tests.Separate Returns Cost of Keeping Up a Home
1) You file a separate return.You can change your filing status by filing an
amended return using Form 1040X. 2) You paid more than half the cost of keep- AmountIf you or your spouse (or both of you) file aing up your home for the tax year. You Totalseparate return, you generally can change to a
Paid Cost3) Your spouse did not live in your home dur-joint return any time within 3 years from the due
ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Yourdate of the separate return or returns. This does Property taxes $ $spouse is considered to live in your homenot include any extensions. A separate return Mortgage interest expenseeven if he or she is temporarily absent dueincludes a return filed by you or your spouse Rentto special circumstances. See Temporaryclaiming married filing separately, single, or Utility chargesabsences, under Qualifying Person, later.head of household filing status. Upkeep and repairs
4) Your home was the main home of your Property insurance
child, stepchild, or adopted child for moreFood consumed
Separate Returns After than half the year or was the main home ofon the premises
your foster child for the entire year. (SeeJoint Return Other household expenses
Home of qualifying person, under Qualify- Totals $$Once you file a joint return, you cannot chooseing Person, later, for rules applying to a
to file separate returns for that year after the duechild’s birth, death, or temporary absenceMinus total amount you ()date of the return. during the year.) paid
Exception. A personal representative for a 5) You must be able to claim an exemption
Amount others paid $decedent can change from a joint return elected for the child. However, you can still meet
by the surviving spouse to a separate return for this test if you cannot claim the exemption
the decedent. The personal representative has only because the noncustodial parent is
If the total amount you paid is more than the amount1 year from the due date of the return to make allowed to claim the exemption for theothers paid, you meet the requirement of paying morethe change. See chapter 4 for more information child. See Exception under Support Test than half the cost of keeping up the home.
on filing a return for a decedent. for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 23

Page 26 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Costs you include.Include in the cost of up- your father or mother if you pay more than half mother’s support. Your mother had no income.
keep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest, Because you paid more than half the cost ofthe cost of keeping your parent in a rest home or
real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re- keeping up your mother’s apartment from Janu-home for the elderly.
pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home. ary 1 until her death, and you can claim anTemporary absences. You and your quali-exemption for her, you can file as a head offying person are considered to live togetherCosts you do not include.Do not include in household.even if one or both of you are temporarily absentthe cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,
from your home due to special circumstanceseducation, medical treatment, vacations, life in-
such as illness, education, business, vacation,surance, or transportation. Also, do not include
or military service. It must be reasonable tothe rental value of a home you own or the value Qualifying Widow(er)assume that the absent person will return to theof your services or those of a member of your
household after the temporary absence. Youhousehold. With Dependent Childmust continue to keep up the home during the
absence.Qualifying Person If your spouse died in 2002, you can use married
Death or birth.You may be eligible to file asfiling jointly as your filing status for 2002 if you
See Table 2–1 to see who is a qualifying per-head of household if the individual who qualifiesotherwise qualify to use that status. The year of
son. you for this filing status is born or dies during thedeath is the last year for which you can file jointly
Any person not described in Table 2–1 is not year. You must have provided more than half ofwith your deceased spouse. See Married Filing
a qualifying person. the cost of keeping up a home that was theJointly, earlier.
individual’s main home for more than half theYou may be eligible to use qualifyingHome of qualifying person.Generally, the year or, if less, the period during which thewidow(er) with dependent child as your filingqualifying person must live with you for moreindividual lived. status for 2 years following the year of death ofthan half of the year. your spouse. For example, if your spouse died in
Example. You are unmarried. Your mother,2001, and you have not remarried, you may beSpecial rule for parent.You may be eligi-
for whom you can claim an exemption, lived inable to use this filing status for 2002 and 2003.ble to file as head of household even if the
an apartment by herself. She died on Septem-parent for whom you can claim an exemption This filing status entitles you to use joint
ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartmentdoes not live with you. You must pay more than return tax rates and the highest standard deduc-
for the year until her death was $6,000. You paidhalf the cost of keeping up a home that was the tion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).
$4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Yourmain home for the entire year for your father or This status does not entitle you to file a joint
mother. You are keeping up a main home for brother made no other payments toward your return.
Table 2–1. Who Is a Qualifying Person for Filing as Head of Household?1
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
you can claim an exemption for him or a qualifying person.parent, grandparent, brother, sister,
her2stepbrother, stepsister, stepmother,
stepfather, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, half brother, halfyou cannot claim an exemption for him orNOT  a qualifying person.sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,herson-in-law, or daughter-in-law
he or she is related to you by blood and a qualifying person.uncle, aunt, nephew, or niece
you can claim an exemption for him or
her
2, 3
he or she is not related to you by blood3 NOT  a qualifying person.
you cannot claim an exemption for him or
her
he or she is single a qualifying person. 4child, grandchild, stepchild, or
adopted child he or she is married, and you can claim an a qualifying person
exemption for him or her2
he or she is married, and you cannot claimNOT  a qualifying person.5
an exemption for him or her
the child lived with you all year, and you a qualifying person.foster child6
can claim an exemption for him or her2
the child lived with you all year, and youNOT  a qualifying person.
cannot claim an exemption for him or her
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person cannot be a qualifying person.
See Multiple Support Agreement in chapter 3.
3You are related by blood to an uncle or aunt if he or she is the brother or sister of your mother or father. You are related by blood to a
nephew or niece if he or she is the child of your brother or sister.
4This child is a qualifying person even if you cannot claim an exemption for the child.
5This child is a qualifying person if you could claim an exemption for the child except that the child’s other parent claims the exemption
under the special rules for a noncustodial parent discussed under Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents in chapter 3.
6The term “foster child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents in chapter 3.
Page 24 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 27 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How to file.If you file as qualifying widow(er) 2) You did not remarry before the end ofExample.  John Reed’s wife died in 2000.
with dependent child, you can use either Form2002. John has not remarried. During 2001 and 2002,
1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing status he continued to keep up a home for himself and3) You have a child, stepchild, adopted child,by checking the box on line 5 of either form. his child (for whom he can claim an exemption).or foster child for whom you can claim anWrite the year your spouse died in the space For 2000 he was entitled to file a joint return forexemption.provided on line 5. Use the Married filing jointly himself and his deceased wife. For 2001 and
column of the Tax Table or Schedule Y–1 of the 4) You paid more than half the cost of keep-2002 he can file as qualifying widower with a
Tax Rate Schedules to figure your tax. ing up a home that is the main home for dependent child. After 2002 he can file as head
you and that child for the entire year, ex-of household if he qualifies.Eligibility rules.You are eligible to file yourcept for temporary absences. See Tempo-2002 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-rary absences and Keeping Up a Home, Death or birth.You may be eligible to file as apendent child if you meet all of the followingdiscussed earlier under Head of House- qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if thetests. hold. child who qualifies you for this filing status is
born or dies during the year. You must have1) You were entitled to file a joint return with
As mentioned earlier, this filing statusprovided more than half of the cost of keeping upyour spouse for the year your spouse died.
is only available for 2 years followinga home that was the child’s main home duringIt does not matter whether you actually
the year of death of your spouse. the entire part of the year he or she was alive.filed a joint return.
CAUTION
!
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 25

Page 28 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or line 40 (Form 1040) by multiplying the totalDeath of spouse. If your spouse died during
number of exemptions shown in the box on line the year, you can generally claim your spouse’s
6d by $3,000. exemption under the rules just explained under
3. Joint return and Separate return.If your adjusted gross income is moreIf you remarried during the year, you cannotthan $103,000, see Phaseout of Ex- take an exemption for your deceased spouse.emptions, later.CAUTION
!
If you are a surviving spouse without grossPersonal income and you remarry in the year your spouse
died, you can be claimed as an exemption onUseful Items both the final separate return of your deceasedExemptions and You may want to see: spouse and the separate return of your new
spouse for that year. If you file a joint return withPublicationDependents your new spouse, you can be claimed as an
exemption only on that return.❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
and Filing Information
Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-
Important Changes tained a final decree of divorce or separateForm (and Instructions)
maintenance by the end of the year, you cannot
❏ 2120 Multiple Support DeclarationExemption amount. The amount you can de- take your former spouse’s exemption. This rule
duct for each exemption has increased from applies even if you provided all of your former❏ 8332 Release of Claim to Exemption for
$2,900 in 2001 to $3,000 in 2002. spouse’s support.Child of Divorced or Separated
ParentsExemption phaseout. You will lose all or part
Exemptions forof the benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted
gross income is above a certain amount. The Dependents
amount at which this phaseout begins depends
on your filing status. For 2002, the phaseout You are allowed one exemption for each person
Exemptionsbegins at $103,000 for married persons filing you can claim as a dependent. To claim the
separately, $137,300 for unmarried individuals, exemption for a dependent, you must meet allThere are two types of exemptions: personal$171,650 for heads of household, and $206,000 five of the dependency tests, discussed later.exemptions and exemptions for dependents.for married persons filing jointly. See Phaseout You can claim an exemption for your dependentWhile these are both worth the same amount,of Exemptions, later. even if your dependent files a return. But thatdifferent rules apply to each type.
dependent cannot claim his or her own personal
exemption if you are entitled to do so. However,
Personal Exemptions see Joint Return Test, later in this chapter.
Introduction You are generally allowed one exemption forKidnapped children. You may be eligible to
yourself and, if you are married, one exemptionThis chapter discusses exemptions. The follow- claim the exemption for a child, even if the child
for your spouse. These are called personal ex-ing topics will be explained. has been kidnapped. For more information, see
emptions. Publication 501.• Personal exemptions — You generally
can take one for yourself and, if you are Child born alive.If your child was born alivemarried, one for your spouse. Your Own Exemption during the year, and the dependency tests are
met, you can claim the exemption. This is true• Exemptions for dependents — You must You can take one exemption for yourself unlesseven if the child lived only for a moment. State ormeet five exemption tests for each exemp-you can be claimed as a dependent by anotherlocal law must treat the child as having beention you claim. If you are entitled to claimtaxpayer. born alive. There must be proof of a live birthan exemption for a dependent, that depen-
shown by an official document, such as a birthdent cannot claim a personal exemptionSingle persons.If another taxpayer is entitled
certificate.on his or her own tax return. to claim you as a dependent, you cannot take an
exemption for yourself. This is true even if the• Phaseout of exemptions — You get less Stillborn child.You cannot claim an exemp-other taxpayer does not actually claim your ex-of a deduction when your adjusted gross tion for a stillborn child.emption.income goes above a certain amount.
Death of dependent. If your dependent diedMarried persons. If you file a joint return, you• Social security number (SSN) requirement during the year and otherwise met the depen-can take your own exemption. If you file a sepa-for dependents — You must list the social dency tests, you can claim the exemption forrate return, you can take your own exemptionsecurity number of any dependent for your dependent.only if another taxpayer is not entitled to claimwhom you claim an exemption. you as a dependent.
Example. Your dependent mother died on
Deduction. Exemptions reduce your taxable January 15. The five dependency tests are met.
income. Generally, you can deduct $3,000 for You can claim the exemption for her on yourYour Spouse’s Exemption
each exemption you claim in 2002. But, you may return.
Your spouse is never considered your depen-lose the benefit of part or all of your exemption if
Housekeepers, maids, or servants.If thesedent. You may be able to take one exemption foryour adjusted gross income is above a certain
people work for you, you cannot claim exemp-your spouse only because you are married.amount. See Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
tions for them.Joint return.On a joint return you can claimHow you claim an exemption.  How you one exemption for yourself and one for yourChild tax credit.You may be entitled to a childclaim an exemption on your tax return dependsspouse. tax credit for each of your qualifying children foron which form you file.
whom you can claim an exemption. For moreIf you file Form 1040EZ , the exemption Separate return.If you file a separate return,information, see chapter 35.amount is combined with the standard deductionyou can claim the exemption for your spouse
amount and entered on line 5. only if your spouse had no gross income and
If you file Form 1040A or Form 1040, follow was not the dependent of another taxpayer. ThisDependency Tests
the instructions for the form. The total number of is true even if the other taxpayer does not actu-
exemptions you can claim is the total in the box ally claim your spouse’s exemption. This is also The following five tests must be met for you to
on line 6d. Also complete line 26 (Form 1040A) true if your spouse is a nonresident alien. claim an exemption for a dependent.
Page 26 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 29 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Any of these relationships that were established may be able to take a charitable contribution
1) Member of Household or Relationship by marriage are not ended by death or divorce. deduction. See Expenses Paid for Student Liv-
Test. ing With You in chapter 26.
Adoption. Even if your adoption of a child is2) Citizen or Resident Test.
not yet final, the child is considered to be yourJoint Return Test3) Joint Return Test. child if he or she was placed with you for legal
adoption by an authorized placement agency.4) Gross Income Test. Even if the other dependency tests are met, youAlso, the child must have been a member ofare generally not allowed an exemption for your5) Support Test. your household. An authorized placement dependent if he or she files a joint return.agency includes any person authorized by state
law to place children for legal adoption. Example. You supported your daughter forMember of Household If the child was not placed with you by anthe entire year while her husband was in theauthorized placement agency, the child willor Relationship Test Armed Forces. The couple files a joint return.meet this test only if he or she was a member ofEven though all the other tests are met, youyour household for your entire tax year.To meet this test, a person must either: cannot take an exemption for your daughter.
Foster child.A foster child must live with you1) Live with you for the entire year as a mem- Exception. The joint return test does not applyas a member of your household for the entireber of your household, or if a joint return is filed by the dependent and hisyear to qualify as your dependent. For this test, a
or her spouse merely as a claim for refund and2) Be related to you in one of the ways listedfoster child is one who is in your care that you
no tax liability would exist for either spouse onlater under Relatives who do not have tocare for as your own child. It does not matter
separate returns.live with you. how the child became a member of the house-
hold.If at any time during the year the person was Example. Your son and his wife each hadyour spouse, that person cannot be your depen-Cousin. You can claim an exemption for yourless than $3,000 of wages and no unearneddent. However, see Personal Exemptions, ear- cousin only if he or she lives with you as aincome. Neither is required to file a tax return.lier. member of your household for the entire year. ATaxes were taken out of their pay, so they file a
cousin is a descendant of a brother or sister ofjoint return to get a refund. You are allowed toTemporary absences. A person lives with
your father or mother. take exemptions for your son andyou as a member of your household even if
daughter-in-law if the other dependency testseither (or both) of you are temporarily absentJoint return.If you file a joint return, you doare met, even though they can also claim theirdue to special circumstances. Temporary ab-not need to show that a person is related to bothpersonal exemptions on their joint return.sences due to special circumstances includeyou and your spouse. You also do not need to
absences because of illness, education, busi-show that a person is related to the spouse who
ness, vacation, or military service. provides support. Gross Income TestIf the person is placed in a nursing home forFor example, your spouse’s uncle who re-
an indefinite period of time to receive constant Generally, you cannot take an exemption for aceives more than half his support from you may
medical care, the absence is considered tempo- dependent if that person had gross income ofbe your dependent, even though he does not
rary. $3,000 or more for 2002. This test does notlive with you. However, if you and your spouse
apply if the person is your child and is either:file separate returns, your spouse’s uncle canDeath or birth.A person who died during the
be your dependent only if he is a member of youryear, but was a member of your household until 1) Under age 19 at the end of the year, orhousehold and lives with you for your entire taxdeath, will meet the member of household test.
year.The same is true for a child who was born during 2) A student under age 24 at the end of the
the year and was a member of your household year.
for the rest of the year. The test is also met if a
Citizen or Resident Test The exceptions for children under age 19 andchild would have been a member except for any students under age 24 are discussed in detailrequired hospital stay following birth. To meet the citizen or resident test, a personlater.must be a U.S. citizen or resident, or a residentLocal law violated.A person does not meet If you file on a fiscal year basis, the grossof Canada or Mexico, for some part of the calen-the member of household test if at any time income test applies to the calendar year in whichdar year in which your tax year begins.during your tax year the relationship between your fiscal year begins.
you and that person violates local law. Children’s place of residence.Children usu-
Gross income defined.All income in the formally are citizens or residents of the country ofRelatives who do not have to live with you. of money, property, and services that is nottheir parents.A person related to you in any of the following exempt from tax is gross income.If you were a U.S. citizen when your childways does not have to live with you for the entirewas born, the child may be a U.S. citizen al-In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-year as a member of your household to meetthough the other parent was a nonresident aliening business, gross income is the total net salesthis test. and the child was born in a foreign country. If so,minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-
and the other dependency tests are met, youneous income from the business.• Your child, grandchild, great grandchild,
can take the exemption. It does not matter if theetc. (a legally adopted child is considered Gross receipts from rental property are gross
child lives abroad with the nonresident alienyour child). income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., to
parent. determine the gross income from rental prop-• Your stepchild. If you are a U.S. citizen who has legallyerty.
adopted a child who is not a U.S. citizen or• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis- Gross income includes a partner’s share of
resident, and the other dependency tests areter, stepbrother, or stepsister. the gross, not a share of the net, partnership
met, you can take the exemption if your home isincome.• Your parent, grandparent, or other directthe child’s main home and the child is a memberGross income also includes all unemploy-ancestor, but not foster parent. of your household for your entire tax year.ment compensation and certain scholarship and• Your stepfather or stepmother. fellowship grants. Scholarships received by de-Foreign students’ place of residence.For-
gree candidates that are used for tuition, fees,eign students brought to this country under a• A brother or sister of your father or
supplies, books, and equipment required forqualified international education exchange pro-mother.
particular courses are not included in gross in-gram and placed in American homes for a tem-• A son or daughter of your brother or sister. come. For more information, see chapter 13.porary period generally are not U.S. residents
Tax-exempt income, such as certain social• Your father-in-law, mother-in-law, and do not meet the citizen or resident test. You
security payments, is not included in gross in-son-in-law, daughter-in-law, cannot claim exemptions for them. However, if
come.brother-in-law, or sister-in-law. you provided a home for a foreign student, you
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 27

Page 30 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Disabled dependents. For this gross in- Vocational high school students.People Example. You are in the Armed Forces.
who work on “co-op” jobs in private industry as a You authorize an allotment for your widowedcome test, gross income does not include in-
part of the school’s prescribed course of class- mother that she uses to support herself and yourcome received by a permanently and totally
room and practical training are consideredsister. If the allotment provides more than half ofdisabled individual for services performed at a
full-time students. their support, you can take an exemption forsheltered workshop. The availability of medical
each of them, if they otherwise qualify, evencare must be the main reason the individual is atNight school. Your child is not a full-timethough you authorize the allotment only for yourthe workshop. Also, the income must come student while attending school only at night.mother.solely from activities at the workshop that areHowever, full-time attendance at a school canincident to this medical care. A sheltered work-include some attendance at night as part of aTax-exempt military quarters allowances.shop is a school operated by certain tax-exemptfull-time course of study. These allowances are treated the same way asorganizations, or by a state, a U.S. possession, dependency allotments in figuring support. Thea political subdivision of a state or possession, allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow-Support Testthe United States, or the District of Columbia, ance for quarters are both considered as pro-that provides special instruction or training de- vided by you for support.Generally, you must provide more than half of asigned to alleviate the disability of the individual.
person’s total support during the calendar yearTax-exempt income. In figuring a person’sto meet the support test. However, there areChild defined.For purposes of the gross in- total support, include tax-exempt income, sav-special rules that apply in the following two situa-come test, your child is your son, stepson, ings, and borrowed amounts used to supporttions.daughter, stepdaughter, a legally adopted child, that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer-
tain social security benefits, welfare benefits,or a child who was placed with you by an author-1) Two or more persons provide support, but
nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armedized placement agency for your legal adoption.no one person provides more than half of
Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions,A foster child who was a member of your house-a person’s total support. See Multiple Sup-
and tax-exempt interest.hold for your entire tax year is also consideredport Agreement, later.
your child.
2) The person supported is the child of di-Example 1. You provide $4,000 toward
vorced or separated parents. See Support your mother’s support during the year. She hasChild under age 19.If your child is under 19 atTest for Child of Divorced or Separatedearned income of $600, nontaxable social se-the end of the year, the gross income test doesParents, later. curity benefit payments of $4,800, and tax-ex-not apply. Your child can have any amount of
empt interest of $200. She uses all these for herincome and you can still claim an exemption ifYou figure whether you have provided more
support. You cannot claim an exemption for yourthe other dependency tests, including the sup-than half of a person’s total support by compar-
mother because the $4,000 you provide is notport test, are met. ing the amount you contributed to that person’s
more than half of her total support of $9,600.support with the entire amount of support that
Example. Marie, 18, earned $4,000. Her fa-person received from all sources. This includes
Example 2. Your daughter takes out a stu-ther provided more than half her support. Be-support the person provided from his or her own
dent loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay her col-cause Marie is under 19, the gross income testfunds.
lege tuition. She is personally responsible for thedoes not apply. If the other dependency testsYou may find Table 3–1 helpful in figuring
loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total sup-were met, Marie’s father can claim an exemptionwhether you provided more than half of a
port. You cannot claim an exemption for yourfor her. person’s support.
daughter because you provide less than half of
her support.Person’s own funds not used for support.Student under age 24.The gross income test
A person’s own funds are not support unlessdoes not apply if your child is a student who is Social security benefit payments.If athey are actually spent for support.under age 24 at the end of the calendar year. husband and wife each receive payments that
The other dependency tests must still be met. are paid by one check made out to both of them,Example. Your mother received $2,400 inhalf of the total paid is considered to be for theStudent defined.To qualify as a student,social security benefits and $300 in interest. Shesupport of each spouse, unless they can showyour child must be, during some part of each of 5paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation.otherwise.calendar months during the calendar year (notEven though your mother received a total ofIf a child receives social security benefits andnecessarily consecutive): $2,700, she spent only $2,400 for her own sup-uses them toward his or her own support, theport. If you spent more than $2,400 for her sup-payments are considered as provided by the1) A full-time student at a school that has aport and no other support was received, youchild.regular teaching staff, course of study, andhave provided more than half of her support.regularly enrolled body of students in at- Support provided by the state (food
tendance, or stamps, housing, etc.).Benefits provided byChild’s wages used for own support.You
the state to a needy person generally are con-cannot include in your contribution to your2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
sidered to be used for support. However, pay-child’s support any support that is paid for by theing course given by a school described in
ments based on the needs of the recipient willchild with the child’s own wages, even if you paid(1) above or a state, county, or local gov-
not be considered as used entirely for thatthe wages.ernment.
person’s support if it is shown that part of the
Year support is provided.The year you pro-payments were not used for that purpose.Full-time student defined.A full-time stu-vide the support is the year you pay for it, even ifdent is a person who is enrolled for the number Foster care payments and expenses.Pay-you do so with borrowed money that you repayof hours or courses the school considers to be ments you receive for the support of a fosterin a later year.full-time attendance. child from a child placement agency are consid-If you use a fiscal year to report your income,
School defined.  The term “school” in- ered support provided by the agency. Similarly,you must provide more than half of the
cludes elementary schools, junior and senior payments you receive for the support of a fosterdependent’s support for the calendar year in
high schools, colleges, universities, and techni- child from a state or county are considered sup-which your fiscal year begins.
cal, trade, and mechanical schools. It does not port provided by the state or county.
include on-the-job training courses, correspond-Armed Forces dependency allotments.The If you are not in the trade or business of
ence schools, and night schools. part of the allotment contributed by the govern- providing foster care to a child and your un-
ment and the part taken out of your military pay reimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in caring for
Example. James, 22, attends college as aare both considered provided by you in figuring a foster child were mainly to benefit an organiza-
full-time student. During the summer, Jameswhether you provide more than half of the sup- tion qualified to receive deductible charitable
earned $4,000. If the other dependency testsport. If your allotment is used to support persons contributions, the expenses are deductible as
are met, his parents can take the exemption forother than those you name, you can take the charitable contributions, but are not considered
James. exemptions for them if they otherwise qualify. support you provided. For more information
Page 28 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 31 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 3–A. Can You Claim an Exemption for a Dependent?
Was the person either a member of your household for the entire tax
year or related to you? (See Member of Household or Relationship
Test.)
You cannot
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
You can
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
Start Here
No
Yes
No
Yes
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075 Was the person a U.S. citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or
Mexico, for any part of the tax year?
1
Did the person file a joint return for the year?
2
Did you provide more than half the person’s total support for the
year? (If you are a divorced or separated parent of the person, see
Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents. )
3
Did the person have gross income of $3,000 or more during the tax
year?
4
Was the person your child? (See Child defined.)
Was your child under 19 at the end of the year?
Was your child under 24 at the end of the year and a full-time
student for some part of each of five months during the year? (See
Student under age 24. )
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
No
No
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
1
If the person was your legally adopted child and lived in your home as a member of your household for the entire tax year, answ er “yes” to this question.
2
If neither the person nor the person’s spouse is required to file a return, but they file a joint return only to claim a refund  of tax withheld, answer “no” to this
question.
3
Answer “yes” to this question if you meet the multiple support requirements under Multiple Support Agreement.
/H17075
4
Gross income for this purpose does not include income received by a permanently disabled individual at a sheltered workshop. Se e Disabled dependents.
about the deduction for charitable contributions, also includes any other amounts that you pro- Expenses that are not directly related to any
one member of a household, such as the cost ofsee Publication 526. If your unreimbursed ex- vided during the year.
food for the household, must be divided amongpenses are not deductible as charitable contri-
the members of the household.butions, they are considered support you
provided. Total Support
Example. Your parents live with you, yourIf you are in the trade or business of provid-To figure if you provided more than half of thespouse, and your two children in a house youing foster care, your unreimbursed expensessupport of a person, you must first determine theown. The fair rental value of your parents’ shareare not considered support provided by you.total support provided for that person. Total sup-of lodging is $2,000 a year, which includes fur-
port includes amounts spent to provide food,nishings and utilities. Your father receives a
lodging, clothing, education, medical and dentalHome for the aged. If you make a lump-sum nontaxable pension of $4,200, which he spends
care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-advance payment to a home for the aged to take equally between your mother and himself for
cessities.care of your relative for life and the payment is items of support such as clothing, transporta-
based on that person’s life expectancy, theGenerally, the amount of an item of support tion, and recreation. Your total food expense for
amount of support you provide each year is theis the amount of the expense incurred in provid- the household is $6,000. Your heat and utility
lump-sum payment divided by the relative’s lifeing that item. For lodging, the amount of support bills amount to $1,200. Your mother has hospital
expectancy. The amount of support you provide is the fair rental value of the lodging. and medical expenses of $600, which you pay
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 29

Page 32 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3–1. Worksheet for Determining Support
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1) Total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable and
nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year $
2) Amount used for support $
3) Amount used for other purposes $
4) Amount in savings and other accounts at the end of the year $
 (The total of lines 2, 3, and 4 should equal line 1) $
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
5) Lodging (Complete item a or b)
a) Rent paid $
b) If not rented, show fair rental value of home. If the person you supported owned the
home, include the amount in line 19. $
6) Food $
7) Utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 5a or 5b) $
8) Repairs (not included in line 5a or 5b) $
9) Other. Do not include expenses of maintaining home, such as mortgage interest, real
estate taxes, and insurance. $
10) Total household expenses (Add lines 5 through 9) $
11) Total number of persons who lived in household
Expenses for the Person You Supported
12) Each person’s part of household expenses (line 10 divided by line 11) $
13) Clothing $
14) Education $
15) Medical, dental $
16) Travel, recreation $
17) Other (specify)
$
18) Total cost of support for the year (Add lines 12 through 17) $
Did You Provide More Than Half?
19) Amount the person provided for own support (line 2, plus line 5b if the person you
supported owned the home) $
20) Amount others provided for the person’s support. Include amounts provided by state, local,
and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. $
21) Amount you provided for the person’s support (line 18 minus lines 19 and 20) $
 22) 50% of line 18 $
Is line 21 more than line 22?
Yes. You meet the support test for the person. If the other exemption tests are met, you may claim an exemption for
the person.
No. You do not meet the support test for the person. You cannot claim an exemption for the person unless you can
do so under a multiple support agreement. See Multiple Support Agreement in this chapter.
Page 30 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 33 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
during the year. Figure your parents’ total sup-Property. Property provided as support isprovide child care or disabled dependent care,
port as follows: measured by its fair market value. Fair marketyou can include these payments as support,
value is the price that property would sell for oneven if you claim a credit for them. For informa-
Support Provided Father Mother the open market. It is the price that would betion on the credit, see chapter 33.
agreed upon between a willing buyer and aFair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000
willing seller, with neither being required to act,Pension spent for their 2,100 2,100
and both having reasonable knowledge of theDo Not Include in Total Supportsupport .............
relevant facts.Share of food (1/6 of 1,000 1,000
The following items are not included in total$6,000) ............. Capital expenses. Capital items, such assupport.Medical expenses for 600 furniture, appliances, and cars, that are boughtmother.............. for a person during the year can be included in1) Federal, state, and local income taxes paidParents’ total support $4,100 $4,700 total support under certain circumstances. by persons from their own income.
You must apply the support test separatelyThe following examples show when a capital2) Social security and Medicare taxes paid byto each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000item is or is not support.
persons from their own income.lodging, $1,000 food) of your father’s total sup-
port of $4,100 — less than half. You provideExample 1. You buy a $200 power lawn 3) Life insurance premiums.$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000mower for your 13-year-old child. The child is
4) Funeral expenses.  food, $600 medical) — more than half of hergiven the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed.
total support of $4,700. You meet the supportBecause a lawn mower is ordinarily an item you5) Scholarships received by your child if your
test for your mother, but not your father. Heatbuy for personal and family reasons that bene-child is a full-time student.and utility costs are included in the fair rentalfits all members of the household, you cannot6) Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educationalvalue of the lodging, so these are not consideredinclude the cost of the lawn mower in the support
Assistance payments used for support ofseparately. of your child.
the child who receives them.
Lodging defined. Lodging is the fair rentalExample 2. You buy a $150 television set
value of the room, apartment, or house in whichas a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.
Multiple Supportthe person lives. It includes a reasonable allow-The television set is placed in your child’s bed-
ance for the use of furniture and appliances androom. You can include the cost of the televisionAgreementfor heat and other utilities. set in the support of your child.
Sometimes no one provides more than half ofFair rental value defined.This is the
Example 3. You pay $5,000 for a car andthe support of a person. Instead, two or moreamount you could reasonably expect to receive
register it in your name. You and your persons, each of whom would be able to takefrom a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It is
17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-the exemption but for the support test, togetherused in place of rent or taxes, interest, deprecia-
cause you own the car and do not give it to yourprovide more than half of the person’s support.tion, paint, insurance, utilities, cost of furniture
daughter but merely let her use it, you cannotand appliances, etc. In some cases, fair rental When this happens, you can agree that any
include the cost of the car in your daughter’svalue may be equal to the rent paid. one of you who individually provides more thantotal support. However, you can include in yourIf you provide the total lodging, the amount of 10% of the person’s support, but only one, candaughter’s support your out-of-pocket expensessupport you provide is the fair rental value of the claim an exemption for that person. Each of theof operating the car for her benefit.room the person uses, or a share of the fair others must sign a statement agreeing not to
rental value of the entire dwelling if the person claim the exemption for that year. The personExample 4. Your 17-year-old son, usinghas use of your entire home. If you do not pro- who claims the exemption must keep thesepersonal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-vide the total lodging, the total fair rental value signed statements for his or her records. A multi-vide all the rest of your son’s support — $4,000.must be divided depending on how much of the ple support declaration identifying each of theSince the car is bought and owned by your son,total lodging you provide. If you provide only a others who agreed not to claim the exemptionthe car’s fair market value ($4,500) must bepart and the person supplies the rest, the fair must be attached to the return of the personincluded in his support. The $4,000 support yourental value must be divided between both of claiming the exemption. Form 2120, Multipleprovide is less than half of his total support ofyou according to the amount each provides. Support Declaration, can be used for this pur-$8,500. You cannot claim an exemption for your
pose.son.Example. Your parents live rent free in a
house you own. It has a fair rental value of Example 1. You, your sister, and your twoMedical insurance premiums.Medical insur-$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair brothers provide the entire support of yourance premiums you pay, including premiums forrental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 mother for the year. You provide 45%, yoursupplementary Medicare coverage, are in-for the furniture. This does not include heat and sister 35%, and your two brothers each providecluded in the support you provide.utilities. The house is completely furnished with 10%. Either you or your sister can claim anfurniture belonging to your parents. You payMedical insurance benefits.Medical in- exemption for your mother. The other must sign$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usuallysurance benefits, including basic and supple-a statement agreeing not to take an exemptionincluded in rent for houses in the area wherementary Medicare benefits, are not part offor your mother. The one who claims the exemp-your parents live. Therefore, you consider thesupport. tion must attach a Form 2120 or similar declara-total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000
tion to his or her return and must keep for his or($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnishedTuition payments and allowances under the
her records the signed statement from the onehouse, $1,800 allowance for furnishings pro-GI Bill.Amounts veterans receive under the
agreeing not to take the exemption. Becausevided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities)GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances while
neither brother provides more than 10% of theof which you are considered to provide $4,200they attend school are included in total support.
support, neither can take the exemption. Your($3,600 + $600).
brothers do not have to sign a statement.Example. During the year, your son re-Person living in his or her own home.The ceives $2,200 from the government under the GItotal fair rental value of a person’s home that he Example 2. You and your brother each pro-Bill. He uses this amount for his education. Youor she owns is considered support contributed vide 20% of your mother’s support for the year.provide the rest of his support — $2,000. Be-by that person. The remaining 60% of her support is providedcause GI benefits are included in total support,
equally by two persons who are not related toLiving with someone rent free.If you liveyour son is not your dependent.
her. She does not live with them. Because morewith a person rent free in his or her home, you
than half of her support is provided by personsOther support items. Other items may bemust reduce the amount you provide for support
considered as support depending on the facts in who cannot claim an exemption for her, no oneby the fair rental value of lodging he or she
each case. For example, if you pay someone tocan take the exemption.provides you.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 31

Page 34 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 3. Your father lives with you and half of the support of the child. However, seeDivorce decree or separation agreement
receives 25% of his support from social security,Exception, later. made after 1984. If your divorce decree or
40% from you, 24% from his brother, and 11% separation agreement was executed after 1984,
from a friend. Either you or your uncle can takeExample 2. You and your former spouse the noncustodial parent does not have to attach
the exemption for your father if the other signs aprovided your child’s total support for 2002. ForForm 8332 if both of the following requirements
statement agreeing not to. The one who takesthe first 8 months of the year, you had custody ofare met.
the exemption must attach a Form 2120 or ayour child under your 1994 divorce decree (the
similar declaration to his return and must keep 1) The decree or agreement is signed by themost recent decree at the time). On August 31,
for his records the signed statement from the custodial parent and states all of the fol-2002, a new custody decree granted custody to
one agreeing not to take the exemption. lowing.your former spouse. Because you had custody
for the greater part of the year, you are consid-a) The custodial parent will not claim theered to have provided more than half of yourSupport Test for child as a dependent for the year.child’s support, unless the exception describedChild of Divorced or next applies. b) The noncustodial parent can claim the
child as a dependent without regardSeparated Parents
to any condition, such as payment ofException. The noncustodial parent will be
The support test for a child of divorced or sepa- support.treated as providing more than half of the child’s
rated parents is based on the special rules ex-support if: c) The years for which the noncustodialplained here and shown in Figure 3–B . parent, rather than the custodial parent,However, these special rules apply only if all of1) The custodial parent signs a written decla-can claim the child as a dependent.the following are true. ration that he or she will not claim the
exemption for the child, and the noncus-2) The noncustodial parent attaches a copy1) The parents are divorced or legally sepa-todial parent attaches this written declara-of the following pages of the decree orrated under a decree of divorce or sepa- tion to his or her return, agreement to his or her tax return.rate maintenance, or separated under a
2) The custodial parent signed a decree orwritten separation agreement, or lived a) The cover page (write the otheragreement executed after 1984 that statesapart at all times during the last 6 months parent’s social security number on thishe or she will not claim the exemption forof the calendar year. page).the child, and that the noncustodial parent2) One or both parents provide more than can claim an exemption for the child with-b) The pages that contain the informationhalf of the child’s total support for the cal-out regard to any condition, such as pay- shown in item (1).endar year. ment of support, and the noncustodial c) The signature page with the otherparent attaches to his or her return the3) One or both parents have custody of the parent’s signature and the date of thedocumentation described later under Di-child for more than half of the calendar agreement.vorce decree or separation agreementyear.
made after 1984, or“Child” is defined earlier under Gross Income If these requirements are not met, the3) A decree or agreement executed beforeTest. noncustodial parent must attach to his1985 provides that the noncustodial parentThis discussion does not apply if the support or her return Form 8332 or a similarCAUTION
!
is entitled to the exemption, and he or sheof the child is determined under a multiple sup- statement from the custodial parent releasingprovides at least $600 for the child’s sup-port agreement, discussed earlier. the exemption.port during the year, unless the pre-1985
decree or agreement is modified afterGeneral rule.The parent who has custody of 1984 to specify that this provision will notChild support.All child support payments ac-the child for the greater part of the year (theapply. tually received from the noncustodial parent arecustodial parent) is generally treated as the
considered used for the support of the child.parent who provides more than half of the child’sNoncustodial parent. The noncustodialsupport. It does not matter whether the custodialparent is the parent who has custody of the childExample. The noncustodial parent providesparent actually provided more than half of thefor the shorter part of the year or who does not$1,200 for the child’s support. This amount issupport. have custody at all. considered support provided by the noncus-
Custody. Custody is usually determined by todial parent even if the $1,200 was actually
the terms of the most recent decree of divorce orExample. Under the terms of your 1984 di-spent on things other than support.
separate maintenance, or a later custody de-vorce decree, your former spouse has custodyPaid in a later year.If you fail to pay childcree. If there is no decree, use the written sepa-of your child. The decree specifically states thatsupport in the year it is due, but pay it in a laterration agreement. If neither a decree noryou are entitled to the exemption. You provide atyear, your payment of the overdue amount is notagreement establishes custody, then the parentleast $600 in child support during the calendarconsidered paid for the support of your child,who has the physical custody of the child for theyear. You are considered to have provided moreeither for the year the payment was due or forgreater part of the year is considered to havethan half of the child’s support. the year it is paid. It is payment of an amount youcustody of the child. This also applies if the
Written declaration.The custodial parentowed to the custodial parent, but it is not consid-validity of a decree or agreement awarding cus-
may use either Form 8332 or a similar state-ered paid by you for the support of your child.tody is uncertain because of legal proceedings
ment (containing the same information requiredpending on the last day of the calendar year.
by the form) to make the written declaration toExample. You owed but failed to pay childIf the parents are divorced or separated dur-release the exemption to the noncustodial par-support last year. This year, you pay all of theing the year and had joint custody of the childent. The noncustodial parent must attach theamount owed from last year and the full amountbefore the separation, the parent who has cus-form or statement to his or her tax return.due for this year. Your payment of this year’stody for the greater part of the rest of the year is
child support counts as your support for thisThe exemption can be released for a singleconsidered to have custody of the child for the
year, but your payment of the amount owed fromyear, for a number of specified years (for exam-tax year.
last year does not count as support either for thisple, alternate years), or for all future years, as
year or for last year.specified in the declaration. If the exemption isExample 1. Under the terms of your di-
released for more than one year, the originalvorce, you have custody of your child for 10
release must be attached to the return of theThird-party support.Support provided by amonths of the year. Your former spouse has
noncustodial parent for the first year of such third party for a divorced or separated parent iscustody for the other 2 months. You and your
release, and a copy must be attached for each not included as support provided by that parent.former spouse provide the child’s total support.
later year. However, see Remarried parent, later.You are considered to have provided more than
Page 32 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 35 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 3–B. Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents
Are the parents divorced or
legally separated, separated
under a written agreement, or
did they live apart the last 6
months of the year?
Did the custodial parent
sign a decree or
agreement executed after
1984 releasing the
exemption?
Start Here
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
/H17075
Did one or both parents
furnish over half of the child’s
total support?
Is the child in the custody of
one or both parents for more
than half of the year?
Did the custodial parent sign
a Form 8332 or similar
statement releasing the
exemption?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
YesDid any one person
provide over half of the
child’s total support?
The person who provided over
half of the child’s support meets
the support test.
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
before 1985 (and not
modified after 1984)
that entitles the
noncustodial parent to
the exemption?
Did the noncustodial
parent provide at least
$600 of the child’s
support during the
year?
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
See Multiple Support
Agreement.
The custodial parent meets the
support test.
The noncustodial parent meets
the support test.
/H17074
No
/H17075
Yes
Is the noncustodial parent
attaching the signed form
or other required
documentation to his or
her return?
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 33

Page 36 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are divorced. During the en- Note. If your dependent does not have and
cannot get an SSN, you must list the individualtire year, you and your child live with yourPhaseout of taxpayer identification number (ITIN) or adop-mother in a house she owns. The fair rental
tion taxpayer identification number (ATIN) in-value of the lodging provided by your mother forExemptions
stead of an SSN. See Taxpayer identificationyour child is $3,000. The home provided by your
numbers for aliens or Taxpayer identificationmother is not included in the amount of supportThe amount you can claim as a deduction for
number for adoptees, later.exemptions is phased out once your adjustedyou provide.
gross income (AGI) goes above a certain levelRemarried parent.If you remarry, the sup- No social security number.If a person forfor your filing status. These levels are as follows:port provided by your new spouse is treated as whom you expect to claim an exemption on your
provided by you. return does not have an SSN, either you or thatAGI Level
person should apply for an SSN as soon asWhich
Example. You have two children from a for- possible by filing Form SS–5, Application for aReduces
mer marriage who live with you. You have re- Social Security Card, with the Social SecurityExemption
Administration (SSA). Information about apply-Filing Status Amountmarried and are living in a home owned by your
ing for an SSN and Form SS–5 is available atnew spouse. The fair rental value of the homeMarried filing separately..... $103,000 your local SSA office.provided to the children by your new spouse isSingle................. 137,300
It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN.treated as provided by you. Head of household......... 171,650
If you do not have a required SSN by the filingMarried filing jointly........ 206,000
due date, you can file Form 4868 for an exten-Qualifying widow(er)........ 206,000Home jointly owned. If you and your former sion of time to file.If your AGI exceeds the level for your filingspouse have the right to use and live in the
Born and died in 2002.If your child wasstatus, use the Deduction for Exemptions Work-home, each of you is considered to provide half
born and died in 2002, and you do not have ansheet in the instructions for Form 1040 to figureof your child’s lodging. However, if the divorce
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of thethe amount of your deduction for exemptions.decree gives only you the right to use and live in
child’s birth certificate instead. If you do, enterYou must reduce the dollar amount of yourthe home, you are considered to provide your “DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of your Formexemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part ofchild’s entire lodging. It does not matter if the 1040 or Form 1040A.$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-legal title to the home remains in the names ofrately), that your AGI exceeds the amountboth parents. Taxpayer identification numbers for aliens.shown above for your filing status. If your AGI
If your dependent is a resident or nonresidentexceeds the amount shown by more than
alien who does not have and is not eligible to getParents who never married. These special $122,500 ($61,250 if married filing separately),
an SSN, the IRS will issue your dependent anrules for divorced or separated parents do not the amount of your deduction for exemptions is
individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN)reduced to zero.apply to parents who never married each other.
instead of an SSN. Write the number in columnIf this is your situation, you must provide more
(2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.than half the support of your child or enter into a To apply for an ITIN, use Form W–7, Applica-multiple support agreement, as discussed ear- tion for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identificationlier, to satisfy the support test. Social Security Number.
It usually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to get anExample. You never married the father ofNumbers for ITIN.your child and do not live with him, but he pro-
vides the home you and your child live in. TheDependents Taxpayer identification numbers forfair rental value of the lodging he provides to adoptees. If you have a child who was placedYou must list the social security number (SSN)your child is $3,000 a year. You provide the rest with you by an authorized placement agency,of any person for whom you claim an exemptionof your child’s support for the year, which is you may be able to claim an exemption for thein column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 or$1,200. The special rules for a child of divorced child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or anForm 1040A.or separated parents do not apply because you ITIN for the child, you must get an adoption
and the child’s father never married. As a result, taxpayer identification number (ATIN) for theIf you do not list the dependent’s SSN
you cannot claim an exemption for your child child from the IRS. See Form W–7A, Applica-when required or if you list an incorrect
because you did not provide more than half of tion for Taxpayer Identification Number forSSN, the exemption may be disal-CAUTION
!
Pending U.S. Adoptions, for details.the child’s support. lowed.
Page 34 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 37 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 1310 Statement of Person Claiming
Refund Due a Deceased Taxpayer
Final Return
❏ 4810 Request for Prompt Assessment4.
Under Internal Revenue Code for the Decedent
Section 6501(d)
The same filing requirements that apply to indi-
Decedents viduals determine if a final income tax return
must be filed for the decedent. Filing require-
ments are discussed in chapter 1.PersonalImportant Changes Representative Filing to get a refund.A return should be filed
to obtain a refund if tax was withheld from sala-Rollovers by surviving spouses.For distri-
A personal representative of an estate is anries, wages, pensions, or annuities, or if esti-butions after 2001, an employee’s surviving
executor, administrator, or anyone who is inmated tax was paid, even if a return is notspouse who receives an eligible rollover distri-
charge of the decedent’s property. required to be filed. See Claiming a refund, later.bution may roll it over into an eligible retirement
plan, including an IRA, a qualified plan, a section Also, the decedent may be entitled to other cred-Executor. Generally, an executor (or execu-403(b) annuity, or a section 457 plan. For distri- its that result in a refund. See chapters 37 andtrix) is named in a decedent’s will to administerbutions before 2002, surviving spouses could 38 for additional information on refundable cred-the estate (property and debts left by the dece-only roll the distribution over into an IRA. its and see chapter 35 for information on thedent) and distribute properties as the decedent
child tax credit.has directed.Estate tax return.Generally, if the decedent
died during 2002, an estate tax return (FormAdministrator.An administrator (or adminis-
Determining income and deductions. The706) must be filed if the gross estate is moretratrix) is usually appointed by the court if no will
method of accounting regularly used by the de-than $1,000,000. exists, if no executor was named in the will, or if
cedent before death generally determines whatthe named executor cannot or will not serve.Estate tax repeal.The estate tax is repealed income you must include and what deductions
for decedents dying after 2009. Personal representative.In general, an ex-you can take on the final return. Generally, indi-
ecutor and an administrator perform the sameviduals use one of two methods of accounting:duties and have the same responsibilities. Be-cash or accrual.cause a personal representative for a
Cash method. If the decedent used thedecedent’s estate can be an executor, adminis-Important Reminder cash method of accounting, include only thetrator, or anyone in charge of the decedent’s
items of income actually or constructively re-property, the term personal representative willConsistent treatment of estate items.Bene- ceived before death and deduct only the ex-be used throughout this chapter.ficiaries must generally treat estate items the penses the decedent paid before death. For anThe surviving spouse may or may not be thesame way on their individual returns as they arepersonal representative, depending on theexception for certain medical expenses not paidtreated on the estate’s return. For more informa-terms of the decedent’s will or the court appoint-before death, see Decedent in chapter 23.tion, see How and When To Report under Distri- ment. Accrual method. If the decedent used anbutions to Beneficiaries From an Estate in
accrual method of accounting, report only thosePublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and Ad-
Duties items of income that the decedent accrued, orministrators.
earned, before death. Deduct those expenses
the decedent was liable for before death, re-The primary duties of a personal representative
gardless of whether the expenses were paid.are to collect all of the decedent’s assets, pay
the creditors, and distribute the remaining as-Introduction Additional information.For more informa-sets to the heirs or other beneficiaries.tion on the cash and accrual methods, see Ac-This chapter discusses the tax responsibilities ofThe personal representative also must per-counting Methods in chapter 1.the person who is in charge of the propertyform the following duties.
(estate) of an individual who has died (dece-
1) Notify the IRS (as discussed below) thatdent). It also covers the following topics. Who must file the return?The personal rep-he or she is acting as the personal repre-resentative (defined earlier) must file the final• Filing the decedent’s final return. sentative. income tax return (Form 1040) of the decedent
• Tax effects on survivors. for the year of death and any returns not filed for2) File any income tax and estate tax return
preceding years. A surviving spouse, under cer-when due. (See Final Return for the Dece-
This chapter does not discuss the require- dent, next.) tain circumstances, may have to file the returnsments for filing an income tax return of an estate for the decedent. See Joint return, later.3) Pay any tax determined up to the date of(Form 1041). For information on Form 1041, see
discharge from duties.Income Tax Return of an Estate—Form 1041 in Example. Samantha Smith died on MarchPublication 559. This chapter also does not dis-4) Provide the payers of any interest and divi-21, 2002, before filing her 2001 tax return. Hercuss the requirements for filing an estate taxdends the name(s) and identification personal representative must file her 2001 re-return (Form 706). For information, see Formnumber(s) of the new owner(s). (See Inter- turn by April 15, 2002. Her final tax return is due706 and its instructions. est and Dividend Income (Forms 1099),April 15, 2003.
later.)
Useful Items For more information on the duties and re-Filing the return.The word “DECEASED,”You may want to see: sponsibilities of the personal representative, seethe decedent’s name, and the date of death
Duties under Personal Representative in Publi- should be written across the top of the tax return.Publication cation 559. In the name and address space, you should
❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, and write the name and address of the decedentNotifying the IRS.If you are appointed to actAdministrators and, if a joint return, the surviving spouse. If ain any fiduciary capacity for another, you must
joint return is not being filed, the decedent’sfile a written notice with the IRS stating this.Form (and Instructions) name should be written in the name space andForm 56 can be used for this purpose. The
the personal representative’s name and ad-❏ 56 Notice Concerning Fiduciary instructions and other requirements are given on
dress should be written in the remaining space.Relationship the back of the form.
Chapter 4 Decedents Page 35

Page 38 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. John Stone died in early 2002. He Generally, you must file the final income taxJoint return.Generally, the personal repre-
was survived by his wife Jane. The top of their return of the decedent with the Internal Revenue sentative and the surviving spouse can file a
final joint return on Form 1040, which includes Service Center for the place where you live. A joint return for the decedent and the surviving
the required information, is illustrated on the tax return for a decedent can be electronically spouse. However, the surviving spouse alone
next page. filed. can file the joint return if no personal representa-
tive has been appointed before the due date for
Signing the return.If a personal representa- filing the final joint return for the year of death.Request for prompt assessment (charge) oftive has been appointed, that person must sign This also applies to the return for the precedingtax. The IRS ordinarily has 3 years from thethe return. If it is a joint return, the surviving year if the decedent died after the close of thedate an income tax return is filed, or its due date,spouse must also sign it. preceding tax year and before the due date forwhichever is later, to charge any additional taxIf no personal representative has been ap- filing that return. The income of the decedentthat is due. However, as a personal representa-pointed, the surviving spouse (on a joint return) that was includible on his or her return for thetive, you may request a prompt assessment ofshould sign the return and write in the signature year up to the date of death (as explained undertax after the return has been filed. This reducesarea “Filing as surviving spouse.” See Joint re- Determining income and deductions, earlier)the time for making the assessment to 18turn, later. and the income of the surviving spouse for themonths from the date the written request forIf no personal representative has been ap- entire year must be included in the final jointprompt assessment was received. This requestpointed and if there is no surviving spouse, the return.can be made for any income tax return of theperson in charge of the decedent’s propertydecedent and for the income tax return of theA final joint return with the decedent cannotmust file and sign the return as “personal repre-decedent’s estate. This may permit a quickerbe filed if the surviving spouse remarried beforesentative.” settlement of the tax liability of the estate and anthe end of the year of the decedent’s death. The
earlier final distribution of the assets to the bene-filing status of the decedent in this instance isExample. Assume in the previous exampleficiaries. “married filing separate return.”that no personal representative has been ap-You can request prompt assessment of anypointed. The bottom of the final joint return, Personal representative may revoke jointof the decedent’s taxes (other than federal es-which shows that Jane is filing the return as the return election.A court-appointed personaltate taxes) for any years for which the statutorysurviving spouse, is illustrated on the next page. representative may revoke an election to file aperiod for assessment is open. This appliesjoint return that was previously made by theeven though the returns were filed before theThird party designee.You can check the surviving spouse alone. This is done by filing adecedent’s death.“Yes” box in the “Third Party Designee” area of separate return for the decedent within one yearyour return to authorize the IRS to discuss yourForm 4810. You can use Form 4810 to from the due date of the return (including anyreturn with a friend, family member, or any othermake this request. It must be filed separatelyextensions). The joint return made by the surviv-person you choose. This allows the IRS to callfrom any other document. The request shoulding spouse will then be regarded as the separatethe person you identified as your designee tobe filed with the IRS office where the return wasreturn of that spouse by excluding theanswer any questions that may arise during thefiled. If Form 4810 is not used, you must clearlydecedent’s items and refiguring the tax liability.processing of your return. It also allows yourindicate that you are making a request for
designee to perform certain actions. See yourprompt assessment under section 6501(d) ofHow To Reportincome tax package for details. the Internal Revenue Code. You must identify
the type of tax and the tax period for which theCertain IncomeClaiming a refund.Generally, a person whoprompt assessment is requested.is filing a return for a decedent and claiming a This section explains how to report certain typesFailure to report income.If you or the de-refund must file Form 1310 with the return. How- of income on the final return. The rules on in-cedent failed to report substantial amounts ofever, if the person claiming the refund is a sur- come discussed in the other chapters of thisgross income (more than 25% of the gross in-viving spouse filing a joint return with the publication also apply to a decedent’s final re-come reported on the return) or filed a false ordecedent, or a court-appointed or certified per- turn. See chapters 6 through 17, if they apply.fraudulent return, your request for prompt as-sonal representative filing an original return for
sessment will not shorten the period duringthe decedent, Form 1310 is not needed. The
which the IRS may assess the additional tax.personal representative must attach to the re- Interest and Dividend IncomeHowever, such a request may relieve you ofturn a copy of the court certificate showing that (Forms 1099)personal liability for the tax if you did not havehe or she was appointed the personal represen-
knowledge of the unpaid tax.tative. A Form 1099 should be received for the dece-If the personal representative is filing a claim dent to report interest and dividends earnedfor refund on Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi- Request for discharge from personal liabilitybefore death. These amounts must be includedvidual Income Tax Return, or Form 843, Claim for tax.An executor can make a written re-on the decedent’s final return. A separate Formfor Refund and Request for Abatement, and the quest for a discharge from personal liability for a1099 should show the interest and dividendscourt certificate has already been filed with thedecedent’s income and gift taxes. The requestearned after the date of the decedent’s deathIRS, then attach Form 1310 and write “Certifi-must be made after the returns for those taxesand paid to the estate or other recipient thatcate Previously Filed” at the bottom of the form.are filed. It must clearly indicate that the requestmust include those amounts on its return. You
is for discharge from personal liability under sec-can request corrected Forms 1099 if theseExample. Mr. Green died before filing histion 6905 of the Internal Revenue Code. For thisforms do not properly reflect the right recipient ortax return. You were appointed the personalpurpose, an executor is an executor or adminis-amounts.representative for Mr. Green’s estate and youtrator that is appointed, qualified, and actingFor example, a Form 1099–INT reportingfile his Form 1040 showing a refund due. You dowithin the United States. interest payable to the decedent may includenot need Form 1310 to claim the refund if youWithin 9 months after receipt of the request,income that should be reported on the final in-attach a copy of the court certificate showing youthe IRS will notify the executor of the amount ofcome tax return of the decedent, as well aswere appointed the personal representative.taxes due. If this amount is paid, the executorincome that the estate or other recipient shouldwill be discharged from personal liability for anyWhen and where to file.The final income tax report, either as income earned after death or asfuture deficiencies. If the IRS has not notified thereturn is due at the same time the decedent’s income in respect of the decedent (discussedexecutor, he or she will be discharged fromreturn would have been due had death not oc- later). For income earned after death, youpersonal liability at the end of the 9-month pe-curred. The final return for a decedent who was should ask the payer for a Form 1099 that prop-riod.a calendar year taxpayer is generally due April erly identifies the recipient (by name and identifi-
15 following the year death occurred. However, Even if the executor is discharged fromcation number) and the proper amount. If that is
when the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, personal liability, the IRS still will benot possible, or if the form includes an amount
or legal holiday, the return is filed timely if filedable to assess tax deficiencies againstthat represents income in respect of the dece-CAUTION
!
by the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday,the executor to the extent that he or she still hasdent, report the interest, as shown next under
or legal holiday. any of the decedent’s property. How to report.
Page 36 Chapter 4 Decedents

Page 39 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
DECEASED FEBRUARY 28, 2002JOHN S. STONE
765 00 4321
123 00 4567I
R
S
CAR-RT SORT**CR01
LP S29 30
JOHN S & JANE M STONE
1992 OAK ST 103
SHERIDAN WY 82801
Jane M. Stone 4/1/03 Engineer
/H12011
Filing as surviving spouse
Department of the Treasury—Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1–Dec. 31, 2002, or other tax year beginning , 2002, ending , 20
Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 21.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Spouse’s social security number
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Presidential
Election Campaign
1 Single
Filing Status Married filing jointly (even if only one had income)2
Form
/H17075
Label
IRS Use Only—Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 21.) If
the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent, enter
/H17073/H17073Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
(See page 21.)
(99)2002
4
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
Joint return?
See page 21.
Daytime phone number
()
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2002)
Designee’s
name /H17075
Do you want to allow another person to discuss this return with the IRS (see page 58)?Third Party
Designee Phone
no. /H17075()
Yes. Complete the following. No
Personal identification
number (PIN) /H17075
See U.S. savings bonds acquired from dece- would have included for the entire partnershipAccelerated Death Benefits
tax year.dent in Publication 559 for information on sav-
Accelerated death benefits are amounts re- On the decedent’s final return, include theings bond interest that may have to be reported
ceived under a life insurance contract before thedecedent’s distributive share of partnershipon the final return.
death of the insured individual. These benefitsitems for the following periods.
also include amounts received on the sale or
1) The partnership’s tax year that endedHow to report. If you are preparing the assignment of the contract to a viatical settle-
within or with the decedent’s final tax yeardecedent’s final return and you have received ament provider.
(the year ending on the date of death).Form 1099–INT for the decedent that includesGenerally, if the decedent received acceler-
amounts belonging to the decedent and to an-ated death benefits either on his or her own life2) The period, if any, from the end of the
or on the life of another person, those benefitsother recipient (the decedent’s estate or another partnership’s tax year in (1) to the
are not included in the decedent’s income. Thisbeneficiary), report the total interest shown on decedent’s date of death.
exclusion applies only if the insured was a termi-Form 1099–INT on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or
nally or chronically ill individual. For more infor-on Schedule B (Form 1040). Next, enter a sub- S corporation income.If the decedent was a
mation, see Accelerated death benefits undertotal of the interest shown on Forms 1099 and shareholder in an S corporation, include on the
Gifts, Insurance, and Inheritances in Publicationfinal return the decedent’s share of the Sthe interest reportable from other sources for559. corporation’s items of income, loss, deduction,which you did not receive Forms 1099. Then,
and credit for the following periods.show any interest (including any interest you
receive as a nominee) belonging to another re-Business Income 1) The corporation’s tax year that endedcipient separately and subtract it from the sub- within or with the decedent’s final tax year
total. Identify this adjustment as a “NomineeThis section discusses some of the business (the year ending on the date of death).
Distribution” or other appropriate designation. income which may have to be included on the
2) The period, if any, from the end of thefinal return.Report dividend income for which you re- corporation’s tax year in (1) to the
ceived a Form 1099–DIV, Dividends and Distri- decedent’s date of death.Partnership income. The death of a partnerbutions, on the appropriate schedule using thecloses the partnership’s tax year for that partner.same procedure. Generally, it does not close the partnership’s taxSelf-employment income. Include self-em-
year for the remaining partners. The decedent’s ployment income actually or constructively re-Note. If the decedent received amounts as adistributive share of partnership items must be ceived or accrued, depending on the decedent’s
nominee, you must give the actual owner a Formfigured as if the partnership’s tax year ended on accounting method. (See Income To Include,
1099, unless the owner is the decedent’s the date the partner died. To avoid an interim under Final Return for Decedent, in Publication
spouse. See General Instructions for Formsclosing of the partnership books, the partners 559 for an explanation of the concept.) For
1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G, for more infor-can agree to estimate the decedent’s distributiveself-employment tax purposes only, the
mation on filing forms 1099. share by prorating the amounts the partner decedent’s self-employment income will include
Chapter 4 Decedents Page 37

Page 40 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the decedent’s distributive share of a Standard Deduction
partnership’s income or loss through the end of Tax Effect on OthersIf you do not itemize deductions on the finalthe month in which death occurred. For this
return, the full amount of the appropriate stan-purpose, the partnership income or loss is con- This section contains information about the ef-dard deduction is allowed regardless of the datesidered to be earned ratably over the fect of an individual’s death on the income taxof death. For information on the appropriatepartnership’s tax year. For more information on liability of the survivors (including the widow orstandard deduction, see chapter 21.how to compute self-employment income, see widower and any beneficiaries) and the estate.Publication 533, Self-Employment Tax. A survivor should coordinate the filing of his or
her own tax return with the personal representa-Itemized Deductions tive handling the decedent’s estate. The per-
Coverdell Education Savings sonal representative can coordinate filingIf the total of the decedent’s itemized deductionsAccount (ESA) status, exemptions, income, and deductions sois more than the decedent’s standard deduction,that the decedent’s final return and the incomethe federal income tax will generally be less ifGenerally, the balance in a Coverdell ESA must tax returns of the survivors and the estate are allyou claim itemized deductions on the final re-be distributed within 30 days after the individual filed correctly.turn. See chapters 23 through 30 for the types offor whom the account was established reaches
expenses that are allowed as itemized deduc-age 30, or dies, whichever is earlier. The treat- Gifts and inheritances.Property received astions.ment of the Coverdell ESA at the death of an a gift, bequest, or inheritance is not included in
individual under age 30 depends on who ac- your income. However, if property you receive inMedical expenses. Medical expenses paidquires the interest in the account. If the this manner later produces income, such asbefore death by the decedent are deductible,decedent’s estate acquires the interest, the interest, dividends, or rent, that income is taxa-subject to limits, on the final income tax return ifearnings on the account must be included on the ble to you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance youdeductions are itemized. This includes ex-final income tax return of the decedent. The receive is the income from property, that incomepenses for the decedent as well as for theestate tax deduction, discussed later, does not is taxable to you.decedent’s spouse and dependents.apply to this amount. If a beneficiary acquires If you inherited the right to receive income in
the interest, see the discussion under Income in Qualified medical expenses are not de-respect of the decedent, see Income in Respect
Respect of the Decedent, later. ductible if paid with a tax-free distribu-of the Decedent, later.
tion from an Archer MSA.The age 30 limit does not apply if the individ-CAUTION
!
Joint return by surviving spouse.A surviv-ual for whom the account was established, orFor information on certain medical expensesing spouse can file a joint return for the year ofthe beneficiary that acquires the account, is anthat were not paid before death, see Decedent in death and may qualify for special tax rates forindividual with special needs. This includes anchapter 23. the following 2 years. For more information, seeindividual who because of a physical, mental, or
Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child inemotional condition (including a learning disabil-Unrecovered investment in pension.If the chapter 2.ity) requires additional time to complete his ordecedent was receiving a pension or annuityher education. (with an annuity starting date after 1986) andDecedent as your dependent. If the dece-For more information on Coverdell ESAs,died without a surviving annuitant, you can takedent qualified as your dependent for the part ofsee Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education.a deduction on the decedent’s final return for thethe year before death, you can claim the exemp-amount of the decedent’s investment in the pen-tion for the dependent on your tax return, regard-sion or annuity contract that remained unrecov-less of when death occurred during the year.Archer MSA ered at death. The deduction is a miscellaneousIf the decedent was your qualifying child, youitemized deduction that is not subject to the 2%may be able to claim the child tax credit. SeeThe treatment of an Archer MSA or a limit on adjusted gross income. See chapter 30.chapter 35.Medicare+Choice MSA, at the death of the ac-
count holder, depends on who acquires the in-
terest in the account. If the decedent’s estate
Income in RespectDeduction for Lossesacquires the interest, the fair market value of the of the Decedentassets in the account on the date of death isA decedent’s net operating loss deduction from
included in income on the decedent’s final re-a prior year and any capital losses (includingAll income that the decedent would have re-turn. The estate tax deduction, discussed later,capital loss carryovers) can be deducted only onceived had death not occurred and that was notdoes not apply to this amount. the decedent’s final income tax return. A netproperly includible on the final return, discussedIf a beneficiary acquires the interest, see theoperating loss on the decedent’s final incomeearlier, is income in respect of the decedent.discussion under Income in Respect of the De-tax return can be carried back to prior years (see
If the decedent is a specified terroristcedent, later. For more information on ArcherPublication 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs)
victim (see Publication 3920, Tax Re-MSAs, see Publication 969, Medical Savings for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts). You cannot
lief for Victims of Terrorist Attacks), anyAccounts (MSAs). deduct any unused net operating loss or capital
CAUTION
!
income received after the date of death andloss on the estate’s income tax return.
before the end of the decedent’s tax year (deter-Exemptions, Deductions, mined without regard to death) is excluded from
the recipient’s gross income. This exclusionand Credits Credits
does not apply to certain income.
Generally, the rules for exemptions, deductions,Any of the tax credits discussed in this publica-
and credits allowed to an individual also apply totion also apply to the final return if the decedent
the decedent’s final income tax return. Show onwas eligible for the credits at the time of death.How To Reportthe final return deductible items the decedentThese credits are discussed in chapters 33
paid (or accrued, if the decedent reported de-through 38. Income in respect of a decedent must be in-ductions on an accrual method) before death. cluded in the income of one of the following.Tax withheld and estimated payments.
There may have been income tax withheld from• The decedent’s estate, if the estate re-
the decedent’s pay, pensions, or annuities ceives it.Exemptions
before death, and the decedent may have paid• The beneficiary, if the right to income isYou can claim the decedent’s personal exemp- estimated income tax. To get credit for these taxpassed directly to the beneficiary and thetion on the final income tax return. If the dece-payments, you must claim them on the beneficiary receives it.dent was another person’s dependent (for decedent’s final return. For more information,
example, a parent’s), you cannot claim the per- see Credit for Withholding and Estimated Tax in • Any person to whom the estate properly
sonal exemption on the decedent’s final return. chapter 5. distributes the right to receive it.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Decedents

Page 41 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you have to include income in re-in respect of the decedent. Interest for a periodRoth IRAs. Qualified distributions from a Roth
spect of the decedent in your grossafter the decedent’s death that becomes pay- IRA are not subject to tax. A distribution made to
income, you may be able to claim aable on the certificates after death is not income a beneficiary or to the Roth IRA owner’s estate
TIP
deduction for the estate tax paid on that income.in respect of the decedent, but is taxable income on or after the date of death is a qualified distri-
For more information, see Estate Tax Deduc- includible in the income of the respective recipi- bution if it is made after the 5-year tax period
tion, later. ents. beginning with the first tax year in which a contri-
bution was made to any Roth IRA of the owner.Installment obligations.If the decedent had
Example 1. Frank Johnson owned and op- A distribution cannot be a qualified dis-sold property using the installment method and
erated an apple orchard. He used the cash tribution unless it is made after 2002.you have the right to collect the payments, use
method of accounting. He sold and deliveredthe same gross profit percentage the decedentCAUTION
!
1,000 bushels of apples to a canning factory forwould have used to figure the part of each pay-
Generally, the entire interest in the Roth IRA$2,000, but did not receive payment before hisment that represents profit. Include in your in-
must be distributed by the end of the fifth calen-death. The proceeds from the sale are income income the same profit the decedent would have
dar year after the year of the owner’s deathrespect of the decedent. When the estate wasincluded had death not occurred. For more infor-
unless the interest is payable to a designatedsettled, payment had not been made and themation on installment sales, see Publication
beneficiary over his or her life or life expectancy.estate transferred the right to the payment to his537, Installment Sales.
If paid as an annuity, the distributions must be-widow. When Frank’s widow collects the $2,000,If you dispose of an installment obligation
gin before the end of the calendar year followingshe must include that amount in her return. It isacquired from a decedent (other than by transfer
the year of death. If the sole beneficiary is thenot to be reported on the final return of theto the obligor), the rules explained in Publication
decedent’s spouse, the spouse can delay thedecedent or on the return of the estate. 537 for figuring gain or loss on the disposition
distributions until the decedent would haveapply to you.
reached age 701/2 or can treat the Roth IRA asExample 2. Assume the same facts as inInherited IRAs.If a beneficiary receives ahis or her own Roth IRA.Example 1, except that Frank used an accruallump-sum distribution from a traditional IRA hePart of any distribution to a beneficiary that ismethod of accounting. The amount accrued or she inherited, all or some of it may be taxable.not a qualified distribution may be includible infrom the sale of the apples would be included onThe distribution is taxable in the year receivedthe beneficiary’s income. Generally, the part in-his final return. Neither the estate nor the widowas income in respect of a decedent up to thecludible is the earnings in the Roth IRA. Earn-will realize income in respect of the decedentdecedent’s taxable balance. This is the ings attributable to the period ending with thewhen the money is later paid. decedent’s balance at the time of death, includ-decedent’s date of death are income in respect
ing unrealized appreciation and income accruedof the decedent. Additional earnings are theExample 3. Cathy O’Neil was entitled to ato date of death, minus any basis (nondeductibleincome of the beneficiary.large salary payment at the date of her death.contributions). Amounts distributed that areFor more information on Roth IRAs, seeThe amount was to be paid in five annual install-more than the decedent’s entire IRA balancePublication 590.ments. The estate, after collecting two install-(including taxable and nontaxable amounts) atments, distributed the right to the remainingthe time of death are the income of the benefi-Coverdell education savings account (ESA).installments to you, the beneficiary. The pay-ciary. Generally, the balance in a Coverdell ESA mustments are income in respect of the decedent.If the beneficiary of a traditional IRA is thebe distributed within 30 days after the individualNone of the payments were includible in Cathy’sdecedent’s surviving spouse who properly rollsfor whom the account was established reachesfinal return. The estate must include in its in-over the distribution into another traditional IRAage 30 or dies, whichever is earlier. The treat-come the two installments it received, and youor into a Roth IRA, the distribution is not cur-ment of the Coverdell ESA at the death of anmust include in your income each of the threerently taxed. A surviving spouse can also rollindividual under age 30 depends on who ac-installments as you receive them. over tax free the taxable part of the distributionquires the interest in the account. If the
into a qualified plan, section 403(b) annuity, ordecedent’s estate acquires the interest, see theTransferring your right to income.If you
section 457 plan. discussion under How To Report Certain In-transfer your right to income in respect of a
come, earlier.decedent, you must include in your income the
Example 1. At the time of his death, Greggreater of: The age 30 limit does not apply if theowned a traditional IRA. All of the contributionsindividual for whom the account was• The amount you receive for the right, orby Greg to the IRA had been deductible contri- established, or the beneficiary that ac-CAUTION
!
butions. Greg’s nephew, Mark, was the sole• The fair market value of the right at the quires the account, is an individual with specialbeneficiary of the IRA. The entire balance of thetime of the transfer. needs. This includes an individual who becauseIRA, including income accruing before and afterof a physical, mental, or emotional conditionGreg’s death, was distributed to Mark in a lumpFair market value (FMV).FMV is the price (including a learning disability) requires addi-sum. Mark must include the total amount re-at which the property would change hands be- tional time to complete his or her education.ceived in his income. The portion of thetween a buyer and a seller, neither having to buy
lump-sum distribution that equals the amount ofIf the decedent’s spouse or other familyor sell, and both having reasonable knowledge
the balance in the IRA at Greg’s death, includingmember is the designated beneficiary of theof all necessary facts.
the income earned before death, is income indecedent’s account, the Coverdell ESA be-Giving your right to income as a gift.If respect of the decedent. Mark may take a de-comes that person’s Coverdell ESA. It is subjectyou give your right to receive income in respectduction for any federal estate taxes that wereto the rules discussed in Publication 970.of a decedent as a gift, you must include in yourpaid on that portion. Any other beneficiary (including a spouse orincome the fair market value of the right at the family member who is not the designated benefi-time you make the gift. Example 2. Assume the same facts as inciary) must include in income the earnings por-
Example 1, except that some of Greg’s contribu-tion of the distribution. Any balance remaining atType of income. The character or type of in-
tions to the IRA had been nondeductible contri-the close of the 30-day period is deemed to become that you receive in respect of a decedent
butions. To determine the amount to include indistributed at that time. The amount included inis the same as it would be to the decedent if he
income, Mark must subtract the total nondeduct-income is reduced by any qualified educationor she were alive. If the income would have been
ible contributions made by Greg from the totalexpenses of the decedent that are paid by thea capital gain to the decedent, it will be a capital
amount received (including the income that wasbeneficiary within 1 year after the decedent’sgain to you.
earned in the IRA both before and after Greg’sdate of death. An estate tax deduction, dis-
Interest accrued on savings certificates.death). Income in respect of the decedent is thecussed later, applies to the amount included in
The interest accrued on savings certificates (re- total amount included in income less the incomeincome by a beneficiary other than the
deemable after death without forfeiture of inter- earned after Greg’s death. decedent’s spouse or family member.
est) that is for the period from the date of the last For more information on inherited IRAs, see
interest payment to the date of the decedent’s Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-Archer MSA. The treatment of an Archer MSA
death, but not received as of that date, is incomements (IRAs). or a Medicare+Choice MSA, at the death of the
Chapter 4 Decedents Page 39

Page 42 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
account holder, depends on who acquires the income tax deduction is allowed to the recipientDeductions in Respectinterest in the account. If the decedent’s estate for the estate tax paid on the income.
acquires the interest, see the earlier discussionof the Decedent The deduction for estate tax can be claimed
under How To Report Certain Income. only for the same tax year in which the income inItems such as business expenses, income-pro-If the decedent’s spouse is the designated respect of the decedent must be included in theducing expenses, interest, and taxes, for whichbeneficiary of the account, the account becomes recipient’s income. (This also is true for income
the decedent was liable but that are not properlythat spouse’s Archer MSA. It is subject to the in respect of a prior decedent.)
rules discussed in Publication 969. allowable as deductions on the decedent’s finalYou can claim the deduction only as a mis-Any other beneficiary (including a spouseincome tax return will be allowed as a deductioncellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule Athat is not the designated beneficiary) must in-to one of the following when paid. (Form 1040). This deduction is not subject to theclude in income the fair market value of the 2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions• The estate.assets in the account on the decedent’s date of as discussed in chapter 30.death. This amount must be reported for the• The person who acquired an interest in If the income in respect of the decedent isbeneficiary’s tax year that includes the the decedent’s property (subject to suchcapital gain income, you must reduce the gaindecedent’s date of death. The amount includedobligations) because of the decedent’sbut not below zero, by any deduction for estatein income is reduced by any qualified medicaldeath, if the estate was not liable for thetax paid on such gain. This applies in figuring theexpenses for the decedent that are paid by theobligation. following.beneficiary within 1 year after the decedent’s
date of death. An estate tax deduction, dis- • The maximum tax on net capital gain.cussed later, applies to the amount included inEstate Tax Deduction • The 50% exclusion for gain on small busi-income by a beneficiary other than the
ness stock.decedent’s spouse. Income that a decedent had a right to receive is
included in the decedent’s gross estate and is• The limitation on net capital losses.Other income. For examples of other income
subject to estate tax. This income in respect of asituations concerning decedents, see Specific
decedent is also taxed when received by theFor more information, see Estate Tax Deduc-Types of Income in Respect of a Decedent in
recipient (estate or beneficiary). However, antion in Publication 559.Publication 559.
Page 40 Chapter 4 Decedents

Page 43 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax this way. You may have to pay esti-Salaries and Wagesmated tax if you receive income such as
dividends, interest, capital gains, rent, andIncome tax is withheld from the pay of most5. royalties. Estimated tax is used to pay notemployees. Your pay includes your regular pay,only income tax, but self-employment taxbonuses, commissions, and vacation al-and alternative minimum tax as well. lowances. It also includes reimbursements and
other expense allowances paid under a nonac-Tax Withholding This chapter explains both of these methods.countable plan. See Supplemental Wages,In addition, it explains: later, for more information about reimburse-
and Estimated ments and allowances paid under a nonac-• Credit for withholding and estimated
countable plan.tax. When you file your 2002 income tax
return, take credit for all the income taxTax Military retirees.Military retirement pay iswithheld from your salary, wages, pen-
treated in the same manner as regular pay forsions, etc., and for the estimated tax you
income tax withholding purposes, even though itpaid for 2002, and
is treated as a pension or annuity for other taxImportant Changes • Underpayment penalty. If you did not purposes.
pay enough tax during the year eitherfor 2003 through withholding or by making esti-Household workers. If you are a household
mated tax payments, you may have to payworker, you can ask your employer to withholdTax law changes for 2003.When you figure a penalty. The IRS usually can figure thisincome tax from your pay. Tax is withheld only ifhow much income tax you want withheld from penalty for you. See Underpayment Pen- you want it withheld and your employer agreesyour pay and when you figure your estimated alty at the end of this chapter. to withhold it. If you do not have enough incometax, consider tax law changes effective in 2003. tax withheld, you may have to make estimatedSee Important Changes for 2003 in the front of tax payments, as discussed later under Esti-this publication, or get Publication 553, High- Useful Items mated Tax.lights of 2002 Tax Changes. You may want to see:
Farmworkers. Income tax is generally with-Estimated tax safe harbor for higher incomePublication held from your cash wages for work on a farmtaxpayers. For installment payments for tax unless your employer both:years beginning in 2003, the estimated tax safe❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
harbor for higher income individuals (other than 1) Pays you cash wages of less than $150❏ 553 Highlights of 2002 Tax Changesfarmers and fishermen) has been modified. If during the year, andyour adjusted gross income was more than ❏ 919 How Do I Adjust My Tax
2) Has expenditures for agricultural labor to-$150,000 ($75,000 if you are married filing a Withholding?
taling less than $2,500 during the year.separate return), you will have to deposit the
smaller of 90% of your expected tax for 2003 orForm (and Instructions) If you receive either noncash wages or cash110%  of the tax shown on your 2002 return to wages not subject to withholding, you can ask❏ W–4 Employee’s Withholding Allowanceavoid an estimated tax penalty. your employer to withhold income tax. If yourCertificate employer does not agree to withhold tax, or if not
❏ W–4P Withholding Certificate for enough is withheld, you may have to make esti-
Pension or Annuity Payments mated tax payments, as discussed later under
Important Reminder Estimated Tax.❏ W–4S Request for Federal Income Tax
Withholding From Sick Pay
Payment of estimated tax by electronic ❏ W–4V Voluntary Withholding Request Determining Amountfunds withdrawal. You may be able to pay
your estimated tax by authorizing an automatic of Tax Withheld❏ 1040–ES Estimated Tax for Individuals
withdrawal from your checking or savings ac-❏ 2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax byThe amount of income tax your employer with-count. For more information, see Payment by Individuals, Estates, and Trustsholds from your regular pay depends on twoElectronic Funds Withdrawal in chapter 2 of
things. Publication 505.
1) The amount you earn.
2) The information you give your employer on
Withholding Form W–4.Introduction
Form W–4 includes three types of informa-This chapter discusses how to pay your tax asThis chapter discusses withholding on thesetion that your employer will use to figure youryou earn or receive income during the year. Intypes of income: withholding. general, the federal income tax is a pay-as-• Salaries and wages,you-go tax. There are two ways to pay as you 1) Whether to withhold at the single rate or atgo. • Tips, the lower married rate.
• Withholding. If you are an employee, • Taxable fringe benefits, 2) How many withholding allowances youyour employer probably withholds income claim. (Each allowance reduces the• Sick pay,tax from your pay. Tax may also be with- amount withheld.)held from certain other income — includ-• Pensions and annuities,
ing pensions, bonuses, commissions, and 3) Whether you want an additional amount• Gambling winnings,gambling winnings. In each case, the withheld.
amount withheld is paid to the Internal• Unemployment compensation, and If your income is low enough that you will notRevenue Service (IRS) in your name. • Certain federal payments. have to pay income tax for the year, you may be
• Estimated tax. If you do not pay your tax exempt from withholding. This is explainedThis chapter explains in detail the rules for with-through withholding, or do not pay enough under Exemption From Withholding, later.holding tax from each of these types of income.tax that way, you might have to pay esti-
mated tax. People who are in business for This chapter also covers backup withholdingNote. You must specify a filing status and a
themselves generally will have to pay their on interest, dividends, and other payments. number of withholding allowances on Form
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 41

Page 44 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
W–4. You cannot specify only a dollar amount claim. The worksheets are for your own records.• You have nonwage income, such as inter-
of withholding. Do not give them to your employer. est, dividends, alimony, unemployment
compensation, or self-employment in-You do not have to use the Form W-4 work-New job. When you start a new job, you must come.sheets if you use a more accurate method offill out Form W–4 and give it to your employer.figuring the number of withholding allowances.• You will owe additional amounts with yourYour employer should have copies of the form. IfSee Alternative method of figuring withholdingreturn, such as self-employment tax.you need to change the information, you must fillallowances under Completing Form W–4 andout a new form. • Your withholding is based on obsoleteWorksheets in chapter 1 of Publication 505 forIf you work only part of the year (for example, Form W–4 information for a substantialmore information.you start working after the beginning of the part of the year.Two jobs. If you have income from two jobsyear), too much tax may be withheld. You may
at the same time, complete only one set of Formbe able to avoid overwithholding if your em- To make sure you are getting the right amountW–4 worksheets. Then split your allowancesployer agrees to use the part-year method. See of tax withheld, get Publication 919. It will helpbetween the Forms W–4 for each job. You can-Part-year method in chapter 1 of Publication 505 you compare the total tax to be withheld duringnot claim the same allowances with more thanfor more information. the year with the tax you can expect to figure onone employer at the same time. You can claimyour return. It also will help you determine howChanging your withholding. Events during all your allowances with one employer and nonemuch additional withholding, if any, is neededthe year may change your marital status or thewith the other, or divide them any other way.each payday to avoid owing tax when you fileexemptions, adjustments, deductions, or credits your return. If you do not have enough tax with-you expect to claim on your return. When thisMarried individuals.If both you and your held, you may have to make estimated tax pay-happens, you may need to give your employer aspouse are employed and expect to file a jointments, as explained under Estimated Tax, later.new Form W–4 to change your withholding sta-return, figure your withholding allowances using
tus or number of allowances. your combined income, adjustments, deduc-
If the event changes your withholding statustions, exemptions, and credits. Use only one setRules Your Employeror the number of allowances you are claiming,of worksheets. You can divide your total al-
Must Followyou must give your employer a new Form W–4lowances any way, but you cannot claim an
within 10 days after either of the following. allowance that your spouse also claims. It may be helpful for you to know some of theIf you and your spouse expect to file sepa-withholding rules your employer must follow.1) Your divorce, if you have been claimingrate returns, figure your allowances separatelyThese rules can affect how to fill out your Formmarried status. based on your own individual income, adjust-W-4 and how to handle problems that may arise.ments, deductions, exemptions, and credits.2) Any event that decreases the number of
New Form W–4. When you start a new job,withholding allowances you can claim.
Personal allowances worksheet. Use the your employer should give you a Form W–4 to
Generally, you can submit a new Form W–4Personal Allowances Worksheet on page 1 of fill out. Your employer will use the information
whenever you wish to change the number ofForm W–4 to figure your withholding al- you give on the form to figure your withholding
your withholding allowances for any other rea-lowances for exemptions and any special al-beginning with your first payday.
son. lowances that apply. If you later fill out a new Form W–4, your
employer can put it into effect as soon as possi-Changing your withholding for 2004.If
Deductions and adjustments worksheet. ble. The deadline for putting it into effect is theevents in 2003 will decrease the number of your
Fill out this worksheet to adjust the number ofstart of the first payroll period ending 30 or morewithholding allowances for 2004, you must give
your withholding allowances for deductions, ad-days after you turn it in.your employer a new Form W–4 by December
justments to income, and tax credits. The De-1, 2003. If the event occurs in December 2003, No Form W–4. If you do not give your em-ductions and Adjustments Worksheet is on pagesubmit a new Form W–4 within 10 days. ployer a completed Form W–4, your employer2 of Form W–4. Chapter 1 of Publication 505must withhold at the highest rate—as if youCumulative wage method. If you change the explains this worksheet. were single and claimed no allowances.number of your withholding allowances during
Two-earner/two-job worksheet. You maythe year, too much or too little tax may have Repaying withheld tax.If you find you are
need to complete this worksheet if you have twobeen withheld for the period before you made having too much tax withheld because you did
jobs or a working spouse. You can also add tothe change. You may be able to compensate for not claim all the withholding allowances you are
the amount, if any, on line 8 of this worksheet,this if your employer agrees to use the cumula- entitled to, you should give your employer a new
any additional withholding necessary to covertive wage withholding method for the rest of the Form W–4. Your employer cannot repay any of
any amount you expect to owe other than in-year. You must ask in writing that your employer the tax previously withheld.
come tax, such as self-employment tax.use this method. However, if your employer has withheld
To be eligible, you must have been paid for more than the correct amount of tax for the Form
the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi- W–4 you have in effect, you do not have to fill
Getting the Right Amountweekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year. out a new Form W–4 to have your withholding
lowered to the correct amount. Your employerof Tax WithheldChecking your withholding.After you have can repay the amount that was incorrectly with-given your employer a Form W–4, you can In most situations, the tax withheld from yourheld. If you are not repaid, your Form W–2 willcheck to see whether the amount of tax withheldpay will be close to the tax you figure on yourreflect the full amount actually withheld.from your pay is too little or too much. Seereturn if you follow these two rules.
Getting the Right Amount of Tax Withheld, later.
If too much or too little tax is being withheld, you 1) You accurately complete all the FormExemption From Withholdingshould give your employer a new Form W–4 to W–4 worksheets that apply to you.
change your withholding. If you claim exemption from withholding, your2) You give your employer a new Form W–4
employer will not withhold federal income taxwhen changes occur.Note. You cannot give your employer a pay- from your wages. The exemption applies only to
ment to cover withholding for past pay periods or But because the worksheets and withholdingincome tax, not to social security or Medicare
a payment for estimated tax. methods do not account for all possible situa- tax.
tions, you may not be getting the right amountYou can claim exemption from withholding
withheld. This is most likely to happen in thefor 2003 only if both the following situations
following situations.
Completing Form W–4 apply.
and Worksheets • You are married and both you and your 1) For 2002 you had a right to a refund of allspouse work.Form W–4 has worksheets to help you figure federal income tax withheld because you
how many withholding allowances you can • You have more than one job at a time. had no tax liability.
Page 42 Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 45 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) For 2003 you expect a refund of all federal pay plus your reported tips. Your employer
1) You make statements or claim withholdingincome tax withheld because you expect should refund to you any incorrectly withheld
allowances on your Form W–4 that reduceto have no tax liability. tax. See Allocated Tips in chapter 7 for more
the amount of tax withheld. information.
2) You have no reasonable basis for thoseStudent. If you are a student, you are not
statements or allowances at the time youautomatically exempt. See chapter 1 to see Taxable Fringe Benefits
prepare your Form W–4.whether you must file a return. If you work only
The value of certain fringe benefits you receivepart time or only during the summer, you mayThere is also a criminal penalty for willfully
qualify for exemption from withholding. from your employer is considered part of yoursupplying false or fraudulent information on your
pay. Your employer generally must withhold in-Form W–4 or for willfully failing to supply infor-Age 65 or older or blind.If you are 65 or older come tax on these benefits from your regularmation that would increase the amount withheld.or blind, use one of the worksheets in chapter 1 pay for the period the benefits are paid or con-The penalty upon conviction can be either a fineof Publication 505, under Exemption From With- sidered paid.of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to oneholding, to help you decide whether you can For information on fringe benefits, see Fringeyear, or both.claim exemption from withholding. Do not use Benefits under Employee Compensation inThese penalties will apply if you deliberatelyeither worksheet if you will itemize deductions or chapter 6.and knowingly falsify your Form W–4 in anclaim exemptions for dependents or claim taxattempt to reduce or eliminate the proper with-Your employer can choose not to withholdcredits on your 2003 return. See Itemizing de-holding of taxes. A simple error — an honestincome tax on the value of your personal use ofductions or claiming exemptions or tax credits in mistake — will not result in one of these penal-a car, truck, or other highway motor vehiclePublication 505. ties. For example, a person who has tried toprovided by your employer. Your employer must
figure the number of withholding allowances cor-notify you if this choice is made.Claiming exemption from withholding.To rectly, but claims seven when the proper num-For more information on withholding on taxa-claim exemption, you must give your employer aber is six, will not be charged a W–4 penalty.ble fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of PublicationForm W–4. Print “EXEMPT” on line 7.
505.Your employer must send the IRS a copy of
Tipsyour Form W–4 if you claim exemption from
withholding and your pay is expected to usually Sick PayThe tips you receive while working on your jobbe more than $200 a week. If it turns out that youare considered part of your pay. You must in-do not qualify for exemption, the IRS will send Sick pay is a payment to you to replace yourclude your tips on your tax return on the sameboth you and your employer a written notice. regular wages while you are temporarily absentline as your regular pay. However, tax is notfrom work due to sickness or personal injury. ToIf you claim exemption, but later your situa-withheld directly from tip income, as it is fromqualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a plantion changes so that you will have to pay incomeyour regular pay. Nevertheless, your employerto which your employer is a party.tax after all, you must file a new Form W–4will take into account the tips you report whenwithin 10 days after the change. If you claim If you receive sick pay from your employer orfiguring how much to withhold from your regularexemption in 2003, but you expect to owe in- an agent of your employer, income tax must bepay.come tax for 2004, you must file a new Form withheld. An agent who does not pay regularSee chapter 7 for information on reportingW–4 by December 1, 2003. wages to you may choose to withhold incomeyour tips to your employer. For more information
tax at a flat 27% rate.on the withholding rules for tip income, see Pub-An exemption is good for only one year.
However, if you receive sick pay from a thirdlication 531, Reporting Tip Income.You must give your employer a new Form W–4
party who is not acting as an agent of yourby February 15 each year to continue your ex-
How employer figures amount to withhold. employer, income tax will be withheld only if youemption.
The tips you report to your employer are countedchoose to have it withheld. See Form W–4S,
as part of your income for the month you reportlater.
them. Your employer can figure your withholdingIf you receive payments under a plan inSupplemental Wages in either of two ways. which your employer does not participate (such
Supplemental wages include bonuses, commis- as an accident or health plan where you paid all1) By withholding at the regular rate on thesions, overtime pay, and certain sick pay. The the premiums), the payments are not sick paysum of your pay plus your reported tips.payer can figure withholding on supplemental and usually are not taxable.
wages using the same method used for your 2) By withholding at the regular rate on your
regular wages. If these payments are identifiedpay plus an amount equal to 27% of yourUnion agreements. If you receive sick payseparately from your regular wages, your em-reported tips. under a collective bargaining agreement be-ployer or other payer of supplemental wages tween your union and your employer, the agree-can withhold income tax from these wages at aNot enough pay to cover taxes.If your regu-ment may determine the amount of income taxflat rate of 27%. lar pay is not enough for your employer to with-withholding. See your union representative or
hold all the tax (including social security tax,your employer for more information.Expense allowances. Reimbursements or Medicare tax, or railroad retirement tax) due onother expense allowances paid by your em-your pay plus your tips, you can give your em-Form W–4S. If you choose to have incomeployer under a nonaccountable plan are treatedployer money to cover the shortage. tax withheld from sick pay paid by a third party,as supplemental wages. If you do not give your employer money tosuch as an insurance company, you must fill outReimbursements or other expense al- cover the shortage, your employer will first with-Form W–4S, Request for Federal Income Taxlowances paid under an accountable plan thathold as much social security tax, Medicare tax,Withholding From Sick Pay. Its instructions con-are more than your proven expenses are treatedor railroad retirement tax as possible, up to thetain a worksheet you can use to figure theas paid under a nonaccountable plan if you doproper amount, and then withhold income tax upamount you want withheld. They also explainnot return the excess payments within a reason-to the full amount of your pay. If not enough taxrestrictions that may apply.able period of time. is withheld, you may have to make estimated taxGive the completed form to the payer of yourFor more information about accountable andpayments. When you file your return, you alsosick pay. The payer must withhold according tononaccountable expense allowance plans, seemay have to pay any social security tax, Medi-your directions on the form.Reimbursements in chapter 28. care tax, or railroad retirement tax your em-If you do not request withholding on Formployer could not withhold. W–4S, or if you do not have enough tax with-
held, you may have to make estimated tax pay-Allocated tips.Your employer should notPenalties
ments. If you do not pay enough estimated tax orwithhold income tax, social security tax, Medi-
have enough income tax withheld, you mayYou may have to pay a penalty of $500 if both of care tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allo-
have to pay a penalty.the following apply. cated tips. Withholding is based only on your
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 43

Page 46 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
These payments generally are not subject toPensions and Annuities Unemployment withholding. However, “backup” withholding is
Compensation required in certain situations. Backup withhold-Income tax usually will be withheld from your ing can apply to most kinds of payments that arepension or annuity distributions unless youYou can choose to have income tax withheldreported on Form 1099.choose not to have it withheld. This rule appliesfrom unemployment compensation. To make For 2003, the payer must withhold at a flatto distributions from: this choice, you will have to fill out Form W–4V, 30% rate in the following situations.Voluntary Withholding Request, (or a similar• A traditional individual retirement arrange-
form provided by the payer) and give it to the• You do not give the payer your TIN in thement (IRA),
payer. The amount withheld will be 10% of eachrequired manner.• A life insurance company under an en-payment. • The IRS notifies the payer that the TINdowment, annuity, or life insurance con-Unemployment compensation is taxable. So, you gave is incorrect.tract, if you do not have income tax withheld, you may
• You are required, but fail, to certify that• A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan,have to make estimated tax payments. See Esti-
you are not subject to backup withholding.mated Tax, later.• A stock bonus plan, and If you do not pay enough tax either through• The IRS notifies the payer to start with-• Any other plan that defers the time youwithholding or estimated tax, you may have toholding on interest or dividends becausereceive compensation. pay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty, you have underreported interest or divi-later, for information. dends on your income tax return. The IRSThe amount withheld depends on whether will do this only after it has mailed you fouryou receive payments spread out over more notices over at least a 120-day period.Federal Paymentsthan one year (periodic payments), within one
year (nonperiodic payments), or as an eligibleYou can choose to have income tax withheld See Backup Withholding in chapter 1 of Publi-rollover distribution (ERD). You cannot choosefrom certain federal payments you receive.cation 505 for more information.not to have income tax withheld from an ERD.These payments are:
Penalties.There are civil and criminal penal-More information. For more information on 1) Social security benefits, ties for giving false information to avoid backuptaxation of annuities and distributions (including withholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi-2) Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,eligible rollover distributions) from qualified re- nal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up totirement plans, see chapter 11. For information3) Commodity credit loans you choose to in-$1,000 or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or both.on IRAs, see chapter 18. For more informationclude in your gross income, and
on withholding on pensions and annuities, in-
4) Payments under the Agricultural Act ofcluding a discussion of  Form W–4P, see Pen-
1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et. seq.), or title II ofsions and Annuities in chapter 1 of Publication
the Disaster Assistance Act of 1988, as505. Estimated Tax
amended, that are treated as insurance
proceeds and that you receive because:Estimated tax is the method used to pay tax onGambling Winnings income that is not subject to withholding. Thisa) Your crops were destroyed or damagedincludes income from self-employment, interest,Income tax is withheld from certain kinds of by drought, flood, or any other naturaldividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale ofgambling winnings. For 2003, the amount with- disaster, or assets, prizes, and awards. You also may haveheld is 27% of the proceeds paid (the amount ofb) You were unable to plant crops be-to pay estimated tax if the amount of income taxyour winnings minus the amount of your bet). cause of a natural disaster described inbeing withheld from your salary, pension, orGambling winnings of more than $5,000 from (a). other income is not enough.the following sources are subject to income tax
Estimated tax is used to pay both income taxwithholding. To make this choice, you will have to fill outand self-employment tax, as well as other taxes
• Any sweepstakes, wagering pool, or lot-Form W–4V, Voluntary Withholding Request,and amounts reported on your tax return. If you
tery. (or a similar form provided by the payer) anddo not pay enough through withholding or by
give it to the payer. For 2003, you can choose tomaking estimated tax payments, you may be• Any other wager, if the proceeds are athave 7%, 10%, 15%, or 27% of each paymentcharged a penalty. If you do not pay enough byleast 300 times the amount of the bet.withheld. the due date of each payment period (see When
It does not matter whether your winnings areIf you do not choose to have income taxTo Pay Estimated Tax, later), you may be
paid in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Win-withheld, you may have to make estimated taxcharged a penalty even if you are due a refund
nings not paid in cash are taken into account atpayments. See Estimated Tax, later. when you file your tax return. For information on
their fair market value. If you do not pay enough tax either throughwhen the penalty applies, see Underpayment
withholding or estimated tax, you may have toPenalty, later.Gambling winnings from bingo, keno, and slot
pay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty,machines generally are not subject to income
later, for information.tax withholding. However, you may need to pro- Who Must Make
vide the payer with a social security number toMore information. For more information Estimated Tax Payments?avoid withholding. See Backup withholding onabout the tax treatment of social security andgambling winnings in Publication 505. If yourailroad retirement benefits, see chapter 12. GetIf you had a tax liability for 2002, you may havereceive gambling winnings not subject to with-Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide, for infor-to pay estimated tax for 2003.holding, you may need to make estimated taxmation about the tax treatment of commoditypayments. See Estimated Tax, later. General rule.You must make estimated taxcredit loans or crop disaster payments.If you do not pay enough tax through with- payments for 2003 if both of the following apply.holding or estimated tax payments, you may be
subject to a penalty. See Underpayment Pen- Backup Withholding 1) You expect to owe at least $1,000 in taxalty, later. for 2003 after subtracting your withholdingBanks and other businesses that pay you cer-and credits.Form W–2G. If a payer withholds income tax tain kinds of income must file an information
from your gambling winnings, you should re- return (Form 1099) with the IRS. The informa-2) You expect your withholding and credits to
ceive a Form W–2G, Certain Gambling Win- tion return shows how much you were paid dur-be less than the smaller of:
nings, showing the amount you won and the ing the year. It also includes your name and
amount withheld. Report the tax withheld on line taxpayer identification number (TIN). TINs are• 90% of the tax to be shown on your 2003
62 of Form 1040. explained in chapter 1. tax return, or
Page 44 Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 47 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 5–A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Will you owe $1,000 or more
for 2003 after subtracting
income tax withholding and
credits from your total tax?
(Do not subtract any
estimated tax payments.)
You MUST make estimated
tax payment(s) by the
required due date(s).
Start Here
No
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 100%* of the tax shown
on your 2002 tax return?
/H17075
No
/H17075
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 90% (66-2/3% for farmers
and fishermen) of the tax
shown on your 2003 tax
return? Note: Your 2002 return must
have covered a 12-month
period.
You are NOT required to pay
estimated tax.
See When To Pay
Estimated Tax.
/H17075
/H17075
No
Yes
/H17074
* 110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2002 and 2003 is from farming or fishing and your 2002 adjusted gross in come was more than
$150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2003 is married filing a separate return).
The tax you would have paid• 100% of the tax shown on your 2002 tax payments, you can apply these rules on a joint
had you filed a separate returnreturn. Your 2002 tax return must cover allbasis.
12 months. The total tax you and yourYou and your spouse can make joint esti-
spouse would have paid hadmated tax payments even if you are not livingSpecial rules for farmers, fishermen, and you filed separate returnstogether.higher income taxpayers.There are excep-
You and your spouse cannot make joint esti-tions to the general rule for farmers, fishermen, Example. Joe and Heather filed a joint re-
mated tax payments if:and certain higher income taxpayers. See Fig- turn for 2002 showing taxable income of
ure 5–A and chapter 2 of Publication 505 for $48,500 and a tax of $6,898. Of the $48,500
more information. 1) You are legally separated under a decreetaxable income, $40,100 was Joe’s and the rest
of divorce or separate maintenance, was Heather’s. For 2003, they plan to file mar-Aliens. Resident and nonresident aliens ried filing separately. Joe figures his share of themay also have to make estimated tax payments.2) Either spouse is a nonresident alien, ortax on the 2002 joint return as follows:Resident aliens should follow the rules in this3) You and your spouse have different taxchapter unless noted otherwise. Nonresident Tax on $40,100 based on a separateyears.aliens should get  Form 1040–ES(NR), U.S. return..................... $  7,732Estimated Tax for Nonresident Alien Individuals.Whether you and your spouse make jointTax on $8,400 based on a separate
estimated tax payments or separate paymentsreturn.....................  9 6 4Avoiding estimated tax.If you receive sala-will not affect your choice of filing a joint taxTotal...................... $  8,696ries or wages, you can avoid having to makereturn or separate returns for 2003. Joe’s percentage of total ($7,732 ÷estimated tax payments by asking your em-
$8,696).................... 8 9 %2002 separate returns and 2003 joint re-ployer to take more tax out of your earnings. To
Joe’s share of tax on joint returndo this, file a new Form W–4 with your em-turn. If you plan to file a joint return with your
($6,898 × 89%) .............. $  6,139ployer. spouse for 2003, but you filed separate returns
for 2002, your 2002 tax is the total of the tax
Estimated payments not required.You do shown on your separate returns. You filed aHow To Figurenot have to pay estimated tax for 2003 if youseparate return if you filed as single, head ofmeet all three of the following conditions: Estimated Taxhousehold, or married filing separately.
1) You had no tax liability for 2002. 2002 joint return and 2003 separate re-To figure your estimated tax, you must figure
turns. If you plan to file a separate return foryour expected adjusted gross income, taxable2) You were a U.S. citizen or resident for the
income, taxes, deductions, and credits for the2003, but you filed a joint return for 2002, yourwhole year.
year.2002 tax is your share of the tax on the joint3) Your 2002 tax year covered a 12-month When figuring your 2003 estimated tax, itreturn. You file a separate return if you file asperiod. may be helpful to use your income, deductions,single, head of household, or married filing sep-
and credits for 2002 as a starting point. Use yourYou had no tax liability for 2002 if your totalarately.
2002 federal tax return as a guide. You can usetax was zero or you did not have to file anTo figure your share of the tax on the jointForm 1040–ES to figure your estimated tax.income tax return. return, first figure the tax both you and yourYou must make adjustments both for
spouse would have paid had you filed separateMarried taxpayers. To figure whether you changes in your own situation and for recent
returns for 2002 using the same filing status asmust make estimated tax payments, apply the changes in the tax law. For 2003, there are
for 2003. Then multiply the tax on the joint returnrules discussed here to your separate estimated several changes in the law. These changes are
income. If you can make joint estimated tax by the following fraction: discussed in Publication 553, Highlights of 2002
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 45

Page 48 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Changes, or visit the IRS Web Site at period and the due dates for the remaining peri-Estimated Tax Payments
www.irs.gov. ods. The following chart shows when to makeNot Required
Form 1040–ES includes a worksheet to helpinstallment payments.
you figure your estimated tax. Keep the work- You do not have to make estimated tax pay-
If you firstsheet for your records. ments if your withholding in each payment pe-
have incomeFor more complete information and exam- riod is at least one-fourth of your required annual
on which you Make a Make laterples of how to figure your estimated tax for 2003, payment or at least your required annualized
must pay payment installmentssee chapter 2 of Publication 505. income installment for that period. You also do
estimated tax: by: by: not have to make estimated tax payments if you
will pay enough through withholding to keep theWhen To Pay amount you owe with your return under $1,000.Before Apr. 1 – Apr. 15 – June 15Estimated Tax – Sept. 15
– Jan. 15 How To Pay Estimated TaxFor estimated tax purposes, the year is divided next year*into four payment periods. Each period has a There are five ways to pay estimated tax.specific payment due date. If you do not pay
enough tax by the due date of each of the pay-After Mar. 31 – June 15 – Sept. 15 1) By crediting an overpayment on yourment periods, you may be charged a penaltyand – Jan. 15 2002 return to your 2003 estimated tax.even if you are due a refund when you file yourbefore June 1 next year*
income tax return. The following chart gives the 2) By sending in your payment with a
payment periods and due dates for estimated payment-voucher from Form 1040–ES.
After May 31 – Sept. 15 – Jan. 15tax payments. 3) By paying electronically using the Elec-and next year* tronic Federal Tax Payment Systembefore Sept. 1For the period: Due date: (EFTPS). For EFTPS information, call
1–800–945–8400 or 1–800–555–4477.Jan. 1* through Mar. 31 Apr. 15
After Aug. 31 – Jan. 15 (None)April 1 through May 31 June 15 4) By electronic funds withdrawal if younext year*June 1 through Aug. 31 Sept. 15 are filing Form 1040 or Form 1040A elec-Sept. 1 through Dec. 31 Jan. 15 next tronically.*See January payment, and Saturday, Sunday,year** holiday rule under When To Pay Estimated Tax, 5) By credit card using a pay-by-phone sys-earlier. tem or the Internet.*If your tax year does not begin on January
1, see the Form 1040–ES instructions.
**See January payment, later. Change in estimated tax.After making your
first estimated tax payment, changes in yourCrediting an OverpaymentSaturday, Sunday, holiday rule.If the due income, adjustments, deductions, credits, or ex-
date for making an estimated tax payment fallsemptions may make it necessary for you toWhen you file your Form 1040 or Form 1040A
on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, therefigure your estimated tax. Pay the unpaid bal-for 2002 and you have an overpayment of tax,
payment will be on time if you make it on the nextance of your amended estimated tax by the nextyou can apply part or all of it to your estimated
day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal tax for 2003. On line 72 of Form 1040, or line 46payment due date after the change or in install-holiday. For example, a payment due Sunday, of Form 1040A, write the amount you wantments by that date and the due dates for theJune 15, 2003, will be on time if you make it by credited to your estimated tax rather than re-remaining payment periods.Monday, June 16, 2003. funded. The amount you have credited should
be taken into account when figuring your esti-How much to pay to avoid a penalty. ToJanuary payment. If you file your 2003 Form
mated tax payments.determine how much you should pay by each1040 or Form 1040A by February 2, 2004, and
You can use all the credited amount towardpay the rest of the tax you owe, you do not need payment due date, see How To Figure Each
your first payment, or you can spread it out into make your estimated tax payment that wouldPayment, next. If the earlier discussions of No
any way you choose among any or all of yourbe due on January 15, 2004. income subject to estimated tax during first pe-
payments.riod or Change in estimated tax apply to you,Fiscal year taxpayers.If your tax year does If you ask that an overpayment be credited toyou may need to read Annualized Income In-not start on January 1, see the Form 1040–ES your estimated tax for the next year, the pay-stallment Method in chapter 2 of Publication 505instructions for your payment due dates. ment is considered to have been made on thefor information on how to avoid a penalty.
due date of the first estimated tax installment
(April 15 for calendar year taxpayers). You can-When To Start How To Figure not have any of that amount refunded to you
after that due date until the close of that tax year.
Each PaymentYou do not have to make estimated tax pay- You also cannot use that overpayment in anyments until you have income on which you will other way after that date.You should pay enough estimated tax by theowe the tax. If you have income subject to esti-due date of each payment period to avoid amated tax during the first payment period, you
penalty for that period. You can figure your re-must make your first payment by the due date Using the Payment-Vouchersquired payment for each period by using eitherfor the first payment period. You can pay all your
the regular installment method or the annualizedestimated tax at that time, or you can pay it in Each payment of estimated tax must be accom-income installment method. These methods areinstallments. If you choose to pay in install- panied by a payment-voucher from Formdescribed in Publication 505. If you do not payments, make your first payment by the due date 1040–ES. If you made estimated tax paymentsenough each payment period, you may befor the first payment period. Make your remain- last year, you should receive a copy of the 2003charged a penalty even if you are due a refunding installment payments by the due dates for Form 1040–ES in the mail. It will havewhen you file your tax return.the later periods. payment-vouchers preprinted with your name,
Underpayment penalty. If your estimatedaddress, and social security number. Using theNo income subject to estimated tax during
tax payment for a previous period is less than preprinted vouchers will speed processing, re-first period.If you do not have income subject
duce the chance of error, and help saveone-fourth of your amended estimated tax, youto estimated tax until a later payment period, you
processing costs.may be charged a penalty for underpayment ofcan make your first payment by the due date for
estimated tax for that period when you file yourthat period. You can pay your entire estimated If you did not pay estimated tax last year, you
tax return. See chapter 4 of Publication 505 fortax by the due date for that period, or you can will have to get a copy of Form 1040–ES from
more information.pay it in installments by the due date for that the IRS. After you make your first payment, a
Page 46 Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 49 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040–ES package with the preprinted The 1099 SeriesWithholdingvouchers will be mailed to you. Follow the in-
Most forms in the 1099 series are not filed withstructions in the package to make sure you useIf you had income tax withheld during 2002, youyour return. You should receive these forms bythe vouchers correctly. should receive a statement by January 31,February 1, 2003. Keep these forms for yourUse the window envelopes that came with2003, showing your income and the tax with-records. There are several different forms in thisyour Form 1040–ES package. If you use yourheld. Depending on the source of your income,series, including:own envelope, make sure you mail your you will receive:
payment-vouchers to the address shown in the • Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Broker and
Form 1040–ES instructions for the place where• Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement, Barter Exchange Transactions,
you live. • Form W–2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, • Form 1099–DIV, Dividends and Distribu-
Do not use the address shown in the or tions,
Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruc- • A form in the 1099 series. • Form 1099–G, Certain Government Pay-tions.CAUTION
!
ments,
If you file a joint return and you are makingForms W–2 and W–2G. You file Form W–2 • Form 1099–INT, Interest Income,joint estimated tax payments, please enter thewith your income tax return. File Form W–2G• Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income,names and social security numbers on the pay-with your return if it shows any federal incomement voucher in the same order as they will • Form 1099–OID, Original Issue Discount,tax withheld from your winnings.appear on the joint return.
You should get at least two copies of each• Form 1099–R, Distributions From Pen-
form you receive. Attach one copy to the front ofsions, Annuities, Retirement orChange of address. You must notify the IRS
your federal income tax return. Keep one copyProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insuranceif you are making estimated tax payments and
Contracts, etc.,for your records. You should also receive copiesyou changed your address during the year. You
to file with your state and local returns.must send a clear and concise written statement • Form SSA–1099, Social Security Benefit
to the IRS Service Center where you filed your Statement, and
last return and provide all of the following:
• Form RRB–1099, Payments by the Rail-Form W–2
• Your full name (and your spouse’s full road Retirement Board.
Your employer should give you a Form W–2 forname),
2002 by January 31, 2003. You should receive aIf you received the types of income reported• Your signature (and spouse’s signature),separate Form W–2 from each employer you on some forms in the 1099 series, you may not
• Your old address (and spouse’s old ad-worked for. be able to use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
dress if different), See the instructions to these forms for details.If you stop working before the end of the
year, your employer can give you your Form• Your new address, and Form 1099–R. Attach Form 1099–R to your
W–2 at any time after you leave your job. How-return if box 4 shows federal income tax with-• Your social security number (and spouse’sever, your employer must give it to you by Janu-held. Include the amount withheld in the total onsocial security number). ary 31 of the following year (or the next day thatline 62 of Form 1040 or line 39 of Form 1040A.
You can use  Form 8822, Change of Address, is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday if JanuaryYou cannot use Form 1040EZ if you received
for this purpose. 31 is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday). payments reported on Form 1099–R.
If you ask for the form, your employer mustYou can continue to use your old preprinted Backup withholding. If you were subject to
give it to you within 30 days after receiving yourpayment-vouchers until the IRS sends you new backup withholding on income you received dur-
written request or within 30 days after your finalones. However, do not correct the address on ing 2002, include the amount withheld, as
wage payment, whichever is later.the old voucher. shown on your Form 1099, in the total on line 62
of Form 1040, or line 39 of Form 1040A.If you have not received your Form W–2 on
time, you should ask your employer for it. If you
Payment by Electronic Funds do not receive it by February 15, call the IRS.
Withdrawal or Credit Card Form Not CorrectForm W–2 shows your total pay and other
compensation and the income tax, social secur-If you want to make estimated payments by If you receive a form with incorrect information
ity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheld dur-electronic funds withdrawal or by credit card, on it, you should ask the payer for a corrected
ing the year. Include the federal income taxsee the Form 1040–ES instructions or How To form. Call the telephone number or write to the
withheld (as shown on Form W-2) on:Pay Estimated Tax in Publication 505. address given for the payer on the form. The
corrected Form W–2G or Form 1099 you re-• Line 62 if you file Form 1040, ceive will be marked “Corrected.” A special form,
Form W–2c, Corrected Wage and Tax State-• Line 39 if you file Form 1040A, or
ment, is used to correct a Form W–2.Credit for Withholding • Line 7 if you file Form 1040EZ.
Form W–2 is also used to report any taxableand Estimated Tax Form Received After Filingsick pay you received and any income tax with-
held from your sick pay.When you file your 2002 income tax return, take If you file your return and you later receive acredit for all the income tax and excess social form for income that you did not include on yourForm W–2Gsecurity or railroad retirement tax withheld from return, you should report the income and takeyour salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also, take credit for any income tax withheld by filing FormIf you had gambling winnings in 2002, the payercredit for the estimated tax you paid for 2002. 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Taxmay have withheld 27% as income tax. If taxThese credits are subtracted from your tax. You Return.was withheld, the payer will give you a Formshould file a return and claim these credits, even
W–2G showing the amount you won and theif you do not owe tax.
amount of tax withheld.If you had two or more employers and were Separate ReturnsReport the amounts you won on line 21 ofpaid wages of more than $84,900 during 2002,
Form 1040. Take credit for the tax withheld ontoo much social security or railroad retirement If you are married but file a separate return, you
line 62 of Form 1040. If you had gambling win-tax may have been withheld from your wages. can take credit only for the tax withheld from
nings, you must use Form 1040; you cannot useSee Credit for Excess Social Security Tax or your own income. Do not include any amount
Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld in chapter 38.Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. withheld from your spouse’s income. However,
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 47

Page 50 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
different rules may apply if you live in a commu- ments, you will have an underpayment of esti-Separate Returns
nity property state. mated tax and you may have to pay a penalty.
If you and your spouse made separate esti-Community property states are listed in Generally, you will not have to pay a penalty for
mated tax payments for 2002 and you file sepa-chapter 2. For more information on these rules, 2002 if any of the following situations applies.
rate returns, you can take credit only for yourand some exceptions, see Publication 555, • The total of your withholding and esti-own payments.Community Property. mated tax payments was at least as muchIf you made joint estimated tax payments, as your 2001 tax (or 112% of your 2001you must decide how to divide the payments tax if your adjusted gross income wasbetween your returns. One of you can claim allFiscal Years more than $150,000 — $75,000 if yourof the estimated tax paid and the other none, or2002 filing status is married filing sepa-If you file your tax return on the basis of a fiscalyou can divide it in any other way you agree on.rately) and you paid all required estimatedyear (a 12-month period ending on the last dayIf you cannot agree, you must divide the pay-tax payments on time.of any month except December), you must fol-ments in proportion to each spouse’s individual
low special rules to determine your credit fortax as shown on your separate returns for 2001.• The tax balance due on your return is no
federal income tax withholding. For a discussion more than 10% of your total 2002 tax, and
of how to take credit for withholding on a fiscal you paid all required estimated tax pay-
year return, see Fiscal Years in chapter 3 ofDivorced Taxpayers ments on time.
Publication 505. • Your total 2002 tax minus your withholdingIf you made joint estimated tax payments for
is less than $1,000.2002, and you were divorced during the year,Estimated Tax either you or your former spouse can claim all of• You did not have a tax liability for 2001.
the joint payments, or you each can claim part ofTake credit for all your estimated tax payments • You did not have any withholding taxesthem. If you cannot agree on how to divide thefor 2002 on line 63 of Form 1040 or line 40 of and your current year tax less any house-payments, you must divide them in proportion toForm 1040A. Include any overpayment from hold employment taxes is less thaneach spouse’s individual tax as shown on your2001 that you had credited to your 2002 esti- $1,000.separate returns for 2002.mated tax. You must use Form 1040 or Form If you claim any of the joint payments on yourSpecial rules apply if you are a farmer or fisher-1040A if you paid estimated tax. You cannot usetax return, enter your former spouse’s socialman. See Farmers and Fishermen in chapter 4Form 1040EZ. security number (SSN) in the space provided onof Publication 505 for more information.
Name changed. If you changed your name,the front of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you
and you made estimated tax payments usingdivorced and remarried in 2002, enter your pres-IRS can figure the penalty for you.If you
your old name, attach a brief statement to theent spouse’s SSN in that space and write yourthink you owe the penalty but you do not want to
front of your tax return indicating: former spouse’s SSN, followed by “DIV,” to thefigure it yourself when you file your tax return,
left of line 63, Form 1040, or line 40, Formyou may not have to. Generally, the IRS will• When you made the payments, 1040A. figure the penalty for you and send you a bill.
• The amount of each payment, However, you must complete Form 2210 and file
it with your return if you are able to lower or• The IRS address to which you sent the
eliminate your penalty. See chapter 4 of Publica-payments,
tion 505.Underpayment Penalty• Your name when you made the payments,
and If you did not pay enough tax either through
withholding or by making estimated tax pay-• Your social security number.
The statement should cover payments you
made jointly with your spouse as well as any you
made separately.
Page 48 Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 51 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Two.
The eight chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income. They explainIncome which income is and is not taxed. See Part Three for information on gains and
losses you report on Schedule D (Form 1040) and for information on selling
your home.
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income reimbursed for moving expenses, get Publica-
tion 521, Moving Expenses.
Back pay awards. Include in income amounts6.
you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for
back pay. These include payments made to youEmployee for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,
Wages, Salaries, and unpaid health insurance premiums. TheyCompensation should be reported to you by your employer on
Form W–2.This section discusses many types of employeeand Other
compensation followed by a detailed explana-Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awards
tion of fringe benefits. you receive for outstanding work are included inEarnings If you are an employee, you should receiveyour income and should be shown on your Form
Form W–2 from your employer showing the payW–2. These include prizes such as vacation
you received for your services. Include your paytrips for meeting sales goals. If the prize or
on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or on lineaward you receive is goods or services, youImportant Reminder 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not receive amust include the fair market value of the goods
Form W–2. or services in your income. However, if yourForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or employer merely promises to pay you a bonus orresident alien, you must report income fromChild-care providers.If you provide childaward at some future time, it is not taxable untilsources outside the United States (foreign in-care, either in the child’s home or in your homeyou receive it or it is made available to you.come) on your tax return unless it is exempt byor other place of business, the pay you receive
Employee achievement award. If you re-U.S. law. This is true whether you reside insidemust be included in your income. If you are not
ceive tangible personal property (other thanor outside the United States and whether or notan employee, you are probably self-employed
cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) asyou receive a Form W–2, Wage and Tax State- and must include payments for your services on
an award for length of service or safety achieve-ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. ThisSchedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From
ment, you can generally exclude its value fromapplies to earned income (such as wages andBusiness, or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040), Net
your income. However, the amount you can ex-tips) as well as unearned income (such as inter-Profit From Business. You are generally not an
clude is limited to your employer’s cost andest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents,employee unless you are subject to the will and
cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardsand royalties). control of the person who employs you as to
that are not qualified plan awards) for all suchIf you reside outside the United States, youwhat you are to do and how you are to do it.
awards you receive during the year. Your em-may be able to exclude part or all of your foreignBaby sitting.If you baby sit for relatives orployer can tell you whether your award is asource earned income. For details, see Publica-neighborhood children, whether on a regularqualified plan award. Your employer must maketion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-basis or only periodically, the rules for child-carethe award as part of a meaningful presentation,dent Aliens Abroad. providers apply to you. under conditions and circumstances that do not
create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
guised pay.Miscellaneous
However, the exclusion does not apply to theIntroduction Compensation following awards.
This chapter discusses wages, salaries, fringe • A length-of-service award if you received itThis section discusses many types of employeebenefits, and other compensation received for for less than 5 years of service or if youcompensation. The subjects are arranged in al-services as an employee. The topics include: received another length-of-service awardphabetical order.
during the year or the previous 4 years.• Bonuses and awards,
Advance commissions and other earnings. • A safety achievement award if you are a• Sickness and injury benefits, and If you receive advance commissions or other manager, administrator, clerical employee,amounts for services to be performed in the• Special rules for certain employees. or other professional employee or if morefuture and you are a cash method taxpayer, youthan 10% of eligible employees previouslymust include these amounts in your income inThe chapter explains what income is included received safety achievement awards dur-the year you receive them.in the employee’s gross income and what is not ing the year.If you repay unearned commissions or otherincluded.
amounts in the same year you receive them,
Example. Ben Green received three em-reduce the amount included in your income byUseful Items ployee achievement awards during the year: athe repayment. If you repay them in a later taxYou may want to see: nonqualified plan award of a watch valued atyear, you can deduct the repayment as an item-
$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereoized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),Publication valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued ator you may be able to take a credit for that year.
$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and CarSee  Repayments in chapter 13.
fied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachExpenses
Allowances and reimbursements. If you re- award by itself would be excluded from income.❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care ceive travel, transportation, or other business However, since the $1,750 total value of theExpenses expense allowances or reimbursements from awards is more than $1,600, Ben must include
❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax your employer, get Publication 463. If you are $150 ($1,750 – $1,600) in his income.
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 49

Page 52 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Government cost-of-living allowances. Elective deferrals are not excluded from a cash payment equal to the fair market value of
wages for social security and Medicare taxes the corporation’s stock on the date of use minusCost-of-living allowances are generally included
and benefits. the fair market value on the date the right wasin your income. However, they are not included
If you are a federal employee, this treatment granted. You include the cash payment in yourin your income if you are a federal civilian em-
applies to your contributions to the Thrift Sav- income in the year you use the right.ployee or a federal court employee who is sta-
ings Plan.tioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United Stock options. If you receive a nonstatutoryStates. option to buy or sell stock or other property asSeverance pay. Amounts you receive as sev-
Allowances and differentials that increase payment for your services, you will usually haveerance pay are taxable. A lump-sum payment
your basic pay as an incentive for taking a less income either when you receive the option orfor cancellation of your employment contract
desirable post of duty are part of your compen- when you exercise the option (use it to buy ormust be included in your income in the tax year
sation and must be included in income. For sell the stock or other property). However, if youryou receive it.
example, your compensation includes Foreign option is a statutory stock option, you usually willAccrued leave payment. If you are a fed-Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropical not have any income until you sell or exchangeeral employee and receive a lump-sum paymentdifferentials. For more information, get Publica- your stock. Your employer can tell you whichfor accrued annual leave when you retire ortion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees kind of option you hold. For details, get Publica-resign, this amount will be included as wages onStationed Abroad. tion 525.your Form W–2.
Restricted property.Generally, if you receiveIf you resign from one agency and are reem-Note received for services.If your employer property for your services, you must include itsployed by another agency, you may have togives you a secured note as payment for your fair market value in your income in the year yourepay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-services, you must include the fair market value receive the property. However, if you receivement to the second agency. You can reduce(usually the discount value) of the note in your stock or other property that has certain restric-gross wages by the amount you repaid in theincome for the year you receive it. When you tions that affect its value, you may not have tosame tax year in which you received it. Attach tolater receive payments on the note, a propor- include the value of the property in your incomeyour tax return a copy of the receipt or statementtionate part of each payment is the recovery of in the year you receive it. For details, see Re-given to you by the agency you repaid to explain
the fair market value that you previously in- stricted Property in Publication 525.the difference between the wages on the return
cluded in your income. Do not include that part Dividends you receive on restricted stock areand the wages on your Forms W–2.
again in your income. Include the rest of the extra compensation to you. Your employerOutplacement services. If you choose topayment in your income in the year of payment. should include these payments on your Formaccept a reduced amount of severance pay soW–2.If your employer gives you an unsecuredthat you can receive outplacement servicesnote as payment for your services, payments on Stock you chose to include in income.(such as training in resum´e writing and interviewthe note that are credited toward the principal Dividends you receive on restricted stock youtechniques), you must include the unreducedamount of the note are compensation income chose to include in your income in the yearamount of the severance pay in income.when you receive them. transferred are treated the same as any otherHowever, you can deduct the value of these
dividends. Report them on your return as divi-outplacement services (up to the difference be-Retirement plan contributions. Your dends. For a discussion of dividends, see chap-tween the severance pay included in incomeemployer’s contributions to a qualified retire- ter 9.and the amount actually received) as a miscella-
ment plan for you are not included in income at For information on how to treat dividendsneous deduction (subject to the 2% limit) on
the time contributed. (Your employer can tell you reported on both your Form W–2 and FormSchedule A (Form 1040).
whether your retirement plan is qualified.) How- 1099–DIV, see Dividends received on restrictedSick pay. Pay you receive from your employerever, the cost of life insurance coverage in- stock in Publication 525.while you are sick or injured is part of your salarycluded in the plan may have to be included. See
or wages. In addition, you must include in yourGroup-Term Life Insurance Premiums, later, Fringe Benefitsincome sick pay benefits received from any ofunder Fringe Benefits.
the following payers.If your employer pays into a nonqualified Fringe benefits you receive in connection with
plan for you, you generally must include the the performance of your services are included in1) A welfare fund.
contributions in your income as wages for the your income as compensation unless you pay2) A state sickness or disability fund.tax year in which the contributions are made. fair market value for them or they are specifically
However, if your interest in the plan is subject to excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-3) An association of employers or employ-
a substantial risk of forfeiture (meaning you ance of services (for example, under a covenantees.
have a good chance of losing it) at the time of not to compete) is treated as the performance of4) An insurance company, if your employercontribution, do not include the value of your services for purposes of these rules.paid for the plan.interest in your income until it is no longer sub- Accounting period. You must use the sameject to a substantial risk of forfeiture.However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-accounting period your employer uses to reportdent or health insurance policy, the benefits youElective deferrals.If you chose to set aside your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-receive under the policy are not taxable.part of your pay for retirement under a qualified ployer has the option to report taxable noncash
deferred compensation arrangement (for exam- fringe benefits by using either of the followingSocial security and Medicare taxes paid by
ple, a section 401(k) plan), the amount you set rules.employer. If you and your employer have an
aside (called an elective deferral) is treated asagreement that your employer pays your social1) The general rule: benefits are reported foran employer contribution to a qualified plan,security and Medicare taxes without deductinga full calendar year (January 1– Decem-subject to a limit. For 2002, this limit is $11,000them from your gross wages, you must report ber 31).for all elective deferrals. If you set aside morethe amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages
than $11,000, the excess generally must beon your tax return. The payment is also treated2) The special accounting period rule:
included in your income for that year. This limitas wages for figuring your social security andbenefits provided during the last 2 months
will increase by $1,000 each year until it reachesMedicare taxes and your social security and of the calendar year (or any shorter period)
$15,000 in 2006. See Publication 525 for a dis- Medicare benefits. However, these paymentsare treated as paid during the following
are not treated as social security and Medicarecussion of the tax treatment of corrective distri- calendar year. For example, each year
wages if you are a household worker or a farmbutions of excess deferrals. your employer reports the value of benefits
worker. provided during the last 2 months of theYou may be allowed an additional elec- prior year and the first 10 months of thetive deferral if you are age 50 or older.Stock appreciation rights.Do not include a current year.See Publication 590, Individual Retire-stock appreciation right granted by your em-
TIP
ment Arrangements (IRAs), for more informa-ployer in income until you exercise (use) the
tion. right. When you use the right, you are entitled to Your employer does not have to use the same
Page 50 Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 53 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
accounting period for each fringe benefit, but be unreasonable for the employer to account forCommuter highway vehicle. This is a
must use the same period for all employees who it, the value is not included in your income. highway vehicle that seats at least six adults (not
receive a particular benefit. Generally, the value of benefits such as dis- including the driver). At least 80% of the
You must use the same accounting period counts at company cafeterias, cab fares home vehicle’s mileage must reasonably be expected
that you use to report the benefit to claim an when working overtime, and company picnics to be:
employee business deduction (for use of a car, are not included in your income.
1) For transporting employees between theirfor example). Holiday gifts.If your employer gives you a homes and work place, and
Form W–2. Your employer reports your taxa-turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value at2) On trips during which employees occupyble fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otherChristmas or other holidays, do not include theat least half of the vehicle’s adult seatingcompensation) of Form W–2. The total value ofvalue of the gift in your income. However, if yourcapacity (not including the driver).your fringe benefits may also be noted in box 12.employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or a
The value of your fringe benefits may be addedsimilar item that you can easily exchange forTransit pass.This is any pass, token, fare-to your other compensation on one Form W–2,cash, you include the value of that gift as extracard, voucher, or similar item entitling a personor you may receive a separate Form W–2 show-salary or wages regardless of the amount in-to ride mass transit (whether public or private)ing just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1volved. free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuterwith a notation in box 12.
highway vehicle operated by a person in the
business of transporting persons for compensa-
Educational Assistance tion.Accident or Health Plan
You can exclude from your income up to $5,250Qualified parking.This is parking providedGenerally, the value of accident or health planof qualified employer-provided educational as-to an employee at or near the employer’s placecoverage provided to you by your employer issistance. The exclusion applies to undergradu-of business. It also includes parking provided onnot included in your income. Benefits you re-ate and graduate-level courses. For more or near a location from which the employeeceive from the plan are generally taxable, asinformation, see Publication 508, Tax Benefits commutes to work in a commuter highway vehi-explained later under Sickness and Injury Bene-for Work-Related Education. cle or carpool. It does not include parking at orfits. near the employee’s home.
Long-term care coverage. Contributions by
Employer-Provided Vehiclesyour employer to provide coverage for long-term
Group-Term Life Insurancecare services are generally not included in in-If your employer provides a car (or other high-come. However, contributions made through a Premiumsway motor vehicle) to you, your personal use offlexible spending or similar arrangement (suchthe car is usually a taxable noncash fringe bene-Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 ofas a cafeteria plan) must be included in yourfit. group-term life insurance coverage provided toincome. This amount will be reported as wagesYour employer must determine the actualyou by your employer (or former employer) is notin box 1 of your Form W–2. value of this fringe benefit to include in yourincluded in your income. However, you mustContributions you make to the plan are dis-income. include in income the cost of employer-providedcussed in Publication 502, Medical and Dental
insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000Certain employer-provided transporta-Expenses.
of coverage.tion can be excluded from gross in-Archer MSA contributions.Contributions by If you pay any part of the cost of the insur-come. See the discussion on
TIP
your employer to your Archer MSA (previously ance, your entire payment reduces, dollar forTransportation, next.called a medical savings account) are not in- dollar, the amount you would otherwise include
cluded in your income. Their total will be re- in your income. However, you cannot reduce the
ported in box 12 of Form W–2 with code R. You amount to include in your income by:Transportationmust report this amount on Form 8853, Archer
MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance Con- 1) Payments for coverage in a different tax
If your employer provides you with a qualifiedtracts. Attach the form to your return. year,
transportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedIf your employer does not make contributions 2) Payments for coverage through a cafeteriafrom your income, up to certain limits. A qualifiedto your MSA, you can make your own contribu- plan, unless the payments are after-taxtransportation fringe benefit is:tions to your MSA. These contributions are dis- contributions, orcussed in Publication 969, Medical Savings 1) Transportation in a commuter highway ve-Accounts (MSAs). Also, see Form 8853. 3) Payments for coverage not taxed to youhicle (such as a van) between your home because of the exceptions discussed laterand work place, in Entire cost excluded.
2) A transit pass, orAdoption Assistance The amount included in your income is re-
3) Qualified parking. ported as part of your wages in box 1 of yourYou may be able to exclude from income
Form W–2. It is also shown separately in box 12amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-Cash reimbursement by your employer for thesewith code C.ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-
nection with your adoption of an eligible child.rangement is also excludable. However, cashGroup-term life insurance.This insurance isSee Publication 968, Tax Benefits for Adoption,reimbursement for a transit pass is excludableterm life insurance protection (insurance for afor more information. only if a voucher or similar item that can befixed period of time) that:Adoption benefits are reported by your em-exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily
ployer in box 12 of Form W–2 with code T. Theyavailable for direct distribution to you. 1) Provides a general death benefit,are also included as social security and Medi-
Exclusion limit.The exclusion for commuter 2) Is provided to a group of employees,care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are
highway vehicle transportation and transit passnot included as wages in box 1. To determine 3) Is provided under a policy carried by thefringe benefits cannot be more than a total ofthe taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must employer, and$100 a month, regardless of the total value ofcomplete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-
both benefits. 4) Provides an amount of insurance for eachtion Expenses. Attach the form to your return.
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringeemployee based on a formula that pre-
benefit cannot be more than $185 a month, vents individual selection.
regardless of its value.De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
If the benefits have a value that is more thanPermanent benefits.If your group-term life
If your employer provides you with a product or these limits, the excess must be included in your insurance policy includes permanent benefits,
service and the cost of it is so small that it would income. such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 51

Page 54 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
COST PER $1,000 OF PROTECTIONmust include in your income, as wages, the cost pensation for your duties as an ordained, li-
FOR ONE MONTH of the permanent benefits minus the amount you censed, or commissioned minister. However,
pay for them. Your employer should be able to you must include the rental value of the home or
Age Costtell you the amount to include in your income. the housing allowance as earnings from
Under 25 .................. $. 0 5 self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040) ifAccidental death benefits.Insurance that 25 through 29............... . 0 6 you are subject to the self-employment tax. Forprovides accidental or other death benefits but30 through 34............... . 0 8 more information, see Publication 517, Socialdoes not provide general death benefits (travel35 through 39............... . 0 9 Security and Other Information for Members ofinsurance, for example) is not group-term life40 through 44............... . 1 0 the Clergy and Religious Workers.insurance. 45 through 49............... . 1 5
Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a50 through 54............... . 2 3
55 through 59............... . 4 3 member of the clergy is usually treated the sameEntire cost excluded.You are not taxed on
60 through 64............... . 6 6 as any other pension or annuity. It must bethe cost of group-term life insurance if any of the
65 through 69............... 1.27 reported on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 orfollowing circumstances apply.
70 and older................ 2.06 on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
1) You are permanently and totally disabled
and have ended your employment. Example. You are 51 years old and work forMembers of Religious
employers A and B. Both employers provide2) Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol- Ordersgroup-term life insurance coverage for you foricy for the entire period the insurance is in
the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 withforce during the tax year. If you are a member of a religious order who hasemployer A and $45,000 with employer B. Youtaken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings3) A charitable organization (defined in chap-pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-that you renounce and turn over to the orderter 26) is the only beneficiary of the policyployer B group plan. You figure the amount todepends on whether your services are per-for the entire period the insurance is ininclude in your income as follows: formed for the order.force during the tax year. (You are not
entitled to a deduction for a charitable con-Employer A coverage (in thousands) $35 Services performed for the order.If you aretribution for naming a charitable organiza-Employer B coverage (in thousands) + 45 performing the services as an agent of the ordertion as the beneficiary of your policy.)Total coverage (in thousands)..... $ 8 0 in the exercise of duties required by the order,
Minus: Exclusion (in thousands).... − 50 do not include in your income the amounts
Excess amount (in thousands)..... $ 3 0 turned over to the order.Entire cost taxed.You are taxed on the entireMultiply by cost per $1,000 per month, If your order directs you to perform servicescost of group-term life insurance if either of theage 51 (from table)............ × .23 for another agency of the supervising church orfollowing circumstances apply. Cost of excess insurance for 1 month $6.90an associated institution, you are considered toMultiply by number of full months1) The insurance is provided by your em- be performing the services as an agent of thecoverage at this cost........... × 12ployer through a qualified employees’ order. Any wages you earn as an agent of anCost of excess insurance for tax year $82.80trust, such as a pension trust or a qualified order that you turn over to the order are notMinus: Premiums you paid ($4.15 × 12annuity plan. included in your income.months) .................... −49.80
Cost to include in income2) You are a key employee and your Example. You are a member of a churchas wages $33.00employer’s plan discriminates in favor of order and have taken a vow of poverty. Youkey employees. renounce any claims to your earnings and turn
over to the order any salaries or wages you
Life insurance agents.Full-time life insur- earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order
ance agents who are considered employees for assigns you to work in a hospital that is anSpecial Rules for
social security and Medicare tax withholding associated institution of the church. However,
purposes are treated as employees in applying you remain under the general direction and con-Certain Employees
the provisions relating to group-term life insur- trol of the order. You are considered to be an
ance under a policy carried by their employer. agent of the order and any wages you earn atThis section deals with special rules for people
the hospital that you turn over to your order arein certain types of employment: members of the
not included in your income.More than $50,000 from one employer. If clergy, members of religious orders, people
you have only one employer and you were in-working for foreign employers, military person-Services performed outside the order.Ifsured at any time during the tax year for morenel, and volunteers. you are directed to work outside the order, yourthan $50,000 under a group-term life insurance services are not an exercise of duties requiredpolicy, your taxable income from this source is by the order unless they meet both of the follow-Clergyincluded as other compensation on the Form ing requirements. W–2 you receive. If you are a member of the clergy, you must
1) They are the kind of services that are ordi-include in your income offerings and fees you
More than $50,000 from two or more employ- narily the duties of members of the order.receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,
ers. If two or more employers provide youmasses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the2) They are part of the duties that you mustgroup-term life insurance coverage totalingoffering is made to the religious institution, it isexercise for, or on behalf of, the religiousmore than $50,000, you must figure how muchnot taxable to you. order as its agent.to include in your income. You must include theIf you are a member of a religious organiza-
cost of life insurance provided to you during the If you are an employee of a third party, thetion and you give your outside earnings to the
tax year, regardless of when your employers services you perform for the third party will notorganization, you still must include the earnings
paid the premiums. be considered directed or required of you by thein your income. However, you may be entitled to
order. Amounts you receive for these servicesa charitable contribution deduction for the
Figuring the taxable cost.You figure the tax- are included in your income, even if you haveamount paid to the organization. See chapter
able cost for each month of coverage by multi- taken a vow of poverty.26.
plying the number of thousands of dollars of
insurance coverage for the month (figured to theHousing.  Special rules for housing apply toExample. Mark Brown is a member of a
nearest tenth), less 50, by the cost from the members of the clergy. Under these rules, you religious order and has taken a vow of poverty.
following table. Use your age on the last day of do not include in your income the rental value of He renounces all claims to his earnings and
the tax year. You must prorate the cost from the a home (including utilities) or a housing allow- turns over his earnings to the order.
table if less than a full month of coverage is ance provided to you as part of your pay. The Mark is a school teacher. He was instructed
involved. home or allowance must be provided as com- by the superiors of the order to get a job with a
Page 52 Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 55 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em- For more information on survivor annuities, him until the end of his service, Gary must in-
ployee of the school, and, at his request, the see chapter 11. clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is
school made the salary payments directly to the credited to his account.Disability.If you are retired on disability,order. see  Military and Government Disability Pen-Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA).IfBecause Mark is an employee of the school,sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. you are a VISTA volunteer, you must includehe is performing services for the school rather
meal and lodging allowances paid to you in yourthan as an agent of the order. The wages MarkVeterans’ benefits.Do not include in your in-income as wages.earns working for the school are included in hiscome any veterans’ benefits paid under any law,
income. regulation, or administrative practice adminis-National Senior Services Corps programs.
tered by the Department of Veterans AffairsDo not include in your income amounts you
(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans orreceive for supportive services or reimburse-
Foreign Employer their families are not taxable. ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-
Special rules apply if you work for a foreign lowing programs.• Education, training, and subsistence al-
employer. lowances. • Retired Senior Volunteer Program
(RSVP).U.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen who • Disability compensation and pension pay-
works in the United States for a foreign govern-ments for disabilities paid either to veter-• Foster Grandparent Program.ment, an international organization, a foreignans or their families.  
• Senior Companion Program.embassy, or any foreign employer, you must
• Grants for homes designed for wheelchairinclude your salary in your income.
living.
Service Corps of Retired ExecutivesSocial security and Medicare taxes.You
• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-are exempt from social security and Medicare
lost their sight or the use of their limbs.ive services or reimbursements fortaxes if you are employed in the United States
out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do notby an international organization or a foreign gov-• Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-
include these amounts in income.ernment. However, you must pay self-employ- dends paid either to veterans or their ben-
ment tax on your earnings from services eficiaries, including the proceeds of aVolunteer tax counseling.Do not include inperformed in the United States, even though youveteran’s endowment policy paid beforeyour income any reimbursements you receiveare not self-employed. This rule also applies ifdeath. for transportation, meals, and other expensesyou are an employee of a qualifying you have in training for, or actually providing,• Interest on insurance dividends you leavewholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov- volunteer federal income tax counseling for theon deposit with the VA.ernment. elderly (TCE).
You can deduct as a charitable contributionNon-U.S. citizen.If you are not a U.S. citizen,Rehabilitative program payments. VA
your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses inor if you are a U.S. citizen but also a citizen ofpayments to hospital patients and resident vet-
taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-the Philippines, and you work for an interna-erans for their services under the VA’s therapeu-
tance (VITA) program.tional organization in the United States, yourtic or rehabilitative programs are not treated as
salary from that source is exempt from tax. If younontaxable veterans’ benefits. Report these
work for a foreign government in the Unitedpayments as income on line 21 of Form 1040.
States, your salary from that source is exempt
from tax if your work is like the work done by Sickness and InjuryVolunteersemployees of the United States in that foreign
country and the foreign government gives an
BenefitsThe tax treatment of amounts you receive as aequal exemption to employees of the Unitedvolunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similarStates in that country. This section discusses many types of sicknessagency is covered in the following discussions.
and injury benefits including disability benefitsWaiver of alien status.If you are an alienPeace Corps. Living allowances you receiveand military and government disability pensions.who works for a foreign government or interna-as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leadertional organization and you file a waiver underfor housing, utilities, household supplies, food,section 247(b) of the Immigration and National- Disability Incomeand clothing are exempt from tax.ity Act to keep your immigrant status, different
rules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Publi- Taxable allowances. The following al- Generally, if you retire on disability, you must
cation 525. lowances must be included in your income andreport your pension or annuity as income. There
reported as wages. is a tax credit for people who are permanentlyEmployment abroad. For information on in- and totally disabled. For information on this• Allowances paid to your spouse and minorcome earned abroad, get Publication 54. credit and the definition of permanent and totalchildren while you are a volunteer leaderdisability, see chapter 34.training in the United States.Military
Disability pensions.Generally, you must re-• Living allowances designated by the Di-
port as income any amount you receive for per-Payments you receive as a member of a militaryrector of the Peace Corps as basic com-
sonal injury or sickness through an accident orservice generally are taxed as wages except forpensation. These are allowances for
health plan that is paid for by your employer. Ifretirement pay, which is taxed as a pension.personal items such as domestic help,
both you and your employer pay for the plan,Allowances generally are not taxed. For morelaundry and clothing maintenance, enter-
only the amount you receive that is due to yourinformation on the tax treatment of military al-tainment and recreation, transportation,
employer’s payments is reported as income.lowances and benefits, get Publication 3, Armed and other miscellaneous expenses.
However, certain payments may not be taxableForces’ Tax Guide. • Leave allowances. to you. Your employer should be able to give you
Military retirement pay.If your retirement specific details about your pension plan and tell• Readjustment allowances or terminationpay is based on age or length of service, it is you the amount you paid for your disability pen-payments. These are considered receivedtaxable and must be included in your income as sion. In addition to disability pensions and annui-by you when credited to your account.a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or ties, you may be receiving other payments for
on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not sickness and injury.
include in your income the amount of any reduc-Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps
tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustmentCost paid by you.If you pay the entire cost of
survivor annuity for your spouse or children allowance during his period of service, to be paid a health or accident insurance plan, do not in-
under the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec- to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour of clude any amounts you receive from the plan for
tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan. duty. Although the allowance is not available to personal injury or sickness as income on your
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 53

Page 56 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax return. If your plan reimbursed you for medi- to become a member, on September 24,Long-Term Carecal expenses you deducted in an earlier year,1975.
Insurance Contractsyou may have to include some, or all, of the3) You receive the disability payments for areimbursement in your income. See  Reim- combat-related injury. This is a personalLong-term care insurance contracts are gener-bursement in a later year in chapter 23. injury or sickness that: ally treated as accident and health insurance
Cafeteria plans.Generally, if you are cov- contracts. Amounts you receive from thema) Results directly from armed conflict,ered by an accident or health insurance plan (other than policyholder dividends or premium
through a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the refunds) generally are excludable from incomeb) Takes place while you are engaged ininsurance premiums was not included in your as amounts received for personal injury or sick-extra-hazardous service,income, you are not considered to have paid the ness. To claim an exclusion for payments madec) Takes place under conditions simulat-premiums and you must include any benefits on a per diem or other periodic basis under aing war, including training exercisesyou receive in your income. If the amount of the long-term care insurance contract, you must filesuch as maneuvers, orpremiums was included in your income, you are Form 8853 with your return.
considered to have paid the premiums, and anyd) Is caused by an instrumentality of war.A long-term care insurance contract is anbenefits you receive are not taxable. insurance contract that only provides coverage
4) You would be entitled to receive disabilityfor qualified long-term care services. TheAccrued leave payment.If you retire on disa-
compensation from the Department of Vet-contract must:bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for
erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-accrued annual leave is a salary payment. The • Be guaranteed renewable,tion for it. Your exclusion under thispayment is not a disability payment. Include it in
your income in the tax year you receive it. condition is equal to the amount you would• Not provide for a cash surrender value or
be entitled to receive from the VA. other money that can be paid, assigned,Retirement and profit-sharing plans.If you pledged, or borrowed,receive payments from a retirement or
• Provide that refunds, other than refundsprofit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-Pension based on years of service.If you
on the death of the insured or completebility retirement, do not treat the payments as areceive a disability pension based on years of
surrender or cancellation of the contract,disability pension. The payments must be re-service, you generally must include it in your
and dividends under the contract may beported as a pension or annuity. For more infor-income. But if it is a result of active service in one
used only to reduce future premiums ormation on pensions, see chapter 11. of the listed government services and one of the
increase future benefits, andlisted conditions applies, do not include in in-How to report.If you retired on disability, youcome the part of your pension that you would• Generally not pay or reimburse expensesmust include in income any disability pensionhave received if the pension had been based onincurred for services or items that wouldyou receive under a plan that is paid for by youra percentage of disability. You must include thebe reimbursed under Medicare, exceptemployer. You must report your taxable disabil-
rest of your pension in your income. where Medicare is a secondary payer ority payments as wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or
the contract makes per diem or other peri-Form 1040A, until you reach minimum retire-
Terrorist attack.Do not include in your in- odic payments without regard to ex-ment age. Minimum retirement age generally is
penses.come disability payments you receive for injuriesthe age at which you can first receive a pension
resulting directly from a violent attack that oc-or annuity if you are not disabled.
curs while you are a U.S. government employeeBeginning on the day after you reach mini- Qualified long-term care services.Qualifiedperforming official duties. For your disability pay-mum retirement age, payments you receive are long-term care services are:ments to be tax exempt, the Secretary of Statetaxable as a pension or annuity. Report the
payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, ormust determine the attack was a terrorist attack.• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. The rules peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-
for reporting pensions are explained in How To habilitative services, and maintenance andVA disability benefits.Disability benefits you
Report in chapter 11. personal care services, andreceive from the VA are not included in your
income. If you are a military retiree and you• Required by a chronically ill individual
receive disability benefits from other than theand provided pursuant to a plan of care asMilitary and Government VA, do not include in your income the amount ofprescribed by a licensed health care prac-
Disability Pensions disability benefits equal to the VA benefits totitioner.
which you are entitled.Certain military and government disability pen-
Retroactive VA determination.If you retiresions are not taxable. Chronically ill individual.A chronically ill in-
from the armed services based on years of serv-You may be able to exclude from income dividual is one who has been certified by a
ice and are later given a retroactive service-con-amounts you receive as a pension, annuity, or licensed health care professional within the pre-
nected disability rating by the VA, yoursimilar allowance for personal injury or sickness vious 12 months as one of the following.
retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-resulting from active service in one of the follow-
• An individual who, for at least 90 days, ising government services. cluded from income up to the amount of VA
unable to perform at least two activities ofdisability benefits you would have been entitled• The armed forces of any country. daily living without substantial assistanceto receive. You can claim a refund of any taxdue to loss of functional capacity. Activi-• The National Oceanic and Atmospheric paid on the excludable amount (subject to theties of daily living are eating, toileting,Administration. statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-turn on Form 1040X for each previous year• The Public Health Service. nence.during the retroactive period.
• The Foreign Service. • An individual who requires substantial su-If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-
pervision to be protected from threats toance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-
health and safety due to severe cognitiveity benefits, do not include in your income theConditions for exclusion.Do not include the
impairment.portion of the severance payment equal to thedisability payments in your income if any of the
following conditions apply. VA benefit you would have been entitled to re-
ceive in that same year. However, you mustLimit on exclusion.You can generally ex-1) You were entitled to receive a disabilityinclude in your income any lump-sum readjust-clude from gross income up to $210 a day forpayment before September 25, 1975. ment or other nondisability severance payment2002. This limit is indexed for inflation. See Limit
you received on release from active duty, even if2) You were a member of a listed govern- on exclusion, under Long-Term Care Insurance
you are later given a retroactive disability ratingment service or its reserve component, or Contracts, under Sickness and Injury Benefits in
by the VA.were under a binding written commitment Publication 525 for more information.
Page 54 Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 57 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
surance Act are taxable and you must includeOther compensation. Many other amountsWorkers’ Compensation you receive as compensation for sickness orthem in your income. However, do not include
injury are not taxable. These include the follow-them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobAmounts you receive as workers’ compensation ing amounts.injury.for an occupational sickness or injury are fully
exempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’ • Compensatory damages you receive forIf you received income because of a disabil-
compensation act or a statute in the nature of a physical injury or physical sickness,ity, see Disability Income, earlier.workers’ compensation act. The exemption also whether paid in a lump sum or in periodic
applies to your survivors. The exemption, how- payments.
Federal Employees’ Compensation Actever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits • Benefits you receive under an accident oryou receive based on your age, length of serv-(FECA). Payments received under this Act forhealth insurance policy on which eitherice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if youpersonal injury or sickness, including paymentsyou paid the premiums or your employerretired because of an occupational sickness orto beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.paid the premiums but you had to includeinjury. However, you are taxed on amounts you receivethem in your income.  
under this Act as continuation of pay for up toIf part of your workers’ compensation • Disability benefits you receive for loss of45 days while a claim is being decided. Reportreduces your social security or income or earning capacity as a result ofequivalent railroad retirement benefitsthis income on line 7 of Form 1040 or FormCAUTION
!
injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-received, that part is considered social security1040A, or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, payicy.(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits andfor sick leave while a claim is being processed is
may be taxable. For more information, see Pub- • Compensation you receive for permanenttaxable and must be included in your income as
lication 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail- loss or loss of use of a part or function ofwages.road Retirement Benefits. your body, or for your permanent disfig-
If part of the payments you receive urement. This compensation must be
under FECA reduces your social se-Return to work. If you return to work after based only on the injury and not on the
curity or equivalent railroad retirementqualifying for workers’ compensation, payments
CAUTION
!
period of your absence from work. These
benefits received, that part is considered socialyou continue to receive while assigned to light benefits are not taxable even if your em-
security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-duties are taxable. Report these payments as ployer pays for the accident and health
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, orfits and may be taxable. For a discussion of theplan that provides these benefits.
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. taxability of these benefits, see Other Income
under Miscellaneous Income, later. Reimbursement for medical care. A reim-
Other Sickness and Injury bursement for medical care is generally not tax-You can deduct the amount you spend to buy
able. However, this reimbursement may reduceback sick leave for an earlier year to be eligibleBenefits
your medical expense deduction. For more in-for nontaxable FECA benefits for that period. It is
formation, see chapter 23.In addition to disability pensions and annuities,a miscellaneous deduction subject to the 2%
you may receive other payments for sickness orlimit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you buy back
injury. sick leave in the same year you use it, the
amount reduces your taxable sick leave pay. DoRailroad sick pay.Payments you receive as
not deduct it separately.sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 55

Page 58 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What tips to report.Report to your employer
1) Write information about your tips in a tiponly cash, check, or credit card tips you receive.
diary, or If your total tips for any one month from any
7. one job are less than $20, do not report them to2) Keep copies of documents that show your
your employer.tips, such as restaurant bills and credit
Do not report the value of any noncash tips,card charge slips.
such as tickets or passes, to your employer. YouTip Income You should keep your daily tip record with yourdo not pay social security and Medicare taxes or
personal records. You must keep your recordsrailroad retirement tax on these tips.
for as long as they are important for administra-
How to report.If your employer does not givetion of the federal tax law. For information onIntroduction you any other way to report tips, you can usehow long to keep records, see Publication 552,
Form 4070.  To get a year’s supply of the form,This chapter is for employees who receive tipsRecordkeeping for Individuals.
ask the IRS or your employer for Publicationfrom customers. If you keep a tip diary, you can use Form1244. Fill in the information asked for on theAll tips you receive are income and are sub-4070A,  Employee’s Daily Record of Tips. To get form, sign and date the form, and give it to yourject to federal income tax. You must include inForm 4070A, ask the Internal Revenue Serviceemployer.gross income all tips you receive directly from(IRS) or your employer for Publication 1244.If you do not use Form 4070, give your em-customers, tips from charge customers that arePublication 1244 includes a year’s supply ofployer a statement with the following informa-paid to you by your employer, and your share ofForm 4070A. Each day, write in the informationtion.any tips you receive under a tip-splitting orasked for on the form.tip-pooling arrangement. • Your name, address, and social securityIf you do not use Form 4070A, start yourThe value of noncash tips, such as tickets, number.records by writing your name, your employer’spasses, or other items of value are also incomename, and the name of the business if it is• Your employer’s name, address, and busi-and subject to tax. different from your employer’s name. Then, ness name (if it is different from theReporting your tip income correctly is noteach workday, write the date and the followingemployer’s name).difficult. You must do three things. information.
• The month (or the dates of any shorter1) Keep a daily tip record. • Cash tips you get directly from customersperiod) in which you received tips.
or from other employees.2) Report tips to your employer. • The total tips required to be reported for
• Tips from credit card charge customers that period.3) Report all your tips on your income tax
that your employer pays you.return. You must sign and date the statement. You
• The value of any noncash tips you get,should keep a copy with your personal records.
such as tickets, passes, or other items ofThis chapter will show you how to do these three Your employer may require you to report yourvalue.things and what to do on your tax return if you tips more than once a month. However, thehave not done the first two. This chapter will also• The amount of tips you paid out to otherstatement cannot cover a period of more thanshow you how to treat allocated tips. employees through tip pools or tip split- one calendar month.
ting, or other arrangements, and the Electronic tip statement.Your employerUseful Items names of the employees to whom you can have you furnish your tip statements elec-You may want to see: paid the tips. tronically.
Publication When to report. Give your report for eachDo not write in your tip diary themonth to your employer by the 10th of the next❏ 531 Reporting Tip Income amount of any service charge that yourmonth. If the 10th falls on a Saturday, Sunday,employer adds to a customer’s bill andCAUTION
!
❏ 1244 Employee’s Daily Record of Tips or legal holiday, give your employer the report bythen pays to you and treats as wages. This isand Report to Employer the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, orpart of your wages, not a tip. legal holiday.
Form (and Instructions) Electronic tip record.You may use an Example 1. You must report your tips re-❏ 4137 Social Security and Medicare Taxelectronic system provided by your employer toceived in June 2003 by July 10, 2003.on Unreported Tip Income record your daily tips. You must receive and
keep a paper copy of this record.❏ 4070 Employee’s Report of Tips to Example 2. You must report your tips re-
Employer ceived in April 2003 by May 12, 2003. May 10th
is on a Saturday, and the 12th is the next day
that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
Reporting Tips to Your Final report.If your employment ends dur-
ing the month, you can report your tips whenKeeping a Daily Tip Employer your employment ends.
Record Penalty for not reporting tips.If you do notWhy report tips to your employer? You
report tips to your employer as required, youmust report tips to your employer so that:
Why keep a daily tip record?You must keep may be subject to a penalty equal to 50% of the
• Your employer can withhold federal in-a daily tip record so you can: social security and Medicare taxes or railroad
come tax and social security and Medicareretirement tax you owe on the unreported tips.• Report your tips accurately to your em- taxes or railroad retirement tax, (For information about these taxes, see Report-ployer, ing social security and Medicare taxes on tips• Your employer can report the correct not reported to your employer under Reporting• Report your tips accurately on your tax amount of your earnings to the Social Se-Tips on Your Tax Return, later.) The penaltyreturn, and curity Administration or Railroad Retire-amount is in addition to the taxes you owe.ment Board (which affects your benefits• Prove your tip income if your return is ever You can avoid this penalty if you can showwhen you retire or if you become disabled,questioned. reasonable cause for not reporting the tips toor your family’s benefits if you die), andyour employer. To do so, attach a statement to
• You can avoid the penalty for not reportingHow to keep a daily tip record.There are two your return explaining why you did not report
tips to your employer (explained later).ways to keep a daily tip record. You can either: them.
Page 56 Chapter 7 Tip Income

Page 59 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Giving your employer money for taxes. and noncash tips, on your tax return. Any tips in your total tax amount on line 61, and write
Your regular pay may not be enough for your “UT” and the total of the uncollected taxes on theyou reported to your employer for 2002 are in-
employer to withhold all the taxes you owe on dotted line next to line 61.cluded in the wages shown in box 1 of your Form
your regular pay plus your reported tips. If thisW–2. Add to the amount in box 1 only the tips
happens, you can give your employer moneyyou did not report to your employer.
until the close of the calendar year to pay the If you received $20 or more in cash andrest of the taxes. Allocated Tipscharge tips in a month and did notIf you do not give your employer enough report all of those tips to your em-CAUTION
!
money, your employer will apply your regular If your employer allocated tips to you, they areployer, see Reporting social security and Medi-pay and any money you give to the taxes in the shown separately in box 8 of your Form W–2.care taxes on tips not reported to your employer,following order. They are not included in box 1 with your wageslater.
and reported tips. If box 8 is blank, this discus-1) All taxes on your regular pay. sion does not apply to you.If you did not keep a daily tip record as
required and an amount is shown in2) Social security and Medicare taxes or rail-
box 8 of your Form W–2, see Allocatedroad retirement tax on your reported tips. What are allocated tips?These are tips thatCAUTION
!
Tips, later. your employer assigned to you in addition to the3) Federal, state, and local income taxes on tips you reported to your employer for the year.If you kept a daily tip record and reported tipsyour reported tips. Your employer will have done this only if:to your employer as required under the rulesAny taxes that remain unpaid can be col-explained earlier, add the following tips to the• You worked in a restaurant, cocktaillected by your employer from your next amount in box 1 of your Form W–2. lounge, or similar business that must allo-paycheck. If withholding taxes remain uncol-
cate tips to employees, andlected at the end of the year, you may be subject• Cash and charge tips you received that
to a penalty for underpayment of estimated totaled less than $20 for any month. • The tips you reported to your employer
taxes. See Publication 505, Tax Withholding were less than your share of 8% of food• The value of noncash tips, such as tickets,and Estimated Tax, for more information. and drink sales.passes, or other items of value.
Uncollected taxes. You must report
on your tax return any social security How were your allocated tips figured?TheExample. John Allen began working at theand Medicare taxes or railroad retire-CAUTION
!
tips allocated to you are your share of an amountDiamond Restaurant (his only employer in 2002)ment tax that remained uncollected at the end of figured by subtracting the reported tips of allon June 30 and received $10,000 in wages2002. See Reporting uncollected social security employees from 8% (or an approved lower rate)during the year. John kept a daily tip recordand Medicare taxes on tips under Reporting of food and drink sales (other than carryoutshowing that his tips for June were $18 and hisTips on Your Tax Return, later. These uncol- sales and sales with a service charge of 10% ortips for the rest of the year totaled $7,000. Helected taxes will be shown in box 12 of your 2002 more). Your share of that amount was figuredwas not required to report his June tips to hisForm W–2 (codes A and B). using either a method provided by anemployer, but he reported all of the rest of hisemployer-employee agreement or a methodtips to his employer as required. provided by IRS regulations based on employ-John’s Form W–2 from Diamond RestaurantTip Rate Determination ees’ sales or hours worked. For informationshows $17,000 ($10,000 wages plus $7,000 re-about the exact allocation method used, askand Education Program ported tips) in box 1. He adds the $18 unre-your employer.ported tips to that amount and reports $17,018Your employer may participate in the Tip Rateas wages on his tax return.Determination and Education Program. The pro- Must you report your allocated tips on your
gram was developed to help employees and return? You must report allocated tips on yourReporting social security and Medicareemployers understand and meet their tip report- tax return unless either of the following excep-taxes on tips not reported to your employer.ing responsibilities. tions applies.If you received $20 or more in cash and chargeThere are two agreements under the pro-tips in a month from any one job and did not1) You kept a daily tip record, or other evi-gram — the Tip Rate Determination Agreementreport all of those tips to your employer, youdence that is as credible and as reliable as(TRDA) and the Tip Reporting Alternative Com-must report the social security and Medicarea daily tip record, as required under rulesmitment (TRAC). In addition, employers in thetaxes on the unreported tips as additional tax onexplained earlier.food and beverage industry may be able to getyour return. To report these taxes, you must fileapproval of an employer-designed EmTRAC 2) Your tip record is incomplete, but it showsa return even if you would not otherwise have toprogram. For information on the EmTRAC pro- that your actual tips were more than thefile. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot filegram, see Notice 2001–1 in Internal Revenue tips you reported to your employer plus theForm 1040EZ or Form 1040A.)Bulletin No. 2001–2 (or Cumulative Bulletin allocated tips.Use Form 4137 to figure these taxes. Enter2001–1 ).
the tax on line 57, Form 1040, and attach FormIf either exception applies, report your actual tipsYour employer can provide you with a copy4137 to your return. on your return. Do not report the allocated tips.of the agreement. If you want to learn more
See What tips to report under Reporting Tips onabout these agreements, contact the local tip
Your Tax Return, earlier.Reporting uncollected social security andcoordinator. A list of tip coordinators is available
Medicare taxes on tips. If your employerat www.irs.gov.
could not collect all the social security and Medi-How to report allocated tips.If you must
care taxes or railroad retirement tax you owe onreport allocated tips on your return, add the
tips reported for 2002, the uncollected taxes willamount in box 8 of your Form W–2 to the
be shown in box 12 of your Form W–2 (codes Aamount in box 1. Report the total as wages on
Reporting Tips on Yourand B). You must report these amounts as addi-line 7 of Form 1040. (You cannot file Form
tional tax on your return. You may have uncol-1040EZ or Form 1040A.)
Tax Return lected taxes if your regular pay was not enoughBecause social security and Medicare taxes
for your employer to withhold all the taxes youwere not withheld from the allocated tips, you
owe and you did not give your employer enoughmust report those taxes as additional tax on yourHow to report tips.Report your tips with your
money to pay the rest of the taxes. return. Complete Form 4137,  and include thewages on line 1, Form 1040EZ, or line 7, Form
To report these uncollected taxes, you must allocated tips on line 1 of the form. See Report-1040A or Form 1040.
ing social security and Medicare taxes on tipsfile a return even if you would not otherwise have
not reported to your employer under Reportingto file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot fileWhat tips to report.You must report all tips
Tips on Your Tax Return, earlier.Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A.) Include the taxesyou received in 2002, including both cash tips
Chapter 7 Tip Income Page 57

Page 60 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses name first on the account and give that person’s
SSN to the payer. (For information on who owns❏ 1212 List of Original Issue Discount the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,Instruments8. later.) If the joint account contains combined
funds, give the SSN of the person whose nameForm (and Instructions) is listed first on the account.
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and These rules apply both to joint ownership byInterest Income Ordinary Dividends a married couple and to joint ownership by other
individuals. For example, if you open a joint❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and savings account with your child using funds be-Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040Alonging to the child, list the child’s name first onImportant Change Filers the account and give the child’s SSN.
❏ 3115 Application for Change inReporting interest on your return.Interest Custodian account for your child.If yourAccounting Methodincome that exceeds a certain amount must be child is the actual owner of an account that is
❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Seriesreported on a separate schedule. For 2002, this recorded in your name as custodian for the child,
EE and I U.S. Savings Bondsamount has increased. If you file Form 1040A, give the child’s SSN to the payer. For example,
Issued After 1989you must now attach Schedule 1 to your return if you must give your child’s SSN to the payer of
your interest income is more than $1,500; if you dividends on stock owned by your child, even❏ 8818 Optional Form To Recordfile Form 1040, you must now attach Schedule B though the dividends are paid to you as custo-Redemption of Series EE and Ito your return if your interest income is more dian.U.S. Savings Bonds Issued Afterthan $1,500. Before 2002, you had to attach 1989 Penalty for failure to supply SSN.If youSchedule 1 or Schedule B if your interest income do not give your SSN to the payer of interest,was more than $400. you may have to pay a penalty. See Failure to
supply social security number under Penalties in
chapter 1. Backup withholding also may apply.
General InformationImportant Reminder Backup withholding. Your interest income is
A few items of general interest are covered here.generally not subject to regular withholding.
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-Foreign-source income.If you are a U.S. citi-Tax on investment income of a child under
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on thezen with interest income from sources outsideage 14. Part of a child’s 2002 investment in-
income. Under backup withholding, the payer ofthe United States (foreign income), you mustcome may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This
interest must withhold, as income tax, a percent-report that income on your tax return unless it ismay happen if all the following are true.
age of the amount you are paid. For 2003, theexempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you
percentage is 30%.1) The child was under age 14 at the end ofreside inside or outside the United States and
2002. A child born on January 1, 1989, iswhether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the Backup withholding may also be required if
considered to be age 14 at the end offoreign payer. the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter-
2002. mined that you underreported your interest or
dividend income. For more information, see2) The child had more than $1,500 of invest-Backup Withholding in chapter 5.ment income (such as taxable interest and
dividends) and has to file a tax return.Introduction Reporting backup withholding.If backup
withholding is deducted from your interest in-3) Either parent was alive at the end of 2002.This chapter discusses: come, the payer must give you a Form
If all these statements are true, Form 8615, Tax• Different types of interest income, 1099–INT for the year that indicates the amount
for Children Under Age 14 Who Have Invest-withheld. The Form 1099–INT will show any• What interest is taxable and what interestment Income of More Than $1,500, must be backup withholding as “Federal income tax with-is nontaxable, completed and attached to the child’s tax return.held.”
If any of these statements is not true, Form 8615• When to report interest income, and
is not required and the child’s income is taxed atJoint accounts.If two or more persons hold• How to report interest income on your taxhis or her own tax rate. property (such as a savings account or bond) asreturn. However, the parent can choose to includejoint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or tenants
the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’sin common, each person’s share of any interestIn general, any interest that you receive or thatreturn if certain requirements are met. Usefrom the property is determined by local law.is credited to your account and can be with-Form 8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’sdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have to be Income from property given to a child.Interest and Dividends, for this purpose.entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to this Property you give as a parent to your child underFor more information about the tax on invest-rule are discussed later in this chapter. the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, thement income of children and the parents’ elec-You may be able to deduct expenses you Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law,tion, see chapter 32.have in earning this income on Schedule A becomes the child’s property.Beneficiary of an estate or trust.Interest(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. See Income from the property is taxable to theyou receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trustchapter 30. child, except that any part used to satisfy a legalis generally taxable income. You should receiveobligation to support the child is taxable to theRecordkeeping. You should keep a a Schedule K–1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’sparent or legal guardian having that legal obliga-list showing sources and amounts ofShare of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from tion.interest received during the year. Also,RECORDS
the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K–1 and itskeep the forms you receive that show your inter-instructions will tell you where to report the in-Savings account with parent as trustee.est income (Forms 1099–INT, for example) ascome on your Form 1040. Interest income from a savings account openedan important part of your records. for a child who is a minor, but placed in the nameSocial security number (SSN). You must and subject to the order of the parents as trust-give your name and SSN to any person requiredees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of theUseful Items by federal tax law to make a return, statement,state in which the child resides, both of theYou may want to see: or other document that relates to you. This in- following are true.cludes payers of interest.
Publication SSN for joint account.If the funds in a joint 1) The savings account legally belongs to the
❏ 537 Installment Sales account belong to one person, list that person’s child.
Page 58 Chapter 8 Interest Income

Page 61 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) The parents are not legally permitted to 2002. You must include the $575 in your in-
come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-use any of the funds to support the child.Taxable Interest ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject
to the net investment income limit.Taxable interest includes interest you receiveForm 1099–INT. Interest income is generally
from bank accounts, loans you make to others,reported to you on Form 1099–INT, Interest Gift for opening account.If you receive non-and other sources. The following are some otherIncome, or a similar statement, by banks, sav- cash gifts or services for making deposits or forsources of taxable interest.ings and loans, and other payers of interest. This opening an account in a savings institution, youform shows you the interest you received duringDividends that are actually interest.Certain may have to report the value as interest.the year. Keep this form for your records. You dodistributions commonly called dividends are ac-For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts ornot have to attach it to your tax return.tually interest. You must report as interestservices valued at more than $10 must be re-Report on your tax return the total amount ofso-called “dividends” on deposits or on shareported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 oraccounts in:interest income that you receive for the tax year. more, gifts or services valued at more than $20This includes amounts reported to you on Form must be reported as interest. The value is deter-• Cooperative banks,1099–INT and amounts for which you did not mined by the cost to the financial institution.• Credit unions,receive a Form 1099–INT.
Example. You open a savings account at• Domestic building and loan associations,Nominees. Generally, if someone receives
your local bank and deposit $800. The accountinterest as a nominee for you, that person will• Domestic savings and loan associations,earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-give you a Form 1099–INT showing the interest
culator. If no other interest is credited to your• Federal savings and loan associations,received on your behalf.
account during the year, the Form 1099–INTandIf you receive a Form 1099–INT that in- you receive will show $35 interest for the year.cludes amounts belonging to another person,• Mutual savings banks. You must report $35 interest income on your taxsee the discussion on nominee distributions return.under How To Report Interest Income in chapter Money market funds. Generally, amounts1 of Publication 550, or see the Schedule 1you receive from money market funds should beInterest on insurance dividends.Interest on(Form 1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040) in-reported as dividends, not as interest. insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-structions.
surance company that can be withdrawn annu-Money market certificates, savings certifi-Incorrect amount. If you receive a Form ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited tocates, and other deferred interest accounts.1099–INT that shows an incorrect amount (or your account. However, if you can withdraw itIf you open any of these accounts, interest mayother incorrect information), you should ask the only on the anniversary date of the policy (orbe paid at fixed intervals of 1 year or less duringissuer for a corrected form. The new Form other specified date), the interest is taxable inthe term of the account. You generally must1099–INT you receive will be marked “Cor- the year that date occurs.include this interest in your income when yourected.” actually receive it or are entitled to receive it
Prepaid insurance premiums.Any increasewithout paying a substantial penalty. The sameForm 1099–OID. Reportable interest income in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,is true for accounts that mature in 1 year or lessmay also be shown on Form 1099–OID, Origi- advance premiums, or premium deposit funds isand pay interest in a single payment at maturity.nal Issue Discount. For more information about interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-If interest is deferred for more than 1 year, seeamounts shown on this form, see Original Issue ums due on insurance policies or made avail-Original Issue Discount (OID), later.Discount (OID), later in this chapter. able for you to withdraw.
Interest subject to penalty for early with-
drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferredExempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest U.S. obligations.Interest on U.S. obligations,interest account before maturity, you may havedividends you receive from a regulated invest- such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,to pay a penalty. You must report the totalment company (mutual fund) are not included in issued by any agency or instrumentality of theamount of interest paid or credited to your ac-your taxable income. (However, see United States is taxable for federal income taxcount during the year, without subtracting theInformation-reporting requirement, next.) You purposes.penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-will receive a notice from the mutual fund telling Treasury bills generally have a 4-week,ings in chapter 1 of Publication 550, for moreyou the amount of the exempt-interest dividends 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturity period.information on how to report the interest andthat you received. Exempt-interest dividends They are issued at a discount in the amount ofdeduct the penalty.are not shown on Form 1099–DIV or Form $1,000 and multiples of $1,000. The difference
1099–INT. Money borrowed to invest in money mar- between the discounted price you pay for the
ket certificate.The interest you pay on moneybills and the face value you receive at maturity isInformation-reporting requirement.Al- borrowed from a bank or savings institution tointerest income. Generally, you report this inter-though exempt-interest dividends are not taxa-meet the minimum deposit required for a moneyest income when the bill is paid at maturity.ble, you must show them on your tax return ifmarket certificate from the institution and theTreasury notes have maturity periods ofyou have to file. This is an information-reportinginterest you earn on the certificate are two sepa-more than 1 year, ranging up to 10 years. Matur-requirement and does not change the rate items. You must report the total interest youity periods for Treasury bonds are longer thanexempt-interest dividends to taxable income.earn on the certificate in your income. If you10 years. Both notes and bonds generally pay
itemize deductions, you can deduct the interestinterest every 6 months. Generally, you reportNote. Exempt-interest dividends paid fromyou pay as investment interest, up to the amountthis interest for the year paid. For more informa-specified private activity bonds may be subjectof your net investment income. See Interest Ex-tion, see U.S. Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bondsto the alternative minimum tax. See Alternativepenses in chapter 3 of Publication 550. in chapter 1 of Publication 550.Minimum Tax in chapter 31 for more informa-
tion. Chapter 1 of Publication 550 contains a For other information on TreasuryExample. You deposited $5,000 with a
discussion on private activity bonds, under State notes or bonds, write to:bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to
or Local Government Obligations. make up the $10,000 minimum deposit required
Bureau of the Public Debtto buy a 6–month money market certificate. The
Attn: Customer Service andInterest on VA dividends.Interest on insur-certificate earned $575 at maturity in 2002, but
Current Income Branchance dividends that you leave on deposit withyou received only $265, which represented the
Parkersburg, WV 26106–2186the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not$575 you earned minus $310 interest charged
taxable. This includes interest paid on dividendson your $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form
Or, on the Internet, visit:on converted United States Government Life1099–INT for 2002 showing the $575 interest
www. publicdebt.treas.govInsurance and on National Service Life Insur-you earned. The bank also gives you a state-
ance policies. ment showing that you paid $310 interest for
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 59

Page 62 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For information on series EE, series I, andBonds traded flat.If you buy a bond when bonds issued after November 1965. Series EE
series HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savings interest has been defaulted or when the interestand series E bonds are issued at a discount. The
Bonds, later. has accrued but has not been paid, that interest face value is payable to you at maturity.
is not income and is not taxable as interest ifSeries I bonds were first offered in 1998.Interest on tax refunds.Interest you receivepaid later. When you receive a payment of thatThese are inflation-indexed bonds issued aton tax refunds is taxable income. interest, it is a return of capital that reduces thetheir face amount with a maturity period of 30
remaining cost basis. Interest that accrues afterInterest on condemnation award.If the con- years. The face value plus accrued interest is
the date of purchase, however, is taxable inter-demning authority pays you interest to compen- payable to you at maturity.
est income for the year it is received or accrued.sate you for a delay in paying an award, the If you use the cash method of reporting in-See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later,interest is taxable. come, you can report the interest on series EE,for more information. series E, and series I bonds in either of theInstallment sale payments.If a contract for
following ways.Below-market loans. A below-market loan isthe sale or exchange of property provides for
a loan on which no interest is charged or ondeferred payments, it also usually provides for
1) Method 1. Postpone reporting the interestwhich interest is charged at a rate below theinterest payable with the deferred payments.
until the earlier of the year you cash orapplicable federal rate. See Below-MarketThat interest is taxable when you receive it. If
dispose of the bonds or the year they ma-Loans in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for morelittle or no interest is provided for in a deferred
ture. (However, see Savings bonds traded,information.payment contract, part of each payment may be
later.) Note. Series E bonds issued intreated as interest. See Unstated Interest and
1962 and 1972 matured in 2002. If youOriginal Issue Discount in Publication 537, In- U.S. Savings Bonds have used method 1, you generally muststallment Sales.
report the interest on these bonds on yourThis section provides tax information on U.S.Interest on annuity contract.Accumulated 2002 return.savings bonds. It explains how to report theinterest on an annuity contract you sell before its
interest income on these bonds and how to treat2) Method 2. Choose to report the increasematurity date is taxable.
transfers of these bonds. in redemption value as interest each year.Usurious interest.Usurious interest is inter-
For other information on U.S. savingsYou must use the same method for all series EE,est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as
bonds, write to: series E, and series I bonds you own. If you dointerest unless state law automatically changes
not choose method 2 by reporting the increaseit to a payment on the principal.
in redemption value as interest each year, youIndividual retirement arrangements (IRAs). Bureau of the Public Debt must use method 1.Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.Attn: Savings Bond Operations Office If you plan to cash your bonds in theInterest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. YouParkersburg, WV 26106–1328 same year that you will pay for highergenerally do not include it in your income until
education expenses, you may want toyou make withdrawals from the IRA. See chap-
TIP
Or, on the Internet, visit: use method 1 because you may be able toter 18. www.savingsbonds.gov exclude the interest from your income. To learnInterest income on frozen deposits.Ex- how, see Education Savings Bond Program,clude from your gross income interest on frozen later.Accrual method taxpayers.If you use an ac-deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the
crual method of accounting, you must reportyear, you cannot withdraw any part of the de- Change from method 1. If you want tointerest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itposit because: change your method of reporting the interestaccrues. You cannot postpone reporting interestfrom method 1 to method 2, you can do so1) The financial institution is bankrupt or in-until you receive it or the bonds mature. Accrualwithout permission from the IRS. In the year ofsolvent, or methods of accounting are explained in chapterchange you must report all interest accrued to1 under Accounting Methods.2) The state where the institution is located date and not previously reported for all your
has placed limits on withdrawals becauseCash method taxpayers. If you use the cash bonds.
other financial institutions in the state aremethod of accounting, as most individual tax-Once you choose to report the interest eachbankrupt or insolvent. payers do, you generally report the interest onyear, you must continue to do so for all series
U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. TheEE, series E, and series I bonds you own and forThe amount of interest you must exclude is
cash method of accounting is explained in chap-any you get later, unless you request permissionthe interest that was credited on the frozen de-
ter 1 under Accounting Methods. to change, as explained next.posits minus the sum of:
Series HH Bonds. These bonds are issued at Change from method 2. To change from1) The net amount you withdrew from theseface value. Interest is paid twice a year by directmethod 2 to method 1, you must request permis-deposits during the year, and deposit to your bank account. If you are a cashsion from the IRS. Permission for the change is
method taxpayer, you must report interest on2) The amount you could have withdrawn as automatically granted if you send the IRS a
these bonds as income in the year you receive it.of the end of the year (not reduced by any statement that meets all the following require-
Series HH Bonds were first offered in 1980.penalty for premature withdrawals of a ments.
Before 1980, series H bonds were issued. Se-time deposit).
ries H bonds are treated the same as series HH1) You have typed or printed at the top,If you receive a Form 1099–INT for interestbonds. If you are a cash method taxpayer, you“Change in Method of Accounting Underincome on deposits that were frozen at the endmust report the interest when you receive it.Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc.of 2002, see Frozen deposits under How To Series H bonds have a maturity period of 3099–49 (or later update).”Report Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publica-years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.tion 550, for information about reporting this 2) It includes your name and social security
Series EE and series I bonds.Interest oninterest income exclusion on your tax return. number under the label in (1).
these bonds is payable when you redeem theThe interest you exclude is treated as
3) It identifies the savings bonds for whichbonds. The difference between the purchasecredited to your account in the following year.
you are requesting this change.price and the redemption value is taxable inter-You must include it in income when you can
est.withdraw it. 4) It includes your agreement to:
Series EE bonds were first offered in July
a) Report all interest on any bonds ac-Example. $100 of interest was credited on 1980. They have a maturity period of 30 years.
quired during or after the year ofyour frozen deposit during the year. You with- Before July 1980, series E bonds were issued.
change when the interest is realizeddrew $80 but could not withdraw any more as of The original 10-year maturity period of series E
upon disposition, redemption, or finalthe end of the year. You must include $80 in bonds has been extended to 40 years for bonds
maturity, whichever is earliest, andyour income for the year. You must exclude $20. issued before December 1965 and 30 years for
Page 60 Chapter 8 Interest Income

Page 63 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
new co-owner will report only his or her share ofTable 8–1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
the interest earned after the transfer.
If bonds that you and a co-owner boughtIF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ...
jointly are reissued to each of you separately inYou buy a bond in your name and the name of You. the same proportion as your contribution to theanother person as co-owners, using only your purchase price, neither you nor your co-ownerown funds has to report at that time the interest earned
before the bonds were reissued.You buy a bond in the name of another person, The person for whom you bought the bond.
who is the sole owner of the bond
Example 1. You and your spouse eachYou and another person buy a bond as Both you and the other co-owner, in proportionspent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 seriesco-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond. EE savings bond. The bond was issued to youpurchase price and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-
pone reporting interest on the bond. You laterYou and your spouse, who live in a community You and your spouse. if you file separate
have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, oneproperty state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally
in your name and one in your spouse’s name. Atproperty report one-half of the interest.
that time neither you nor your spouse has to
report the interest earned to the date of reissue.
b) Report all interest on the bonds ac- the bond that is taxable to you. The co-owner
Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EEquired before the year of change whenwho redeemed the bond is a “nominee.” See
savings bond entirely with your own funds. Thethe interest is realized upon disposition,Nominee distributions under How To Report In-
bond was issued to you and your spouse asredemption, or final maturity, whicheverterest Income in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for
co-owners. You both postpone reporting interestis earliest, with the exception of the in-more information about how a person who is a
on the bond. You later have the bond reissuedterest reported in prior tax years.nominee reports interest income belonging to
as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one inanother person.
your spouse’s name. You must report half the5) It includes your signature. Both co-owners’ funds used. If you and interest earned to the date of reissue.You must attach this statement to your tax re-the other co-owner each contribute part of the
turn for the year of change, which you must file Transfer to a trust.If you own series E, seriesbond’s purchase price, the interest is generally
by the due date (including extensions). EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to ataxable to each of you, in proportion to the
You can have an automatic extension of 6 trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you mustamount each of you paid.
months from the due date of your return (exclud- include in your income for that year the interestCommunity property. If you and youring extensions) to file the statement with an earned to the date of transfer if you have notspouse live in a community property state andamended return. To get this extension, you must already reported it. However, if you are consid-hold bonds as community property, one-half ofhave filed your original return by the due date ered the owner of the trust and if the increase inthe interest is considered received by each of(including extensions). At the top of the state- value both before and after the transfer contin-you. If you file separate returns, each of youment, write “Filed pursuant to section ues to be taxable to you, you can continue togenerally must report one-half of the bond inter-301.9100–2.” defer reporting the interest earned each year.est. For more information about communityYou must include the total interest in your in-By the date you file the original state-property, see Publication 555, Community Prop- come in the year you cash or dispose of thement, you must also send a copy to theerty. bonds or the year the bonds finally mature,address below. whichever is earlier.Table 8–1. These rules are also shown inInternal Revenue Service The same rules apply to previously unre-Table 8–1.Attention: CC:PA:T ported interest on series EE or series E bonds ifP.O. Box 7604 the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH orOwnership transferred.If you bought seriesBenjamin Franklin Station series H bonds you acquired in a trade for theE, series EE, or series I bonds entirely withWashington, DC 20044 series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bondsyour own funds and had them reissued in yourIf you use a private delivery service, send the traded, later.co-owner’s name or beneficiary’s name alone,copy to the address below. you must include in your gross income for theDecedents. The manner of reporting interestInternal Revenue Service year of reissue all interest that you earned onincome on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,Attention: CC:PA:T these bonds and have not previously reported.after the death of the owner, depends on the1111 Constitution Avenue, NW But, if the bonds were reissued in your nameaccounting and income-reporting method previ-Room 6561 alone, you do not have to report the interestously used by the decedent. This is explained inWashington, DC 20224 accrued at that time. chapter 1 of Publication 550.
This same rule applies when bonds (otherInstead of filing this statement, you can re- Savings bonds traded. If you postponed re-than bonds held as community property) arequest permission to change from method 2 to porting the interest on your series EE or series Etransferred between spouses incident to di-method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case, bonds, you did not recognize taxable incomevorce.follow the form instructions for an automatic when you traded the bonds for series HH orPurchased jointly.If you and a co-ownerchange. No user fee is required. series H bonds, unless you received cash in the
each contributed funds to buy series E, seriestrade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued inEE, or series I bonds jointly and later have theries HH bonds.) Any cash you received is in-the names of co-owners, such as you and yourbonds reissued in the co-owner’s name alone,come up to the amount of the interest earned onchild or you and your spouse, interest on theyou must include in your gross income for thethe bonds traded. When your series HH or se-bond is generally taxable to the co-owner whoyear of reissue your share of all the interestries H bonds mature, or if you dispose of thembought the bond. earned on the bonds that you have not previ-before maturity, you report as interest the differ-
ously reported. At the time of reissue, the formerOne co-owner’s funds used.  If you used ence between their redemption value and your
co-owner does not have to include in gross in-your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the tax cost. Your cost is the sum of the amount you
come his or her share of the interest earned thaton the interest. This is true even if you let the paid for the traded series EE or series E bonds
was not reported before the transfer. This inter-other co-owner redeem the bond and keep all plus any amount you had to pay at the time of
est, however, as well as all interest earned afterthe proceeds. Under these circumstances, since the trade.
the reissue, is income to the former co-owner.the other co-owner will receive a Form
This income-reporting rule also applies when1099–INT at the time of redemption, the other Example. You own series E bonds with ac-
the bonds are reissued in the name of yourco-owner must provide you with another Form crued interest of $523 and a redemption value of
former co-owner and a new co-owner. But the1099–INT showing the amount of interest from $2,723 and have postponed reporting the inter-
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 61

Page 64 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
est. You trade the bonds for $2,500 in series HH c) Certain employer-provided educationalEducation Savings assistance benefits.bonds and $223 in cash. You must report the
Bond Program$223 as taxable income in the year of the trade.
Effect of other education benefits.Do notChoice to report interest in year of trade.You may be able to exclude from income all orinclude in your qualified expenses any expensesYou can choose to treat all of the previouslypart of the interest you receive on the redemp-used to:unreported accrued interest on the series EE ortion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the
series E bonds traded for series HH bonds asyear if you pay qualified higher educational ex-1) Figure an education credit on Form 8863,income in the year of the trade. If you make thispenses during the same year. This exclusion is
choice, it is treated as a change from method 1. 2) Figure how much of a distribution from aknown as the Education Savings Bond Program.
See Change from method 1 under Series EE Coverdell ESA you can exclude from yourIf you are married, you can qualify for thisincome, orand series I bonds, earlier. exclusion only if you file a joint return with your
spouse. 3) Figure how much of a distribution from aForm 1099–INT for U.S. savings bonds inter- qualified tuition program you can excludeForm 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure yourest. When you cash a bond, the bank or other from your income.exclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 orpayer that redeems it must give you a Form
Form 1040A.1099–INT if the interest part of the payment you Amount excludable. If the total proceeds
receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form Qualified U.S. savings bonds.A qualified (interest and principal) from the qualified U.S.
1099–INT should show the interest as the differ- savings bonds you redeem during the year areU.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued
ence between the amount you received and the not more than your qualified higher educationalafter 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be
amount paid for the bond. However, your Form expenses for the year, you can exclude all of theissued either in your name (sole owner) or in
1099–INT may show more interest than you interest. If the proceeds are more than the ex-your and your spouse’s names (co-owners).
have to include on your income tax return. For penses, you can exclude only part of the inter-You must be at least 24 years old before the
example, this may happen if any of the following est.bond’s issue date.
are true. To determine the excludable amount, multi-The date a bond is issued may be ear-ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.lier than the date the bond is pur-1) You chose to report the increase in the The numerator (top part) of the fraction is thechased because bonds are issued asCAUTION
!
redemption value of the bond each year. qualified higher educational expenses you paidof the first day of the month in which they areThe interest shown on your Form during the year. The denominator (bottom part)purchased.1099–INT will not be reduced by amounts of the fraction is the total proceeds you received
previously included in income. during the year.
Beneficiary.You can designate any individual2) You received the bond from a decedent. Example. In February 2002, Mark and(including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond.The interest shown on your Form Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-1099–INT will not be reduced by any inter-Verification by IRS.If you claim the exclu-ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in Aprilest reported by the decedent before death,sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp-1994. They received proceeds of $7,280, repre-or on the decedent’s final return, or by thetion information from the Department of thesenting principal of $5,000 and interest ofestate on the estate’s income tax return.Treasury. $2,280. In 2002, they paid $4,000 of their
daughter’s college tuition. They are not claiming3) Ownership of the bond was transferred. Qualified expenses.Qualified higher edu-
an education credit for that amount, and they doThe interest shown on your Form cational expenses are tuition and fees requirednot have a Coverdell ESA. They can exclude1099–INT will not be reduced by interestfor you, your spouse, or your dependent (for$1,253 ($2,280 × ($4,000 ÷ $7,280)) of interestthat accrued before the transfer. whom you can claim an exemption) to attend anin 2002. They must pay tax on the remainingeligible educational institution.4) You were named as a co-owner and the $1,027 ($2,280 − $1,253) interest.Qualified expenses include any contributionother co-owner contributed funds to buy
Modified adjusted gross income limit.you make to a qualified tuition program or to athe bond. The interest shown on your
The interest exclusion is limited if your modifiedCoverdell education savings account.Form 1099–INT will not be reduced by the adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:Qualified expenses do not include expensesamount you received as nominee for the
for room and board or for courses involvingother co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in • $57,600 to $72,600 for taxpayers filing sin-
sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of athis chapter, for more information about gle or head of household, and
degree or certificate granting program.the reporting requirements.) • $86,400 to $116,400 for married taxpayers
Eligible educational institutions.These5) You received the bond in a taxable distri- filing jointly or for a qualifying widow(er)
institutions include most public, private, andbution from a retirement or profit-sharing with dependent child.
nonprofit universities, colleges and vocationalplan. The interest shown on your Form You do not qualify for the interest exclusion ifschools that are accredited and are eligible to1099–INT will not be reduced by the inter- your modified AGI is equal to or more than theparticipate in student aid programs run by theest portion of the amount taxable as a dis- upper limit for your filing status.Department of Education.tribution from the plan and not taxable as
Modified AGI, for purposes of this exclusion,interest. (This amount is generally shownReduction for certain benefits.You must is adjusted gross income (line 22 of Form 1040Aon Form 1099–R, Distributions From Pen-reduce your qualified higher educational ex-or line 36 of Form 1040) figured before thesions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar-penses by certain benefits the student may haveinterest exclusion, and modified by adding backing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc.,received. These benefits include: any:for the year of distribution.)
1) Qualified scholarships that are exemptFor more information on including the correct 1) Foreign earned income exclusion,from tax (see chapter 13 for information onamount of interest on your return, see How To 2) Foreign housing exclusion or deduction,qualified scholarships), andReport Interest Income, later. Publication 550
includes examples showing how to report these 3) Exclusion of income for bona fide re-2) Any other nontaxable payments (other
amounts. sidents of American Samoa,than gifts, bequests, or inheritances) re-
ceived for educational expenses, such as:Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex- 4) Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,
empt from state and local taxes. The a) Veterans’ educational assistance bene-5) Exclusion for adoption benefits receivedForm 1099–INT you receive will indi-
TIP
fits, under an employer’s adoption assistancecate the amount that is for U.S. savings bond program,interest in box 3. Do not include this amount onb) Benefits under a qualified tuition pro-
your state or local income tax return. gram, or 6) Deduction for tuition and fees, and
Page 62 Chapter 8 Interest Income

Page 65 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
7) Deduction for student loan interest. A debt instrument generally has OID whenForm 1099–OID. The issuer of the debt in-
the instrument is issued for a price that is less strument (or your broker, if you held the instru-Use the worksheet in the instructions for linethan its stated redemption price at maturity. OID ment through a broker) should give you Form9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If youis the difference between the stated redemption 1099–OID, Original Issue Discount, or a similarclaim any of the exclusion or deduction itemsprice at maturity and the issue price. statement, if the total OID for the calendar yearlisted above (except items 6 and 7), add the is $10 or more. Form 1099–OID will show, inAll instruments that pay no interest beforeamount of the exclusion or deduction (except box 1, the amount of OID for the part of the yearmaturity are presumed to be issued at a dis-any deduction for tuition and fees or student loan that you held the bond. It also will show, in box 2,count. Zero coupon bonds are one example ofinterest) to the amount on line 5 of the work- other interest that you must include in your in-these instruments.sheet, and enter the total on Form 8815, line 9, come. A copy of Form 1099–OID will be sent toThe OID accrual rules generally do not applyas your modified AGI. the IRS. Do not file your copy with your return.to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-If you have investment interest expense in- Keep it for your records.turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).curred to earn royalty income, see Education In most cases, you must report the entireSee Discount on Short-Term Obligations inSavings Bond Program in chapter 1 of Publica- amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099–OID aschapter 1 of Publication 550.tion 550. interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown
Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter- on Form 1099–OID, later in this discussion, forDe minimis OID. You can treat the discount
est exclusion, you must keep a written more information.as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)
record of the qualified U.S. savingsof the stated redemption price at maturity multi-
RECORDS
Nominee. If someone else is the holder ofbonds you redeem. Your record must includeplied by the number of full years from the date ofrecord (the registered owner) of an OID instru-the serial number, issue date, face value, andoriginal issue to maturity. This small discount isment that belongs to you and receives a Formtotal redemption proceeds (principal and inter-known as “de minimis” OID. 1099–OID on your behalf, that person must giveest) of each bond. You can use Form 8818, you a Form 1099–OID.Optional Form To Record Redemption of SeriesExample 1. You bought a 10-year bond with
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989,a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099–OID.
to record this information. You should also keepissued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofYou must refigure the OID shown in box 1 of
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10Form 1099–OID if either of the following apply. 
mentation that shows you paid qualified higher(the number of full years from the date of original
1) You bought the debt instrument after itseducational expenses during the year. issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20
original issue and paid a premium or andiscount is less than $25, the OID is treated as
acquisition premium.zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you will
Bonds Sold Between recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)2) The debt instrument is a stripped bond or
Interest Dates a stripped coupon (including certain zeroExample 2. The facts are the same as in coupon instruments).Example 1, except that the bond was issued atIf you sell a bond between interest payment For information about figuring the correct$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discountdates, part of the sales price represents interest amount of OID to include in your income, seeis more than the $25 figured in Example 1, youaccrued to the date of sale. You must report that Figuring OID on Long-Term Debt Instruments inmust include the OID in income as it accruespart of the sales price as interest income for the Publication 1212.over the term of the bond.year of sale.
If you buy a bond between interest paymentDebt instrument bought after original is-Form 1099–OID not received. If you haddates, part of the purchase price representssue. If you buy a debt instrument with deOID for the year but did not receive a Forminterest accrued before the date of purchase.minimis OID at a premium, the discount is not1099–OID, see Publication 1212, which listsWhen that interest is paid to you, treat it as aincludible in income. If you buy a debt instrumenttotal OID on certain debt instruments and hasreturn of your capital investment, rather thanwith de minimis OID at a discount, the discountinformation that will help you figure OID. If yourinterest income, by reducing your basis in theis reported under the market discount rules. Seedebt instrument is not listed in Publication 1212,bond. See Accrued interest on bonds under Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publica-consult the issuer for further information aboutHow To Report Interest Income in chapter 1 oftion 550. the accrued OID for the year.Publication 550 for information on reporting the
payment. Refiguring periodic interest shown on FormExceptions to reporting OID.The OID rules
1099–OID. If you disposed of a debt instru-discussed in this chapter do not apply to the
ment or acquired it from another holder duringfollowing debt instruments. Insurance the year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest
1) Tax-exempt obligations. (However, seeDates, earlier, for information about the treat-Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-
Stripped tax-exempt obligations under ment of periodic interest that may be shown inciary of the insured person are usually not taxa-
Stripped Bonds and Coupons in chapter 1 box 2 of Form 1099–OID for that instrument.ble. But if you receive the proceeds in
of Publication 550).installments, you must usually report a part of Certificates of deposit (CDs).If you buy aeach installment payment as interest income.2) U.S. savings bonds. CD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you mustFor more information about insurance pro- include in income each year a part of the total3) Short-term debt instruments (those with aceeds received in installments, see Publication interest due and report it in the same manner asfixed maturity date of not more than 1 year525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income. other OID.from the date of issue).
This also applies to similar deposit arrange-Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-4) Obligations issued by an individual beforements with banks, building and loan associa-ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re- March 2, 1984. tions, etc., including:ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income,
not as interest income. See chapter 11 for infor-5) Loans between individuals, if all the follow-• Time deposits,mation on pension and annuity income. ing are true.
• Bonus plans,
a) The lender is not in the business of• Savings certificates,Original Issue lending money.
• Deferred income certificates,Discount (OID) b) The amount of the loan, plus the
amount of any outstanding prior loans• Bonus savings certificates, andOriginal issue discount (OID) is a form of inter-between the same individuals, isest. You generally include OID in your income as • Growth savings certificates.$10,000 or less.it accrues over the term of the debt instrument,
whether or not you receive any payments from c) Avoiding any federal tax is not one ofBearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 gener-
the issuer. the principal purposes of the loan. ally must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 63

Page 66 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CDs that are not in registered form. They are not policy dividends left to accumulate, when theyyou received a Form 1099–INT or Form
issued in the depositor’s name and are transfer- are credited to your account and subject to your 1099–OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-
able from one individual to another. withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet age firm as the payer.
Banks must provide the IRS and the person entered in your passbook. You cannot use Form 1040A if you must use
redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099–INT. You constructively receive income on the Form 1040, as described next.
deposit or account even if you must: 
More information.See chapter 1 of Publica- Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead
1) Make withdrawals in multiples of evention 550 for more information about OID and of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:
amounts,related topics, such as market discount bonds.
1) You forfeited interest income because of2) Give a notice to withdraw before making the early withdrawal of a time deposit,the withdrawal,State or Local
2) You received or paid accrued interest on3) Withdraw all or part of the account to with-Government Obligations securities transferred between interestdraw the earnings, or payment dates,Generally, interest on obligations used to fi-4) Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless3) You had a financial account in a foreignnance government operations is not taxable ifthe interest you are to receive on an earlycountry, unless the combined value of allthe obligations are issued by a state, the Districtwithdrawal or redemption is substantiallyforeign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-of Columbia, a possession of the United States,less than the interest payable at maturity.ing all of 2002 or the accounts were withor any of their political subdivisions. This in-
certain U.S. military banking facilities,cludes interest on certain obligations issued af-
Accrual method. If you use an accrualter 1982 by an Indian tribal government treated 4) You acquired taxable bonds after 1987method, you report your interest income whenas a state. and choose to reduce interest income fromyou earn it, whether or not you have received it.Interest on arbitrage bonds issued by state the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-Interest is earned over the term of the debtor local governments after October 9, 1969, and mium (see Bond Premium Amortization ininstrument.interest on private activity bonds generally is chapter 3 of Publication 550), ortaxable.
Example. If, in the previous example, you5) You are reporting OID in an amount moreFor more information on whether such inter-
use an accrual method, you must include the or less than the amount shown on Formest is taxable or tax exempt, see State or Local
interest in your income as you earn it. You would1099–OID.Government Obligations in chapter 1 of Publica-
report the interest as follows: 2000, $80; 2001,tion 550.
$249.60; and 2002, $179.20. Schedule B. You must complete Part I of
Information reporting requirement.If you Schedule B (Form 1040) if you file Form 1040Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds ismust file a tax return, you are required to show and any of the following apply.taxable in the year the coupon becomes due andany tax-exempt interest you received on yourpayable. It does not matter when you mail the1) Your taxable interest income is more thanreturn. This is an information-reporting require-coupon for payment. $1,500.ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-
est to taxable interest. 2) You are claiming the interest exclusion
under the Education Savings Bond Pro-
gram (discussed earlier).How To Report
3) You had a foreign account.When To Report Interest Income 4) You received interest from a seller-fi-
nanced mortgage, and the buyer used theInterest Income Generally, you report all of your taxable interestproperty as a home.income on line 8a, Form 1040; line 8a, FormWhen to report your interest income depends on 5) You received a Form 1099–INT for tax-ex-1040A; or line 2, Form 1040EZ.whether you use the cash method or an accrual empt interest.You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interestmethod to report income. income is more than $1,500. Instead, you must6) You received a Form 1099–INT for U.S.use Form 1040A or Form 1040.Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use savings bond interest that includes
the cash method. If you use this method, you amounts you reported before 2002.Form 1040A. You must complete Part I of
generally report your interest income in the yearSchedule 1 (Form 1040A) if you file Form 1040A7) You received, as a nominee, interest thatin which you actually or constructively receive it.and any of the following are true. actually belongs to someone else.However, there are special rules for reporting
the discount on certain debt instruments. See1) Your taxable interest income is more than8) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-
U.S. Savings Bonds and Original Issue Dis- $1,500. est on frozen deposits.
count, earlier. 2) You are claiming the interest exclusion9) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-
under the Education Savings Bond Pro- est on a bond that you bought betweenExample. On September 1, 2000, you gram (discussed earlier). interest payment dates.loaned another individual $2,000 at 12%, com-
pounded annually. You are not in the business3) You received interest from a seller-fi-10) Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list is
of lending money. The note stated that principalnanced mortgage, and the buyer used the true.
and interest would be due on August 31, 2002.property as a home. On line 1, Part I, list each payer’s name and theIn 2002, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-4) You received a Form 1099–INT for tax-amount received from each. If you received apal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cashexempt interest. Form 1099–INT or Form 1099–OID from a bro-method, you must include in income on your kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.2002 return the $508.80 interest you received in5) You received a Form 1099–INT for U.S.
that year. savings bond interest that includes Form 1099–INT. Your taxable interest in-amounts you reported before 2002.Constructive receipt.You constructively come, except for interest from U.S. savings
receive income when it is credited to your ac- bonds and Treasury obligations, is shown in box6) You received, as a nominee, interest that
count or made available to you. You do not need 1 of Form 1099–INT. Add this amount to anyactually belongs to someone else.
to have physical possession of it. For example, other taxable interest income you received. You7) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-you are considered to receive interest, divi- must report all of your taxable interest incomeest or frozen deposits.dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac- even if you do not receive a Form 1099–INT.
count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar List each payer’s name and the amount of inter- If you forfeited interest income because of
financial institution, or interest on life insurance est income received from each payer on line 1. If the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
Page 64 Chapter 8 Interest Income

Page 67 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ductible amount will be shown on Form Form 1040A, line 39, or on Form 1040, line 62
1) Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal1099–INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with-(federal income tax withheld).
of all interest listed on line 1.drawal of savings in chapter 1 of Publication Box 5 of Form 1099–INT shows investment
550. expenses you may be able to deduct as an 2) Below the subtotal write “U.S. Savings
Box 3 of Form 1099–INT shows the amountitemized deduction. See chapter 3 of PublicationBond Interest Previously Reported” and
of interest income you received from U.S. sav-550 for more information about investment ex- enter amounts previously reported or inter-
ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and est accrued before you received the bond.penses.
Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3
3) Subtract these amounts from the subtotalU.S. savings bond interest previouslyto any other taxable interest income you re-
and enter the result on line 2.reported. If you received a Form 1099–INTceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 was
for U.S. savings bond interest, the form maypreviously included in interest income. If part of
More information. For more informationshow interest you do not have to report. Seethe amount shown in box 3 was previously in-
about how to report interest income, see chapterForm 1099–INT for U.S. savings bonds interest,cluded in your interest income, see U.S. savings
1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for theearlier, under U.S. Savings Bonds.bond interest previously reported, later.
form you must file.On line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form 1040),Box 4 of Form 1099–INT (federal income tax
or on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),withheld) will contain an amount if you were
report all the interest shown on your Formsubject to backup withholding. Report the
1099–INT. Then follow these steps.amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7, on
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 65

Page 68 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Backup withholding. Your dividend incomeUseful Items
is generally not subject to regular withholding.You may want to see:
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-
9. ing to ensure that income tax is collected on thePublication
income. Under backup withholding, the payer of❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individualsdividends must withhold, as income tax, a per-
centage of the amount you are paid. For 2003,❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
this percentage is 30%.Dividends and ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions Backup withholding may also be required if
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter-Form (and Instructions)Other Corporate mined that you underreported your interest or
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and dividend income. For more information, see
Ordinary Dividends Backup Withholding in chapter 5.Distributions
❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and
Stock certificate in two or more names.IfOrdinary Dividends for Form 1040A
two or more persons hold stock as   joint tenants,Filers
tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common,Important Change
each person may receive a share of any divi-
dends from the stock. Each person’s share isReporting dividends on your return.Ordi-
determined by local law.nary dividend income that exceeds a certain
General Informationamount must be reported on a separate sched-
Form 1099–DIV. Most corporations use Formule. For 2002, this amount has increased. If you
This section discusses general rules on dividend1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to showfile Form 1040A, you must now attach Scheduleincome. you the distributions you received from them1 to your return if your dividend income is more
during the year. Keep this form with your rec-than $1,500; if you file Form 1040, you must nowTax on investment income of a child underords. You do not have to attach it to your taxattach Schedule B to your return if your dividendage 14. Part of a child’s 2002 investment in-return. Even if you do not receive Formincome is more than $1,500. Before 2002, youcome may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This1099–DIV, you must still report all of your taxa-had to attach Schedule 1 or Schedule B if yourmay happen if all of the following are true.ble dividend income.dividend income was more than $400. 1) The child was under age 14 at the end of
Reporting tax withheld.If tax is withheld2002. A child born on January 1, 1989, is
from your dividend income, the payer must giveconsidered to be age 14 at the end of
2002. you a Form 1099–DIV that indicates the amount
withheld.2) The child had more than $1,500 of invest-Important Reminder
ment income (such as taxable interest andNominees. If someone receives distribu-
dividends) and has to file a tax return.tions as a nominee for you, that person will giveForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen with
you a Form 1099–DIV, which will show distribu-dividend income from sources outside the 3) Either parent was alive at the end of 2002.tions received on your behalf.United States (foreign income), you must reportIf all of these statements are true, Form 8615,that income on your tax return unless it is ex-Tax for Children Under Age 14 Who Have In-Form 1099–MISC. Certain substitute pay-empt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re-vestment Income of More Than $1,500, must be ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interestside inside or outside the United States andcompleted and attached to the child’s tax return.that are received by a broker on your behalfwhether or not you receive a Form 1099 from theIf any of these statements is not true, Form 8615must be reported to you on Form 1099–MISC,foreign payer. is not required and the child’s income is taxed atMiscellaneous Income, or a similar statement.
his or her own tax rate. See Reporting Substitute Payments under Short
However, the parent can choose to includeSales in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for more
the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’sinformation about reporting these payments.
return if certain requirements are met. UseIntroduction
Form 8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’sIncorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.IfThis chapter discusses the tax treatment of:Interest and Dividends, for this purpose. you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrectFor more information about the tax on invest-amount (or other incorrect information), you• Ordinary dividends, ment income of children and the parents’ elec-should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The• Capital gain distributions, tion, see chapter 32. new Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor-
• Nontaxable distributions, and rected.”Beneficiary of an estate or trust.Dividends
• Other distributions you may receive from aand other distributions you receive as a benefi-Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,corporation or a mutual fund. ciary of an estate or trust are generally taxableexchanged, or otherwise disposed of after aincome. You should receive a Schedule K–1 dividend is declared, but before it is paid, theThis chapter also explains how to report divi-(Form 1041), Beneficiary’s Share of Income,
owner of record (usually the payee shown on thedend income on your tax return. Deductions, Credits, etc., from the fiduciary.
dividend check) must include the dividend inYour copy of Schedule K–1 and its instructionsDividends are distributions of money, stock, income.will tell you where to report the income on youror other property paid to you by a corporation.
Form 1040.You also may receive dividends through a part- Dividends received in January.If a regu-nership, an estate, a trust, or an association that lated investment company (mutual fund) or realSocial security number (SSN). You mustis taxed as a corporation. However, some estate investment trust (REIT) declares a divi-give your name and SSN (or individual taxpayeramounts you receive that are called dividends dend (including any exempt-interest dividend oridentification number (ITIN)) to any person re-are actually interest income. (See Dividends that capital gain distribution) in October, November,quired by federal tax law to make a return, state-are actually interest under Taxable Interest in or December payable to shareholders of recordment, or other document that relates to you. Thischapter 8.) on a date in one of those months but actuallyincludes payers of dividends. If you do not give
Most distributions are paid in cash (or pays the dividend during January of the nextyour SSN or ITIN to the payer of dividends, you
check). However, distributions can consist ofmay have to pay a penalty. calendar year, you are considered to have re-
more stock, stock rights, other property, or serv- ceived the dividend on December 31. You reportFor more information on SSNs and ITINs,
the dividend in the year it was declared.ices. see Social security number (SSN) in chapter 8.
Page 66 Chapter 9 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 69 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share-complete liquidation of a corporation. These dis-
holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capitaltributions are, at least in part, one form of aOrdinary Dividends Gains. return of capital. They may be paid in one or
Report undistributed capital gains as more installments. You will receive a FormOrdinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-long-term capital gains in column (f) on line 11 of 1099–DIV from the corporation showing you themon type of distribution from a corporation. TheySchedule D (Form 1040). The tax paid on these amount of the liquidating distribution in box 8 orare paid out of the earnings and profits of agains by the mutual fund or REIT is shown in box 9.corporation and are ordinary income to you. This2 of Form 2439. You take credit for this tax by For more information on liquidating distribu-means they are not capital gains. You can as-including it on line 68, Form 1040, and checking tions, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.sume that any dividend you receive on commonbox a on that line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unlessto your return, and keep Copy C for your rec-the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi- Distributions of Stockords.nary dividends will be shown in box 1 of the and Stock RightsForm 1099–DIV you receive. Basis adjustment. Increase your basis in
your mutual fund or your interest in a REIT byDistributions by a corporation of its own stockDividends used to buy more stock.The cor- the difference between the gain you report andare commonly known as stock dividends. Stockporation in which you own stock may have athe credit you claim for the tax paid. rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri-dividend reinvestment plan. This plan lets you butions by a corporation of rights to acquire theAdditional information.For more informationchoose to use your dividends to buy (through an corporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividendson the treatment of distributions from mutualagent) more shares of stock in the corporation and stock rights are not taxable to you, and youfunds, see Publication 564.instead of receiving the dividends in cash. If you do not report them on your return.are a member of this type of plan and you use
your dividends to buy more stock at a price Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.
equal to its fair market value, you still must Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights
report the dividends as income. are taxable to you if any of the following apply.NontaxableIf you are a member of a dividend reinvest-
1) You or any other shareholder has thement plan that lets you buy more stock at a priceDistributions choice to receive cash or other propertyless than its fair market value, you must report
instead of stock or stock rights.as dividend income the fair market value of theYou may receive a return of capital or a tax-freeadditional stock on the dividend payment date.distribution of more shares of stock or stock2) The distribution gives cash or other prop-You also must report as dividend income anyrights. These distributions are not treated theerty to some shareholders and an increaseservice charge subtracted from your cash divi-same as ordinary dividends or capital gain distri-in the percentage interest in thedends before the dividends are used to buy thebutions. corporation’s assets or earnings and prof-additional stock. But you may be able to deduct its to other shareholders.the service charge. See chapter 30 for more
Return of Capital 3) The distribution is in convertible preferredinformation about deducting expenses of pro-
stock and has the same result as in (2).ducing income.
A return of capital is a distribution that is not paidIn some dividend reinvestment plans, you 4) The distribution gives preferred stock toout of the earnings and profits of a corporation. Itcan invest more cash to buy shares of stock at a some common stock shareholders andis a return of your investment in the stock of theprice less than fair market value. If you choose common stock to other common stockcompany. You should receive a Formto do this, you must report as dividend income shareholders.1099–DIV or other statement from the corpora-the difference between the cash you invest and
tion showing you what part of the distribution is a5) The distribution is on preferred stock. (Thethe fair market value of the stock you buy. When
return of capital. On Form 1099–DIV, a nontax-distribution, however, is not taxable if it isfiguring this amount, use the fair market value of
able return of capital will be shown in box 3. Ifan increase in the conversion ratio of con-the stock on the dividend payment date.
you do not receive such a statement, you reportvertible preferred stock made solely to
the distribution as an ordinary dividend.Money market funds. Report amounts you take into account a stock dividend, stock
receive from money market funds as dividend split, or similar event that would otherwiseBasis adjustment.A return of capital reducesincome. Money market funds are a type of mu- result in reducing the conversion right.)the basis of your stock. It is not taxed until yourtual fund and should not be confused with bankbasis in the stock is fully recovered. If you buyThe term “stock” includes rights to acquiremoney market accounts that pay interest. stock in a corporation in different lots at differentstock, and the term “shareholder” includes a
times, and you cannot definitely identify theholder of rights or of convertible securities.
shares subject to the return of capital, reduceIf you receive taxable stock dividends or
the basis of your earliest purchases first.stock rights, include their fair market value at the
Capital Gain When the basis of your stock has been re-time of the distribution in your income.
duced to zero, report any additional return ofPreferred stock redeemable at a premium.Distributions capital that you receive as a capital gain.If you hold preferred stock having a redemptionWhether you report it as a long-term or price higher than its issue price, the differenceCapital gain distributions (also called capitalshort-term capital gain depends on how long(the redemption premium) generally is taxablegain dividends) are paid to you or credited toyou have held the stock. See Holding Period in as a constructive distribution of additional stockyour account by regulated investment compa- chapter 15. on the preferred stock. For more information,nies (commonly called mutual funds)  and real
see chapter 1 of Publication 550.estate investment trusts (REITs). They will be Example. You bought stock in 1990 for
shown in box 2a of the Form 1099–DIV you $100. In 1993, you received a return of capital ofBasis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-
receive from the mutual fund or REIT. $80. You did not include this amount in yourceived in a taxable distribution is their fair market
Report capital gain distributions as long-termincome, but you reduced the basis of your stockvalue when distributed. If you receive stock or
capital gains regardless of how long you ownedto $20. You received a return of capital of $30 instock rights that are not taxable to you, see
your shares in the mutual fund or REIT. 2002. The first $20 of this amount reduced yourStocks and Bonds under Basis of Investment
basis to zero. You report the other $10 as aProperty in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for infor-Undistributed capital gains of mutual fundslong-term capital gain for 2002. You must reportmation on how to figure their basis.and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs as a long-term capital gain any return of capitalkeep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on Fractional shares.You may not own enoughyou receive on this stock in later years.them. You must treat your share of these gains stock in a corporation to receive a full share of
as distributions, even though you did not actu-Liquidating distributions.Liquidating distri- stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-
ally receive them. However, they are not in- butions, sometimes called liquidating dividends, dend. However, with the approval of the share-
cluded on Form 1099–DIV. Instead, they are are distributions you receive during a partial or holders, the corporation may set up a plan in
Chapter 9 Dividends and Other Corporate DistributionsPage 67

Page 70 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
which fractional shares are not issued, but in-Information reporting requirement.Al- If you receive capital gain distributions, you
stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are given though exempt-interest dividends are not taxa-may be able to use Form 1040A or you may
to the shareholders. Any cash you receive for ble, you must show them on your tax return ifhave to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-
fractional shares under such a plan is treated as you have to file a return. This is an informationbutions only in chapter 17. If you receive nontax-
an amount realized on the sale of the fractional reporting requirement and does not change theable distributions required to be reported as
shares. You must determine your gain or loss exempt-interest dividends to taxable income.capital gains, you must use Form 1040. You
and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched- cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receive anyAlternative minimum tax treatment.ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is the dividend income.Exempt-interest dividends paid from specifieddifference between the cash you receive and theprivate activity bonds may be subject to theForm 1099–DIV. If you owned stock on whichbasis of the fractional shares sold. alternative minimum tax. See Alternative Mini-you received $10 or more in dividends and othermum Tax in chapter 31 for more information.Example. You own one share of common distributions, you should receive a Form
stock that you bought on January 3, 1994, for 1099–DIV. Even if you do not receive FormDividends on insurance policies.Insurance
$100. The corporation declared a common stock 1099–DIV, you must report all of your taxablepolicy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses
dividend of 5% on June 30, 2002. The fair mar- dividend income.to pay your premiums are not taxable. However,
ket value of the stock at the time the stockyou must report as taxable interest income theSee Form 1099–DIV for more information
dividend was declared was $200. You were paidinterest that is paid or credited on dividends lefton how to report dividend income.
$10 for the fractional-share stock dividend underwith the insurance company.
a plan described in the above paragraph. You Form 1040A. You must complete Part II ofIf dividends on an insurance contract (other
figure your gain or loss as follows: Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) and attach it to yourthan a modified endowment contract) are distrib-
Form 1040A, if:uted to you, they are a partial return of the
Fair market value of old stock..... $200.00 premiums you paid. Do not include them in your
Fair market value of stock dividend 1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1 of Formgross income until they are more than the total of(cash received)..............  +10.00 1099–DIV) are more than $1,500, orall net premiums you paid for the contract. (ForFair market value of old stock and information on the treatment of a distribution2) You received, as a nominee, dividendsstock dividend............... $210.00 from a modified endowment contract, see Distri- that actually belong to someone else.bution Before Annuity Starting Date From aBasis (cost) of old stock after the
List on line 5 each payer’s name and thestock dividend (($200 ÷ $210) × Nonqualified Plan under Taxation of Nonperi-
amount of ordinary dividends you received. If$100)...................... $95.24 odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension and
you received a Form 1099–DIV from a broker-Basis (cost) of stock dividend Annuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu-
(($10 ÷ $210) × $100).......... +  4.76 age firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.tions on insurance policies on line 16b (Form
Total...................... $100.00 Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed1040) or line 12b (Form 1040A).
on line 5. Also enter this total on line 9, FormCash received................ $10.00 Dividends on veterans’ insurance. Divi- 1040A.Basis (cost) of stock dividend...... − 4.76 dends you receive on veterans’ insurance poli-Gain $5.24 cies are not taxable. In addition, interest onForm 1040. You must fill in Part II of Schedule
Because you had held the share of stock fordividends left with the Department of VeteransB and attach it to your Form 1040, if:
more than 1 year at the time the stock dividendAffairs is not taxable.
was declared, your gain on the stock dividend is 1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1 of FormPatronage dividends. Generally, patronagea long-term capital gain. 1099–DIV) are more than $1,500, ordividends you receive in money from a coopera-
Scrip dividends. A corporation that de-tive organization are included in your income.2) You received, as a nominee, dividends
clares a stock dividend may issue you a scripDo not include in your income patronage that actually belong to someone else.
certificate that entitles you to a fractional share.dividends you receive on: If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,The certificate is generally nontaxable when you you must also complete Part III of Schedule B.1) Property bought for your personal use, orreceive it. If you choose to have the corporation
List on line 5, Part II of Schedule B, eachsell the certificate for you and give you the pro-2) Capital assets or depreciable propertypayer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi-ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be-bought for use in your business. But youdends you received. If your securities are heldtween the proceeds and the portion of your basismust reduce the basis (cost) of the itemsby a brokerage firm (in “street name”), list thein the corporation’s stock that is allocated to thebought. If the dividend is more than thename of the brokerage firm that is shown oncertificate. adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-Form 1099–DIV as the payer. If your stock isHowever, if you receive a scrip certificateport the excess as income. held by a nominee who is the owner of record,that you can choose to redeem for cash instead
and the nominee credited or paid you dividendsThese rules are the same whether the coop-of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-
on the stock, show the name of the nominee anderative paying the dividend is a taxable orceive it. You must include its fair market value in
the dividends you received or for which you weretax-exempt cooperative.income on the date you receive it.
credited.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do not Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedreport these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-on line 5. Also enter this total on line 9, Formport these amounts on line 21 of Form 1040, line1040.Other Distributions 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.
Expenses related to dividend income.YouYou may receive any of the following distribu- may be able to deduct expenses related to divi-tions during the year. dend income if you itemize your deductions on
Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 30 forExempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest How To Report
general information about deducting expensesdividends you receive from a regulated invest-
of producing income.ment company (mutual fund) are not included inDividend Income
your taxable income. You will receive a notice
More information. For more informationfrom the mutual fund telling you the amount of Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or
about how to report dividend income, see chap-the exempt-interest dividends you received. Form 1040A to report your dividend income.
ter 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for theExempt-interest dividends are not shown on Report the total of your ordinary dividends on
form you must file.Form 1099–DIV or Form 1099–INT. line 9 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Page 68 Chapter 9 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 71 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax— Rental of property also used as a home.If
Individuals you rent property that you also use as your
home and you rent it fewer than 15 days during❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations10. the tax year, do not include the rent you receive
❏ Schedule E (Form 1040)Supplemental in your income and do not deduct rental ex-
Income and Loss penses. However, you can deduct on Schedule
A (Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualtyRental Income and theft losses that are allowed for nonrental
property. See Personal Use of Dwelling Unit
(Including Vacation Home), later.and Expenses Rental Income
Part interest.If you own a part interest in
You generally must include in your gross incomerental property, you must report your part of theImportant Change all amounts you receive as rent. Rental incomerental income from the property.
is any payment you receive for the use or occu-
pation of property. In addition to amounts youSpecial depreciation allowance.You can
receive as normal rent payments, there areclaim a special depreciation allowance for quali-
other amounts that may be rental income.fied property you placed in service after Septem- Rental Expensesber 10, 2001. The allowance is a depreciationWhen to report.Report rental income on yourdeduction equal to 30% of the property’s depre- This part discusses repairs and certain otherreturn for the year you actually or constructivelyciable basis. expenses of renting property that you ordinarilyreceive it, if you are a cash basis taxpayer. YouQualified property includes property depreci- can deduct from your rental income. It includesare a cash basis taxpayer if you report income inated under the modified accelerated cost recov- information on the expenses you can deduct ifthe year you receive it, regardless of when it wasery system (MACRS) with a recovery period of you rent part of your property, or if you changeearned. You constructively receive income20 years or less. See Special Depreciation Al- your property to rental use. Depreciation, whichwhen it is made available to you, for example, bylowance under Depreciation later, for more infor- you can also deduct from your rental income, isbeing credited to your bank account.mation. discussed later.For more information about when you con-
structively receive income, see  Accounting
When to deduct. You generally deduct yourMethods in chapter 1.
rental expenses in the year you pay them.
Advance rent. Advance rent is any amountIntroduction
you receive before the period that it covers.Vacant rental property.If you hold propertyThis chapter discusses rental income and ex-Include advance rent in your rental income in thefor rental purposes, you may be able to deductpenses. It covers the following topics. year you receive it regardless of the period cov-your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-
ered or the method of accounting you use.• Rental income. ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or
maintaining the property while the property is• Rental expenses. Example. You sign a 10-year lease to rentvacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss of
your property. In the first year, you receive• Personal use of dwelling unit (including rental income for the period the property is va-
$5,000 for the first year’s rent and $5,000 as rentvacation home). cant.
for the last year of the lease. You must include• Depreciation. $10,000 in your income in the first year.Pre-rental expenses.You can deduct your
• Limits on rental losses. ordinary and necessary expenses for managing,Security deposits.Do not include a securityconserving, or maintaining rental property from• How to report your rental income and ex-deposit in your income when you receive it if youthe time you make it available for rent.penses. plan to return it to your tenant at the end of the
lease. But if you keep part or all of the securityDepreciation.You can begin to depreciateIf you sell or otherwise dispose of your rentaldeposit during any year because your tenantrental property when it is ready and available forproperty, see Publication 544, Sales and Other does not live up to the terms of the lease, includerent. See Placed-in Service Date under Depreci-Dispositions of Assets. the amount you keep in your income for thatation, later.If you have a loss from damage to, or theft of,year.
rental property, see Publication 547, Casualties, If an amount called a security deposit is to be
Expenses for rental property sold.If you sellDisasters, and Thefts. used as a final payment of rent, it is advance
property you held for rental purposes, you canIf you rent a condominium or a cooperativerent. Include it in your income when you receive
deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses forapartment, some special rules apply to you evenit.
managing, conserving, or maintaining the prop-though you receive the same tax treatment as
erty until it is sold.Payment for canceling a lease.If your tenantother owners of rental property. See Publication
pays you to cancel a lease, the amount you527, Residential Rental Property, for more infor-
receive is rent. Include the payment in yourPersonal use of rental property. If youmation.
income in the year you receive it regardless ofsometimes use your rental property for personal
your method of accounting. purposes, you must divide your expenses be-Useful Items tween rental and personal use. Also, your rentalYou may want to see: Expenses paid by tenant.If your tenant paysexpense deductions may be limited. See Per-
any of your expenses, the payments are rentalsonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including VacationPublication income. You must include them in your income.Home), later.
You can deduct the expenses if they are deduct-❏ 527 Residential Rental Property
ible rental expenses. See Rental Expenses, Part interest.If you own a part interest in❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed in later, for more information. rental property, you can deduct your part of theService Before 1987 expenses that you paid.Property or services.If you receive property❏ 535 Business Expenses or services, instead of money, as rent, include
the fair market value of the property or services❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules Repairs and Improvements
in your rental income.❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property If the services are provided at an agreed You can deduct the cost of repairs to your rental
upon or specified price, that price is the fair property. You cannot deduct the cost of im-Form (and Instructions) market value unless there is evidence to the provements. You recover the cost of improve-
❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization contrary. ments by taking depreciation (explained later).
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 69

Page 72 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Separate the costs of repairs and im- putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewer ductions, total more than 2% of your adjusted
provements, and keep accurate rec- systems. These charges are nondepreciable gross income.
ords. You will need to know the cost of capital expenditures. You must add them to the
RECORDS
improvements when you sell or depreciate your basis of your property. You can deduct local
property. benefit taxes if they are for maintaining, repair-
ing, or paying interest charges for the benefits.Property Changed
Repairs. A repair keeps your property in goodTravel expenses. You can deduct the ordi-operating condition. It does not materially add to to Rental Usenary and necessary expenses of traveling awaythe value of your property or substantially pro-from home if the primary purpose of the trip waslong its life. Repainting your property inside or If you change your home or other property, (or ato collect rental income or to manage, conserve,out, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster- part of it), to rental use at any time other than ator maintain your rental property. You must prop-ing, and replacing broken windows are exam- the beginning of your tax year, you must divideerly allocate your expenses between rental andples of repairs. yearly expenses, such as depreciation, taxes,nonrental activities. For information on travelIf you make repairs as part of an extensive and insurance, between rental use and personalexpenses, see chapter 28.remodeling or restoration of your property, the use.
To deduct travel expenses, you mustwhole job is an improvement. You can deduct as rental expenses only thekeep records that follow the rules inpart of the expense that is for the part of the yearImprovements. An improvement adds to the chapter 28.RECORDS
the property was used or held for rental pur-value of your property, prolongs its useful life, or
poses.adapts it to new uses. Improvements include the
Local transportation expenses. You can You cannot deduct depreciation or insurancefollowing items.
deduct your ordinary and necessary local trans-for the part of the year the property was held for
• Putting a recreation room in an unfinishedportation expenses if you incur them to collectpersonal use. However, you can include the
basement. rental income or to manage, conserve, or main-home mortgage interest and real estate tax ex-
tain your rental property. penses for the part of the year the property was• Paneling a den.
Generally, if you use your personal car,held for personal use as an itemized deduction
• Adding a bathroom or bedroom. pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, youon Schedule A (Form 1040).
can deduct the expenses using one of two meth-• Putting decorative grillwork on a balcony.
ods: actual expenses or the standard mileageExample. Your tax year is the calendar
• Putting up a fence. rate. For 2002, the standard mileage rate for allyear. You moved from your home in May and
business miles is 361/2 cents a mile. For morestarted renting it on June 1. You can deduct as• Putting in new plumbing or wiring.
information, see chapter 28. rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearly
• Putting in new cabinets. expenses, such as taxes and insurance.To deduct car expenses under either Starting with June, you can deduct as rental• Putting on a new roof. method, you must keep records thatexpenses the amounts you pay for items gener-follow the rules in chapter 28. In addi-• Paving a driveway.
RECORDS
ally billed monthly, such as utilities.tion, you must complete Part V of Form 4562
and attach it to your tax return.If you make an improvement to property, the
cost of the improvement must be capitalized.
Tax return preparation.You can deduct, as aThe capitalized cost can generally be depreci-
Renting Part ofrental expense, the part of the tax return prepa-ated as if the improvement were separate prop-
ration fees you paid to prepare Part I of Sched-erty.
Propertyule E (Form 1040). You can also deduct, as a
rental expense, any portion of the total expenseOther Expenses If you rent part of your property, you must divideyou paid to resolve a tax underpayment related
certain expenses between the part of the prop-to your rental activities. On your 2002 ScheduleOther expenses you can deduct from your rental erty used for rental purposes and the part of theE, you can deduct fees paid in 2002 to prepareincome include advertising, cleaning and main- property used for personal purposes as thoughPart I of your 2001 Schedule E.tenance services, utilities, fire and liability insur- you actually had two separate pieces of prop-ance, taxes, interest, commissions for the erty.collection of rent, ordinary and necessary travel You can deduct the expenses related to theand transportation, and other expenses, dis- part of the property used for rental purposes,Not Rented for Profitcussed next. such as home mortgage interest and real estate
taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (FormRental payments for property.You can de- If you do not rent your property to make a profit,1040). You can deduct the expenses for the partduct the rent you pay for property that you useyou can deduct your rental expenses only up toof the property used for personal purposes, sub-for rental purposes. If you buy a leasehold forthe amount of your rental income. Any rentalject to certain limitations, only if you itemize yourrental purposes, you can deduct an equal part ofexpenses in excess of rental income cannot bedeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Youthe cost each year over the term of the lease.carried forward to the next year. For more infor-can also deduct as a rental expense a part ofmation about the rules for an activity not en-Rental of equipment. You can deduct the other expenses that normally are nondeductiblegaged in for profit, see chapter 1 of Publicationrent you pay for equipment that you use for personal expenses, such as expenses for elec-535.rental purposes. However, in some cases, lease tricity or painting the outside of your house. You
contracts are actually purchase contracts. If so, cannot deduct any part of the cost of the firstWhere to report. Report your not-for-profit
you cannot deduct these payments. You can phone line even if your tenants have unlimitedrental income on line 21, Form 1040. You can
recover the cost of purchased equipment use of it.include your mortgage interest (if you use the
through depreciation. property as your main home or second home), You do not have to divide the expenses that
real estate taxes, and casualty losses on the belong only to the rental part of your property.Insurance premiums paid in advance.If you appropriate lines of Schedule A (Form 1040), For example, if you paint a room that you rent, orpay an insurance premium for more than oneItemized Deductions, if you itemize your deduc- if you pay premiums for liability insurance inyear in advance, each year you can deduct thetions. connection with renting a room in your home,part of the premium payment that will apply toClaim your other rental expenses, subject to your entire cost is a rental expense. If you installthat year. You cannot deduct the total premiumthe rules explained in chapter 1 of Publication a second phone line strictly for your tenants’in the year you pay it. 535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions on use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-
Local benefit taxes.Generally, you cannot line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). You can ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-
deduct charges for local benefits that increase deduct these expenses only if they, togetherciation, discussed later, on the part of the
the value of your property, such as charges for with certain other miscellaneous itemized de- property used for rental purposes as well as on
Page 70 Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 73 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the furniture and equipment you use for rental 160 (170 − 10) days. Your family also used theDwelling Unit cottage for 7 other days during the year.purposes.
Used as Home You used the cottage as a home because
you used it for personal purposes for 17 days.How to divide expenses.If an expense is forThe tax treatment of rental income and ex-That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10%both rental use and personal use, such as mort-penses for a dwelling unit that you also use forof the 160 days it was rented (16 days).gage interest or heat for the entire house, youpersonal purposes depends on whether you use
must divide the expense between the rental useit as a home. (See How To Figure Rental Income
and the personal use. You can use any reasona-and Deductions, later.) Use As Main Home Before or Afterble method for dividing the expense. It may beYou use a dwelling unit as a home during theRentingreasonable to divide the cost of some items (fortax year if you use it for personal purposes more
example, water) based on the number of peoplethan the greater of:  For purposes of determining whether a dwellingusing them. However, the two most common unit was used as a home, do not count as days1) 14 days, ormethods for dividing an expense are one based of personal use the days you used the propertyon the number of rooms in your home and one2) 10% of the total days it is rented to othersas your main home before or after renting it orbased on the square footage of your home. at a fair rental price. offering it for rent in either of the following cir-
cumstances.See Figuring Days of Personal Use, later.
If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur-1) You rented or tried to rent the property forposes on a day it is rented at a fair rental price,12 or more consecutive months.Personal Use of do not count that day as a day of rental in
2) You rented or tried to rent the property forapplying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day of
a period of less than 12 consecutiveDwelling Unit personal use in applying both (1) and (2) above.
months and the period ended because youThis rule does not apply when dividing expenses
sold or exchanged the property.(Including Vacation between rental and personal use.
This special rule does not apply when dividingFair rental price.A fair rental price for yourHome) expenses between rental and personal use.property generally is an amount that a person
who is not related to you would be willing to pay.If you have any personal use of a dwelling unit
The rent you charge is not a fair rental price if it isFiguring Days(including vacation home) that you rent, you
substantially less than the rents charged formust  divide your expenses between rental use of Personal Useother properties that are similar to your property.and personal use. See Figuring Days of Per-
sonal Use and  How To Divide Expenses, later. A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is any
day that it is used by any of the following per- If you used your dwelling unit for personalExamples sons.purposes long enough during 2002, it will be
considered a “dwelling unit used as home.” If so,The following examples show how to determine1) You or any other person who has an inter-you cannot deduct rental expenses that exceedwhether you used your rental property as a est in it, unless you rent it to anotherrental income for that property. See Dwelling home. owner as his or her main home under aUnit Used as Home and How To Figure Rental shared equity financing agreement (de-Income and Deductions, later. If your dwellingExample 1. You converted the basement of fined later).your home into an apartment with a bedroom, aunit is not considered a dwelling unit used as
bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented thehome, you can deduct rental expenses that ex- 2) A member of your family or a member of
basement apartment at a fair rental price toceed rental income for that property subject to the family of any other person who has a
college students during the regular school year.certain limits. See Limits on Rental Losses, financial interest in it, unless the family
You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273 member uses the dwelling unit as his orlater.
days). her main home and pays a fair rental price.
During June (30 days), your brother stayedFamily includes only brothers and sisters,Exception for minimal rental use.If you use with you and lived in the basement apartmenthalf-brothers and half-sisters, spouses, an-the dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewerrent free. cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.) andthan 15 days during the year, do not include anyYour basement apartment was used as a lineal descendants (children, grandchild-of the rent in your income and do not deduct anyhome because you used it for personal pur- ren, etc.).of the rental expenses. See Dwelling Unit Usedposes for 30 days. Rent-free use by your brother3) Anyone under an arrangement that letsas Home, later. is considered personal use. Your personal useyou use some other dwelling unit.(30 days) is more than the greater of 14 days or
10% of the total days it was rented (27 days).4) Anyone at less than a fair rental price.Dwelling unit. A dwelling unit includes a
house, apartment, condominium, mobile home,Example 2. You rented the guest bedroomboat, vacation home, or similar property. A Main home. If the other person or member ofin your home at a fair rental price during the localdwelling unit has basic living accommodations, the family in (1) or (2) above has more than onecollege’s homecoming, commencement, andsuch as sleeping space, a toilet, and cooking home, his or her main home is ordinarily the onefootball weekends (a total of 27 days). Yourfacilities. A dwelling unit does not include prop- lived in most of the time.sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for theerty used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similarlast 3 weeks (21 days) in July. Shared equity financing agreement.This isestablishment. The room was used as a home because youan agreement under which two or more personsProperty is used solely as a hotel, motel, inn,used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That isacquire undivided interests for more than 50or similar establishment if it is regularly availablemore than the greater of 14 days or 10% of theyears in an entire dwelling unit, including thefor occupancy by paying customers and is not27 days it was rented (3 days). land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-used by an owner as a home during the year. tled to occupy the unit as his or her main homeExample 3. You own a cottage in a resortupon payment of rent to the other co-owner orExample. You rent a room in your home area. You rented it at a fair rental price for a totalowners.that is always available for short-term occu-of 170 days during the year. For 12 of those
pancy by paying customers. You do not use thedays, the tenant was not able to use the cottageDonation of use of property. You use aroom yourself, and you allow only paying cus-and allowed you to use it even though you diddwelling unit for personal purposes if:tomers to use the room. The room is used solelynot refund any of the rent. Your family actually
as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishmentused the cottage for 10 of those days. Therefore,• You donate the use of the unit to a charita-
and is not a dwelling unit. the cottage is treated as having been rented for ble organization,
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 71

Page 74 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The organization sells the use of the unit that day. This rule does not apply whenProperty Used As a Home
at a fund-raising event, and determining whether you used the unit as
If you use a dwelling unit as a home during thea home.• The “purchaser” uses the unit. year (see Dwelling Unit Used as Home, earlier),
2) Any day that the unit is available for renthow you figure your rental income and deduc-
but not actually rented is not a day oftions depends on how many days the unit wasExamples
rental use. rented.
The following examples show how to determine
Rented fewer than 15 days. If you use adays of personal use. Example. Your beach cottage was avail-dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer
able for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92than 15 days during the year, do not include anyExample 1. You and your neighbor are days). Your family uses the cottage during therental income in your income. Also, you cannotco-owners of a condominium at the beach. Youlast 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unablededuct any expenses as rental expenses.rent the unit to vacationers whenever possible.
to find a renter for the first week in August (7The unit is not used as a main home by anyone. Rented 15 days or more.If you use a dwell-days). The person who rented the cottage forYour neighbor uses the unit for two weeks every ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or moreJuly allowed you to use it over a weekend (2year. during the year, you include all your rental in-days) without any reduction in or refund of rent.Because your neighbor has an interest in the come in your income. See How To Reportunit, both of you are considered to have used theThe cottage was not used at all before May 17 orRental Income and Expenses, later. If you had aunit for personal purposes during those 2after August 31. net profit from the rental property for the yearweeks. You figure the part of the cottage expenses(that is, if your rental income is more than the
total of your rental expenses, including depreci-to treat as rental expenses as follows.Example 2. You and your neighbors are ation), deduct all of your rental expenses. How-co-owners of a house under a shared equity ever, if you had a net loss, you may not be able1) The cottage was used for rental a total offinancing agreement. Your neighbors live in the to deduct all of your rental expenses.85 days (92 − 7). The days it was availablehouse and pay you a fair rental price. Use Table 10–1 to figure your deductiblefor rent but not rented (7 days) are notEven though your neighbors have an interest expenses.days of rental use. The July weekend (2in the house, the days your neighbors live there
days) you used it is rental use becauseare not counted as days of personal use by you.
This is because your neighbors rent the house you received a fair rental price for the
as their main home under a shared equity fi-weekend.
Depreciationnancing agreement. 2) You used the cottage for personal pur-
poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks inYou recover your cost in income producingExample 3. You own a rental property that
May). property through yearly tax deductions. You doyou rent to your son. Your son has no interest in
this by depreciating the property; that is, bythis dwelling unit. He uses it as his main home.3) The total use of the cottage was 99 daysdeducting some of your cost on your tax returnHe pays you a fair rental price for the property.(14 days personal use + 85 days rentaleach year.Your son’s use of the property is not personaluse). Three basic factors determine how much de-use by you because your son is using it as his
preciation you can deduct. They are: (1) your4) Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) ofmain home, he has no interest in the property,
basis in the property, (2) the recovery period forthe cottage expenses.and he is paying you a fair rental price.
the property, and (3) the depreciation methodWhen determining whether you used the cot-used. You cannot simply deduct your mortgageExample 4. You rent your beach house totage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) youor principal payments, or the cost of furniture,Joshua. Joshua rents his house in the moun-used it is personal use even though you re-fixtures and equipment, as an expense.tains to you. You each pay a fair rental price.
ceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There-You can deduct depreciation only on the partYou are using your house for personal pur-
fore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83of your property used for rental purposes. De-poses on the days that Joshua uses it because
preciation reduces your basis for figuring gain ordays of rental use for this purpose. Because youyour house is used by Joshua under an arrange-
loss on a later sale or exchange.used the cottage for personal purposes morement that allows you to use his house.
 You may have to use Form 4562 to figurethan 14 days and more than 10% of the days of
and report your depreciation. See How To Re-rental use, you used it as a home. If you have a
port Rental Income and Expenses, later.Days Used for Repairs and net loss, you may not be able to deduct all of the
Maintenance rental expenses. See Property Used as a HomeClaiming the correct amount of depreciation.
in the following discussion. You should claim the correct amount of depreci-Any day that you spend working substantially full ation each tax year. Even if you did not claimtime repairing and maintaining your property is depreciation that you were entitled to deduct,How To Figure Rentalnot counted as a day of personal use. Do not you must still reduce your basis in the propertycount such a day as a day of personal use evenIncome and Deductions by the full amount of depreciation that you couldif family members use the property for recrea- have deducted. If you did not deduct the correcttional purposes on the same day. How you figure your rental income and deduc-amount of depreciation for property in any year,
tions depends on whether the dwelling unit wasyou may be able to make a correction for that
used as a home (see Dwelling Unit Used asHow To Divide Expenses year by filing Form 1040X. If you are not allowed
Home,  earlier) and, if used as a home, howto make the correction on an amended return,
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental andmany days the property was rented. you can change your accounting method to
personal purposes, divide your expenses be- claim the correct amount of depreciation. See
tween the rental use and the personal use based Claiming the correct amount of depreciation in
on the number of days used for each purpose.Property Not Used As a Home Publication 527 for more information.
Expenses for the rental use of the unit are de-
Changing your accounting method to de-ductible under the rules explained in How To If you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,
duct unclaimed depreciation.If you claimedFigure Rental Income and Deductions, later. report all the rental income and deduct all theless depreciation than allowable in an earlier When dividing your expenses follow theserental expenses. See How To Report Rental year, you can change your accounting methodrules. Income and Expenses, later. to take a deduction in the current year for the
Your deductible rental expenses can be1)  Any day that the unit is rented at a fair unclaimed depreciation. To change your ac-
more than your gross rental income. However,rental price is a day of rental use even if counting method, you must have the consent of
see Limits on Rental Losses, later. you used the unit for personal purposes the IRS. In some instances, you can receive
Page 72 Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 75 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 10–1. Worksheet for Figuring the Limit on Rental Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used as a Home
Use this worksheet only if you answer “yes” to all of the following questions.
● Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home. )
1. Enter rents received
2.a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest (see instructions)
● Did you rent the dwelling unit 15 days or more this year?
● Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions)
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions)
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a–2d
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter zero
4.a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining the dwelling unit (such as
repairs, insurance, and utilities)
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest (see instructions)
c. Add lines 4a and 4b
d. Allowable operating expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4c
5. Subtract line 4d from line 3. If zero or less, enter zero
6.a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions)
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit
c. Add lines 6a and 6b
d. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6c
7.a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4d from line 4c
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 6d
from line 6c
Enter the amounts on lines 2e, 4d, and 6d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I.
Worksheet Instructions
Follow these instructions for the worksheet
above. If you were unable to deduct all your
expenses last year because of the rental
income limit, add these unused amounts to
your expenses for this year.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the
dwelling unit that you could deduct on
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not
rented the unit. Do not include interest on
a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit.
For example, do not include interest on a
home equity loan used to pay off credit
cards or other personal loans, buy a car, or
pay college tuition. Include interest on a loan
used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling
unit, or to refinance such a loan. Enter the
rental portion of this interest on line 2a of
the worksheet.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses
related to the dwelling unit that you could
deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you
had not rented the dwelling unit. To do this,
complete Section A of Form 4684,
Casualties and Thefts, treating the losses as
personal losses. On line 17 of Form 4684,
enter 10% of your adjusted gross income
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental
expenses that are directly related only to the
rental activity. These include interest on
loans used for rental activities other than to
buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also
include rental agency fees, advertising,
office supplies, and depreciation on office
equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental
portion of the mortgage interest you could
deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented
the dwelling unit. Enter on line 4b of this
worksheet the rental portion of the
mortgage interest you could not deduct on
Schedule A because it is more than the limit
on home mortgage interest. Do not include
interest on a loan that did not benefit the
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess
casualty and theft losses, use the Form
4684 you prepared for line 2c of this
worksheet.
Allocating the limited deduction. If you
cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4c
or 6c this year, you can allocate the
allowable deduction in any way you wish
among the expenses included on line 4c or
6c. Enter the amount you allocate to each
expense on the appropriate line of Schedule
E, Part I.
A. Enter the amount from line 10
of Form 4684
B. Enter the rental portion of A
C. Enter the amount from line 2c
of this worksheet
D. Subtract C from B. Enter the
result here and on line 6a of
this worksheet
figured without your rental income and
expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter the
rental portion of the result from line 18 of
Form 4684 on line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it
to figure your personal losses on Schedule
A. Instead, figure the personal portion on a
separate Form 4684.
dwelling unit (as explained in the line 2a
instructions).
automatic consent. For more information, see placed in service. For property used in rentalThis chapter discusses MACRS only. If
chapter 1 of Publication 946. activities you use one of the following. you need more information about de-
preciating property placed in serviceCAUTION
!
• MACRS (Modified Accelerated Cost Re-Land. You can never depreciate the cost of before 1987, see Publication 534.covery System) for property placed inland because land does not wear out, become
service after 1986. If you placed property in service before 2002,obsolete, or get used up. The costs of clearing,
continue to use the same method of figuringgrading, planting, and landscaping are usually• ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys- depreciation that you used in the past.all part of the cost of land and are not deprecia-tem) for property placed in service after
ble. 1980 but before 1987. Section 179 election.You cannot claim the
section 179 deduction for property held to pro-• Useful lives and either straight line or an
Depreciation Methods duce rental income. See chapter 2 of Publicationaccelerated method of depreciation, such
946.as the declining balance method, if placed
There are three ways to figure depreciation. Thein service before 1981.depreciation method you use depends on the No deduction greater than basis.The total
type of property and when the property was of all your yearly depreciation deductions cannot
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 73

Page 76 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Dave bought and placed in serv-Table 10–2. MACRS Recovery Periods for Property Used in Rental
ice a new refrigerator ($700) for one of his resi-Activities
dential rental properties in June of 2002. Dave
MACRS Recovery Period notes that the refrigerator has a 5-year recovery
period (see Table 10–2.). Dave’s refrigerator isGeneral Alternative qualifying property and he claims the specialDepreciation Depreciation
depreciation allowance.Type of Property System System
Dave determines the total depreciable basis
Computers and their peripheral equipment............. 5  years 5 years of the property to be $700. Next, he multiplies
Office machinery, such as: this amount by 30% to figure his special depreci-
Typewrites ation allowance deduction of $210 ($700 ×
Calculators 30%). This leaves an adjusted basis of $490Copiers................................. 5  years 6 years ($700 − $210), which he will use to figure his
Automobiles................................. 5  years 5 years MACRS deduction.
Light trucks.................................. 5  years 5 years For more information, see Special Deprecia-
Appliances, such as: tion Allowance in Publication 946.
Stoves
Refrigerators............................. 5  years 9 years
MACRSCarpets .................................... 5  years 9 years
Furniture used in rental property.................... 5  years 9 years Most business and investment property placed
Office furniture and equipment, such as: in service after 1986 is depreciated using
Desks MACRS.
Files................................... 7  years 10 years MACRS consists of two systems that deter-
Any property that does not have a class life and that has not mine how you depreciate your property. The
been designated by law as being in any other class . . . 7 years 12 years main system is called the General Deprecia-
tion System (GDS). The second system isRoads ..................................... 1 5  years 20 years called the Alternative Depreciation SystemShrubbery .................................. 1 5  years 20 years (ADS). GDS is used to figure your depreciationFences ..................................... 1 5  years 20 years deduction for property used in most rental activi-
ties, unless you elect ADS.Residential rental property (buildings or structures)
To figure your MACRS deduction, you needand structural components such as furnaces,
water pipes, venting, etc.,..................... 27.5 years 40 years to know the following information about your
property:Additions and improvements, such as a new roof........ The recovery period of the
property to which the addition 1) Its recovery period,
or improvement is made,
2) Its placed-in-service date, anddetermined as if the property
were placed in service at the 3) Its depreciable basis.same time as the addition or
improvement.
Personal home changed to rental use.You
must use MACRS to figure the depreciation on
property you used as your home and changed tobe more than the cost or other basis of theproperty class placed in service during the year.
rental property in 2002.property. For this purpose, your yearly deprecia-See Election Not To Claim the Allowance in
tion deductions include any depreciation thatPublication 946 for more information. Excluded property.You cannot use MACRSyou were allowed to claim, even if you did not for certain personal property placed in service inclaim it. Qualified property.To qualify for the specialyour rental property in 2002 if it had been previ-depreciation allowance, your property mustously placed in service before MACRS becameCooperative apartments. If you are a meet the following requirements. effective in 1987 (before August 1, 1986, if elec-tenant-stockholder in a cooperative housing cor- tion made).1) It must be new  property that is depreciatedporation and rent your cooperative apartment to  In addition, you may elect to exclude certainunder MACRS with a recovery period of 20others, you can deduct depreciation for the property from the application of MACRS. Seeyears or less.apartment even though it is owned by the corpo- Publication 946 for more information.ration. Your depreciation deduction is your2) It must meet the following tests.share of the corporation’s depreciation. See Co-
operative apartments in Publication 527 for in-a) Acquisition date test.
Recovery Periods Under GDSformation on how to figure your depreciationb) Placed in service date test.deduction. Each item of property that can be depreciated is
c) Original use test. assigned to a property class. The recovery pe-
riod of the property depends on the class theSpecial Depreciation
property is in. Under GDS, the recovery periodAcquisition date test.Generally, you mustAllowance of an asset is generally the same as its propertyhave acquired the property after September 10,class. The property classes under GDS are:You can claim a special depreciation allowance2001.
for qualified property you placed in service after • 3-year property,
Placed in service date test.Generally, theSeptember 10, 2001. The allowance is a depre- • 5-year property,property must be placed in service for use inciation deduction equal to 30% of the property’s
your trade or business or for the production ofdepreciable basis. The special depreciation al- • 7-year property,
income after September 10, 2001, and beforelowance is figured before you calculate your • 10-year property,January 1, 2005.regular MACRS deduction.
• 15-year property,You must claim the special deprecia-Original use test.The original use of the
tion allowance for all qualified property.property must have begun with you after Sep-• 20-year property,
However, you can elect not to claim thetember 10, 2001. “Original use” means the firstCAUTION
!
• Nonresidential real property, andallowance. If you make this election for anyuse to which the property is put, whether or not
property, it applies to all property in the sameby you. • Residential rental property.
Page 74 Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 77 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 10–3. Optional MACRS Tables the original property if it were placed in service at
the same time as the addition or improvement.
Table 10–3–A. MACRS 5–Year property
Example. You own a residential rental
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention house that you have been renting since 1986
and are depreciating under ACRS. You put anYear First Second Third Fourth
addition onto the house and you placed it inquarter quarter quarter quarter
service in 2002. You must use MACRS for the
addition. Under MACRS, the addition would be1 20.00% 35.00% 25.00% 15.00% 5.00%
depreciated as residential rental property over2 32.00 26.00 30.00 34.00 38.00
27.5 years.3 19.20 15.60 18.00 20.40 22.80
4 11.52 11.01 11.37 12.24 13.68
5 11.52 11.01 11.37 11.30 10.94
6 5.76 1.38 4.26 7.06 9.58 Placed-in-Service Date
You can begin to depreciate property when you
Table 10–3–B. MACRS 7–Year property place it in service in your trade or business or for
the production of income. Property is consideredHalf-year convention Mid-quarter convention placed in service in a rental activity when it is
ready and available for a specific use in thatYear First Second Third Fourth
activity.quarter quarter quarter quarter
1 14.29% 25.00% 17.85% 10.71% 3.57%
Cost Basis2 24.49 21.43 23.47 25.51 27.55
3 17.49 15.31 16.76 18.22 19.68
To deduct the proper amount of depreciation4 12.49 10.93 11.97 13.02 14.06
each year, you must first determine your basis in5 8.93 8.75 8.87 9.30 10.04
the property you intend to depreciate. The basis6 8.92 8.74 8.87 8.85 8.73
used for figuring depreciation is your original
basis in the property increased by any additionsTable 10–3–C. MACRS 15-Year property or improvements made to the property. Your
original basis is usually your cost. However, ifHalf-year convention Mid-quarter convention you acquire the property in some other way,
such as by inheriting it, getting it as a gift, orYear First Second Third Forth
building it yourself, you may have to figure yourquarter quarter quarter quarter
original basis in another way. Other adjustments1 5.00% 8.75% 6.25% 3.75% 1.25% could also affect your basis. See chapter 14.2 9.50 9.13 9.38 9.63 9.88
3 8.55 8.21 8.44 8.66 8.89
4 7.70 7.39 7.59 7.80 8.00 Conventions5 6.93 6.65 6.83 7.02 7.20
6 6.23 5.99 6.15 6.31 6.48 Under MACRS, conventions establish when the
recovery period begins and ends. The conven-
tion you use determines the number of monthsTable 10–3–D. Residential Rental Property (27.5–year)
for which you can claim depreciation in the year
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service. you place property in service and in the year you
dispose of the property.Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
Mid-month convention.  A mid-month con-Jan. 3.485% 3.636% 3.636% 3.636% 3.636% 3.636% vention is used for all residential rental propertyFeb. 3.182 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 and nonresidential real property. Under this con-March 2.879 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 vention, you treat all property placed in service,Apr. 2.576 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 or disposed of, during any month as placed inMay 2.273 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636
service, or disposed of, at the midpoint of that
month.June 1.970 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636
July 1.667 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 Half-year convention.The half-year conven-Aug. 1.364 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 tion is used if neither the mid-quarter conventionSept. 1.061 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 nor the mid-month convention applies. UnderOct. 0.758 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 this convention, you treat all property placed in
service, or disposed of, during a tax year asNov. 0.4555 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 placed in service, or disposed of, at the midpointDec. 0.152 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636 3.636
of that tax year.
If this convention applies, you deduct a
half-year of depreciation for the first year and theRecovery periods for property used in rental period for an addition or improvement to prop-last year that you depreciate the property. Youerty begins on the later of: activities are shown in Table 10–2. deduct a full year of depreciation for any other
The class to which property is assigned is year during the recovery period.1) The date the addition or improvement isdetermined by its class life. Class lives and re-placed in service, or Mid-quarter convention.A mid-quarter con-covery periods for most assets are listed in Ap- vention must be used if the mid-month conven-2) The date the property to which the additionpendix B in Publication 946. tion does not apply and the total depreciableor improvement was made is placed in
basis of MACRS property you placed in serviceservice.
Additions or improvements to property. in the last 3 months of a tax year (excludingThe class and recovery period of the additionTreat depreciable additions or improvements nonresidential real property, residential rentalor improvement is the one that would apply toyou make to any property as separate property property, and property placed in service and
items for depreciation purposes. The recovery disposed of in the same year) is more than 40%
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 75

Page 78 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the total basis of all such property you place in Your unadjusted basis is your depreciable basis depreciation deduction for the stove (after figur-
service during the tax year. ing the special depreciation allowance) is $105without reduction for depreciation previously
($300 × .35).claimed.Under this convention, you treat all property
placed in service, or disposed of, during anyOnce you begin using an optional table to
Table 10–3–D. Use this table for residentialquarter of a tax year as placed in service, orfigure depreciation, you must continue to use it
rental property. Find the row for the month thatdisposed of, at the midpoint of the quarter.for the entire recovery period unless there is an
you placed the property in service. Use the per-adjustment to the basis of your property for a
Example. During the tax year, Jordan Greg- centages listed for that month to figure yourreason other than:
ory purchased the following items to use in his depreciation deduction. The mid-month conven-
rental property. tion is taken into account in the percentages1) Depreciation allowed or allowable, or
shown in the table.2) An addition or improvement that is depre-• A dishwasher for $400, that he placed in
ciated as a separate item of property.service in January. Example. You purchased a single family
rental house and placed it in service in February.If there is an adjustment for any other reason (for• Used furniture for $100, that he placed in
Your basis in the house is $160,000. Using Ta-example, because of a deductible casualtyservice in September.
ble 10–3–D,  you find that the percentage forloss), you can no longer use the table. For the• A refrigerator for $500, that he placed in property placed in service in February of year 1year of the adjustment and for the remainingservice in October. is 3.182%. That year’s depreciation deduction isrecovery period, figure depreciation using the
$5,091 ($160,000 × .03182).property’s adjusted basis at the end of the yearJordan uses the calendar year as his tax year.and the appropriate depreciation method, asHe elects not to claim the special depreciation
explained in MACRS Depreciation Under GDS MACRS Depreciationallowance, discussed earlier. The total basis of
in Publication 527.all property placed in service in that year is Under ADS$1,000. The $500 basis of the refrigerator
Tables 10 –3–A, 10–3–B, and 10 –3–C.placed in service during the last 3 months of his If you choose, you can use the ADS method forThe percentages in these tables take into ac-tax year exceeds $400 (40% × $1,000). Jordan most property. Under ADS, you use the straightcount the half-year and mid-quarter conven-must use the mid-quarter convention instead of line method of depreciation.tions. Use Table 10–3–A  for 5-year property,the half-year convention for all three items. Table 10–2 shows the recovery periods forTable 10–3–B  for 7-year property, and Table property used in rental activities that you depre-10–3–C  for 15-year property. Use the percent-MACRS Depreciation ciate under ADS. See Appendix B in Publicationage in the second column (half-year convention)946 for other property. If your property is notUnder GDS unless you must use the mid-quarter conventionlisted, it is considered to have no class life.(explained earlier). If you must use the Under ADS, personal property with no class lifeYou can figure your MACRS depreciation de-mid-quarter convention, use the column thatis depreciated using a recovery period of 12duction under GDS in one of two ways. Thecorresponds to the calendar year quarter inyears and real property with no class life isdeduction is substantially the same both ways.which you placed the property in service.depreciated using a recovery period of 40 years.(The difference, if any, is slight.) You can either:
Use the mid-month convention for residentialExample 1. You purchased a stove and re-rental property and nonresidential real property.1) Use the percentage from the optional frigerator and placed them in service in Febru-For all other property, use the half-year orMACRS tables, see Table 10–3, or ary. Your basis in the stove is $429 and yourmid-quarter convention.basis in the refrigerator is $714. After figuring the2) Actually figure the deduction using the de-
special depreciation allowance your basis in thepreciation method and convention that ap- Election. For property placed in service dur-stove is $300 and your basis in the refrigerator isply over the recovery period of the ing 2002, you choose to use ADS by enteringproperty. $500. Both are 5-year property. Using thethe depreciation on line 20, Part III of Formhalf-year convention column in Table 10–3–A ,Publication 946 discusses computing deprecia- 4562.you find the depreciation percentage for year 1tion using the proper method and convention. The election of ADS for one item in a class ofis 20%. For that year, your depreciation deduc-
property generally applies to all property in thattion is $60 ($300 × .20) for the stove and $100
class that is placed in service during the tax yearUsing the Optional Tables($500 × .20) for the refrigerator. of the election. However, the election applies onFor year 2, you find your depreciation per-a property-by-property basis for residentialYou can use the tables in Table 10–3 to com- centage is 32%. That year’s depreciation deduc-rental property and nonresidential real property.pute annual depreciation under MACRS. Thetion will be $96 ($300 × .32) for the stove andtables show the percentages for the first 6 years. Once you choose to use ADS, you cannot$160 ($500 × .32) for the refrigerator.The percentages in Tables 10–3–A, 10–3–B, change your election.
and 10–3–C make the change from declining Example 2. Assume the same facts as inbalance to straight line in the year that straightExample 1, except you buy the refrigerator inOther Rules Aboutline will yield an equal or larger deduction. SeeOctober instead of February. You must use theAppendix A of Publication 946 for complete ta- Depreciable Propertymid-quarter convention to figure depreciation onbles. the stove and refrigerator. The refrigerator wasIn addition to the rules about what methods youIf you elect to use the straight line method forplaced in service in the last 3 months of the taxcan use, there are other rules you should be5-, 7-, or 15-year property, or the 150% decliningyear and its basis ($714) is more than 40% ofaware of with respect to depreciable property.balance method for 5- or 7-year property, usethe total basis of all property placed in servicethe tables in Appendix A of Publication 946. during the year ($1,143 × .40 = $457). Gain from disposition. If you dispose ofFigure any special depreciation allow-Because you placed the refrigerator in serv-depreciable property at a gain, you may have toance on qualified property before usingice in October, you use the fourth quarter col-report, as ordinary income, all or part of the gain.Table 4–A, 4–B and 4–C , or the 5-,umn of Table 10–3–A  and find that the
CAUTION
!
See Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-7-, or 15-year property tables in Appendix A of depreciation percentage for year 1 is 5%. Yourtions of Assets.Publication 946. depreciation deduction for the refrigerator (after
figuring the special depreciation allowance) isAlternative minimum tax.If you use acceler-
$25 ($500 × .05).How to use the tables.The following section ated depreciation, you may have to file Form
explains how to use the optional tables. Because you placed the stove in service in6251. Accelerated depreciation includes
February, you use the first quarter column ofMACRS, ACRS, and any other method that al-Figure the depreciation deduction by multi-
Table 10–3–A  and find that the depreciation lows you to deduct more depreciation than youplying your unadjusted basis in the property by
could deduct using a straight line method.percentage for year 1 is 35%. For that year, yourthe percentage shown in the appropriate table.
Page 76 Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 79 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You may have to complete Form 8582  to not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented for Profit,
figure the amount of any passive activity loss forearlier.Limits on the current tax year for all activities and theIf you provide significant services that areamount of the passive activity loss allowed onprimarily for your tenant’s convenience, such asRental Losses your tax return. regular cleaning, changing linen, or maid serv-
ice, you report your rental income and expensesRental real estate activities are generally con-
Exception for real estate professionals. on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss Fromsidered passive activities, and the amount of
Rental activities in which you materially partici-Business or Schedule C–EZ, Net Profit Fromloss you can deduct is limited. Generally, you
pated during the year are not passive activitiesBusiness (Sole Proprietorship). Significant serv-cannot deduct losses from rental real estate
if, for that year, you were a real estate profes-activities unless you have income from other ices do not include the furnishing of heat and
sional because you met the requirements. For apassive activities. However, you may be able to light, cleaning of public areas, trash collection,
detailed discussion of the requirements, seededuct rental losses without regard to whether etc. For information, see Publication 334, Tax
Publication 527. For a detailed discussion ofyou have income from other passive activities if Guide for Small Business (For Individuals Whomaterial participation, see Publication 925.you “materially” or “actively” participated in your Use Schedule C or C–EZ). You also may have
rental activity. See Passive Activity Limits, later. to pay self-employment tax on your rental in-
Losses from passive activities are first sub- come. See Publication 533, Self-EmploymentLosses From Rental Real Estateject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit the Tax.Activitiesamount of deductible losses from holding most
real property placed in service after 1986.If you or your spouse actively participated in a Form 1098. If you paid $600 or more of mort-
passive rental real estate activity, you can de-gage interest on your rental property to any one
duct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity fromException. If your rental losses are less than person, you should receive a Form 1098, Mort-
your nonpassive income. This special allowance$25,000 and you actively participated in the gage Interest Statement, or similar statement
is an exception to the general rule disallowingrental activity, the passive activity limits probably showing the interest you paid for the year. If you
losses in excess of income from passive activi-do not apply to you. See Losses From Rental and at least one other person (other than yourties. Similarly, you can offset credits from theReal Estate Activities, later. spouse if you file a joint return) were liable for,activity against the tax on up to $25,000 ofand paid interest on the mortgage, and the othernonpassive income after taking into account anyperson received the Form 1098, report yourProperty used as a home. If you used the losses allowed under this exception. share of the interest on line 13 of Schedule Erental property as a home during the year, the
passive activity rules do not apply to that home. (Form 1040). Attach a statement to your returnIf you are married, filing a separate return,
Instead, you must follow the rules explainedand lived apart from your spouse for the entire showing the name and address of the other
earlier under Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (In-tax year, your special allowance cannot be moreperson. In the left margin of Schedule E (Form
cluding Vacation Home.) than $12,500. If you lived with your spouse at1040), next to line 13, write “See attached.”
any time during the year and are filing a sepa-
rate return, you cannot use the special allow-At-Risk Rules Schedule E (Form 1040)ance to reduce your nonpassive income or tax
on nonpassive income.The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount you Use Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040) to report
can deduct as losses from activities often de- your rental income and expenses. List your totalThe maximum amount of the special allow-scribed as tax shelters. Losses from holding real income, expenses, and depreciation for eachance is reduced if your modified adjusted grossproperty (other than mineral property) placed in rental property. Be sure to answer the questionincome is more than $100,000 ($50,000 if mar-service before 1987 are not subject to the at-risk on line 2.ried filing separately).rules.
If you have more than three rental or royaltyGenerally, any loss from an activity subject properties, complete and attach as manyActive participation.You actively partici-to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of Schedules E as are needed to list the properties.pated in a rental real estate activity if you (andthe total amount you have at risk in the activity at Complete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How-your spouse) owned at least 10% of the rentalthe end of the tax year. You are considered at ever, fill in the “Totals” column on only oneproperty and you made management decisionsrisk in an activity to the extent of cash and the Schedule E. The figures in the “Totals” columnin a significant and bona fide sense. Manage-adjusted basis of other property you contributed on that Schedule E should be the combinedment decisions include approving new tenants,to the activity and certain amounts borrowed fordeciding on rental terms, approving expendi-totals of all Schedules E.use in the activity. See Publication 925 for moretures, and similar decisions. Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in-information.
come or loss from partnerships, S corporations,
estates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-More information. See Publication 925 forPassive Activity Limits ment conduits. If you need to use page 2 ofmore information on the passive loss limits, in-
Schedule E, use page 2 of the same Schedule Ecluding information on the treatment of unusedIn general, all rental activities (except those
disallowed passive losses and credits and theyou used to enter the combined totals in Part I.meeting the exception for real estate profession-
treatment of gains and losses realized on theals, below) are passive activities. For this pur- On page 1, line 20 of Schedule E, enter thedisposition of a passive activity.pose, a rental activity is an activity from which depreciation you are claiming. You must com-
you receive income mainly for the use of tangi- plete and attach Form 4562 for rental activities
ble property, rather than for services. only if you are claiming:
• Depreciation on property placed in serviceLimits on passive activity deductions andHow To Report during 2002,credits. Deductions for losses from passive
activities are limited. You generally cannot offset • Depreciation on any property that is listedRental Incomeincome, other than passive income, with losses property (such as a car), regardless of
from passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes when it was placed in service, orand Expenseson income, other than passive income, with
• Any car expenses (actual or the standardcredits resulting from passive activities. Any ex-If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, andmileage rate).cess loss or credit is carried forward to the nextprovide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,tax year. Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your ownyou normally report your rental income and ex-
worksheet. You do not have to attach theseFor a detailed discussion of these rules, see penses in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040).
computations to your return.Publication 925. However, do not use that schedule to report a
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 77

Page 80 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mortgage interest.......... 5,000Example. On January 1, Justin Cole bought with a 5-year recovery period. The dishwasher
Rent collection fee......... 5 7 2a townhouse and placed it in service as residen-qualifies for the special depreciation allowance
General repairs........... 1 7 5tial rental property. He receives $1,100 a monthwhich he figures first.
Real estate taxes.......... 8 0 0rental income. His rental expenses for the yearJustin uses the percentage for January inTotal expenses................. 6,747are as follows: Table 10–3–D to figure his depreciation deduc-Balance ...................... $6,453tion for the townhouse. He uses the percentageMinus Depreciation:Fire insurance (1-year policy)....... $200 under “Half-year convention” in Table 10–3–A TownhouseMortgage interest............... 5,000 to figure his depreciation deduction for the refrig-($65,000 × 3.485%)....... 2,265Fee paid to real estate company for erator. He must report the depreciation on FormRefrigerator–specialcollecting monthly rent.......... 5 7 2 4562. allowanceGeneral repairs................ 1 7 5 Justin figures his net rental income or loss for($725 × 30%) ........... 2 1 8Real estate taxes imposed and paid . . 800
the townhouse as follows: Refrigerator ($725 – $218
Justin’s basis for depreciation of the special allowance × 20%) . . . 101
townhouse is $65,000. He is using MACRS withTotal rental income received Total depreciation............... 2,584
a 27.5-year recovery period. On April 1, Justin($1,100 × 1 2 ) .................. $13,200Net rental income for townhouse.... $3,869
bought a new refrigerator for the rental propertyMinus Expenses:
Fire insurance (1-year policy) . . 200at a cost of $725. He uses the MACRS method
Page 78 Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 81 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
after November 18, 1996, you generally If your annuity is paid under a qualified plan
and your annuity starting date is after July 1,cannot use the General Rule for a qualified
1986, but before November 19, 1996, you canplan. For more information about the Gen-
11. use either the General Rule or, if you qualify, theeral Rule, see Publication 939.
Simplified Method.2) Civil service retirement benefits. If you
More than one program.If you receive bene-are retired from the federal government
Retirement fits from more than one program, such as a(either regular or disability retirement), see
pension plan and a profit-sharing plan, you mayPublication 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil
have to figure the taxable part of each sepa-Service Retirement Benefits. PublicationPlans, Pensions, rately. You may have to make separate compu-721 also covers the information that you
tations even if the benefits from both areneed if you are the survivor or beneficiary
included in the same check. For example, bene-of a federal employee or retiree who died.and Annuities
fits from one of your programs could be fully3) Individual retirement arrangements taxable, while the benefits from your other pro-(IRAs). Information on the tax treatment ofgram could be taxable under the General Ruleamounts you receive from an IRA is inImportant Changes or the Simplified Method. Your former employerchapter 18. or the plan administrator should be able to tell
you if you have more than one pension or annu-Rollovers to and from qualified retirement
ity contract.plans. For distributions made after 2001, forUseful Itemsrollover purposes, tax-sheltered annuity plans Railroad retirement benefits.Part of the rail-You may want to see:(403(b) plans) and eligible state or local govern- road retirement benefits you receive is treatedment section 457 deferred compensation plans for tax purposes like social security benefits, andPublicationare qualified retirement plans. See Rollovers. part is treated like an employee pension. For❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income information about railroad retirement benefitsHardship distribution rollovers.A hardship
treated as social security benefits, see Publica-❏ 721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Servicedistribution made after 2001 from any retirement
tion 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-Retirement Benefitsplan is not an eligible rollover distribution. See
road Retirement Benefits. For information aboutRollovers. ❏ 939 General Rule for Pensions and railroad retirement benefits treated as an em-Annuities ployee pension, see Railroad Retirement inTime for making rollover.The 60-day period
Publication 575.for completing the rollover of an eligible rolloverForm (and Instructions)distribution may be extended for distributions Credit for the elderly or the disabled.If youmade after 2001 in certain cases of casualty,❏ W–4P Withholding Certificate for receive a pension or annuity, you may be able todisaster, or other events beyond your reasona- Pension or Annuity Payments take the credit for the elderly or the disabled.ble control. See Rollovers. See chapter 34.❏ 1099–R Distributions From Pensions,
Annuities, Retirement orRollover by surviving spouse.You may be Withholding and estimated tax.The payerProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs,able to roll over a distribution made after 2001 of your pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, an-Insurance Contracts, etc.you receive as the surviving spouse of a de- nuity, or deferred compensation plan will with-
ceased employee into a qualified retirement hold income tax on the taxable parts of amounts❏ 4972 Tax on Lump-Sum Distributionsplan or a traditional IRA. See Rollovers. paid to you. You can choose not to have tax❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Planswithheld except for amounts paid to you that areEligible rollover distribution.You may be (Including IRAs) and Other eligible rollover distributions. See Eligible rol-able to roll over the nontaxable part of a retire-Tax-Favored Accounts lover distributions under Rollovers, later. Youment plan distribution made after 2001 to an- make this choice by filing Form W–4P.other qualified retirement plan or a traditional For payments other than eligible rollover dis-IRA. See Rollovers. tributions, you can tell the payer how to withhold
by filing Form W–4P. If an eligible rollover distri-Section 457 plan early distributions.The Employee Pensions bution is paid directly to you, 20% will generallytax on early distributions may apply to certain
be withheld. There is no withholding on a directdistributions made from an eligible state or localand Annuities rollover of an eligible rollover distribution. Seegovernment section 457 deferred compensation
Direct rollover option under Rollovers, later. Ifplan after 2001. See Tax on Early Distributions.Generally, if you did not pay any part of the costyou choose not to have tax withheld or you doof your employee pension or annuity and yournot have enough tax withheld, you may have toemployer did not withhold part of the cost frompay estimated tax.your pay while you worked, the amounts you For more information, see Pensions and An-Introduction receive each year are fully taxable. You mustnuities under Withholding in chapter 5.
report them on your income tax return.This chapter discusses the tax treatment of dis- Loans. If you borrow money from your quali-tributions you receive from: fied pension or annuity plan, tax-sheltered annu-Partly taxable payments.If you paid part of
ity program, government plan, or contractthe cost of your annuity, you are not taxed on the1) An employee pension or annuity from a purchased under any of these plans, you maypart of the annuity you receive that represents aqualified plan, have to treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribu-return of your cost. The rest of the amount you2) A disability retirement, and tion. This means that you may have to include inreceive is taxable. Your annuity starting date
income all or part of the amount borrowed un-(defined later) determines which method you3) A purchased commercial annuity. less certain exceptions apply. Even if you do notmust or may use.
have to treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribu-If you contributed to your pension or annuityWhat is not covered in this chapter.The tion, you may not be able to deduct the interestplan, you figure the tax-free and the taxablefollowing topics are not discussed in this chap- on the loan in some situations. For details, seeparts of your annuity payments under either theter: Loans Treated as Distributions in PublicationSimplified Method or the General Rule. If your575. For information on the deductibility of inter-annuity starting date is after November 18,1) The General Rule. This is the method est, see chapter 25.1996, and your payments are from a qualifiedgenerally used to determine the tax treat-
plan, you must use the Simplified Method. Gen-ment of pension and annuity income from Qualified plans for self-employed
erally, you must use the General Rule only fornonqualified plans (including commercial individuals.Qualified plans set up by self-em-
nonqualified plans.annuities). If your annuity starting date is ployed individuals are sometimes called Keogh
Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 79

Page 82 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or H.R. 10 plans. Qualified plans can be set up Exclusion limit.Your annuity starting dateSimplified Method determines the total amount that you can ex-by sole proprietors, partnerships (but not a part-
clude from your taxable income over the years.ner), and corporations. They can cover self-em-Under the Simplified Method, you figure the
ployed persons, such as the sole proprietor ortax-free part of each monthly annuity paymentExclusion limited to cost.If your annuitypartners, as well as regular (common-law) em-by dividing your cost by the total number ofstarting date is after 1986, the total amount ofployees. expected monthly payments. For an annuity thatannuity income that you can exclude over the
is payable for the lives of the annuitants, thisDistributions from a qualified plan are usually years as a recovery of the cost cannot exceed
number is based on the annuitants’ ages on thefully taxable because most recipients have no your total cost. Any unrecovered cost at your (or
annuity starting date and is determined from acost basis. If you have an investment (cost) in the last annuitant’s) death is allowed as a mis-
table. For any other annuity, this number is thecellaneous itemized deduction on the final returnthe plan, however, your pension or annuity pay-
number of monthly annuity payments under theof the decedent. This deduction is not subject toments from a qualified plan are taxed under the
contract. the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.Simplified Method. For more information about
qualified plans, see Publication 560, Retirement Exclusion not limited to cost.If your an-Who must use the Simplified Method.YouPlans for Small Business. nuity starting date is before 1987, you can con-must use the Simplified Method if your annuitytinue to take your monthly exclusion for as longstarting date is after November 18, 1996, and as you receive your annuity. If you chose a jointSection 457 deferred compensation plans. you receive pension or annuity payments from aand survivor annuity, your survivor can continueIf you work for a state or local government or forqualified plan or annuity, unless you were at to take the survivor’s exclusion figured as of thea tax-exempt organization, you may be able toleast 75 years old and entitled to annuity pay-annuity starting date. The total exclusion may beparticipate in a section 457 deferred compensa-ments from a qualified plan that are guaranteedmore than your cost.tion plan. If your plan is an eligible plan, you arefor 5 years or more.
not taxed currently on pay that is deferred under
How to use it. Complete the Simplifiedthe plan or on any earnings from the plan’sWho must use the General Rule.You must
Method Worksheet to figure your taxable annu-investment of the deferred pay. You are taxeduse the General Rule if you receive pension or
ity for 2002. If the annuity is payable only overon amounts deferred in an eligible state or localannuity payments from:
your life, use your age at the birthday precedinggovernment plan only when they are distributed
your annuity starting date. For annuity starting1) A nonqualified plan (such as a private an-from the plan. You are taxed on amounts de-
dates beginning in 1998, if your annuity is pay-nuity, a purchased commercial annuity, orferred in an eligible tax-exempt organization
able over your life and the lives of other individu-a nonqualified employee plan), orplan when they are distributed or otherwise
als, use your combined ages at the birthdaysmade available to you. 2) A qualified plan if you are age 75 or olderpreceding the annuity starting date.This chapter covers the tax treatment of ben-on your annuity starting date and your an-
If your annuity starting date begins inefits under eligible section 457 plans, but it doesnuity payments are guaranteed for at least
1998 and your annuity is payable overnot cover the treatment of deferrals. For infor- 5 years.
the lives of more than one annuitant,mation on deferrals under section 457 plans, CAUTION
!
the total number of monthly annuity paymentsAnnuity starting before November 19,see Retirement Plan Contributions under Em-
expected to be received is based on the com-1996. If your annuity starting date is after Julyployee Compensation in Publication 525.
bined ages of the annuitants at the annuity start-1, 1986, and before November 19, 1996, youFor general information on these deferred ing date. However, if your annuity starting datehad to use the General Rule for either circum-compensation plans, see Section 457 Deferred began before January 1, 1998, the total numberstance described above. You also had to use itCompensation Plans in Publication 575. of monthly annuity payments expected to befor any fixed-period annuity. If you did not have
received is based on the primary annuitant’s ageto use the General Rule, you could have chosen
Cost (Investment in the at the annuity starting date.to use it. If your annuity starting date is before
July 2, 1986, you had to use the General RuleContract) Be sure to keep a copy of the com-unless you could use the Three-Year Rule.
pleted worksheet; it will help you figureIf you had to use the General Rule (or choseBefore you can figure how much, if any, of your your taxable annuity in later years.to use it), you must continue to use it each year
TIP
pension or annuity benefits is taxable, you must
that you recover your cost.determine your cost (your investment in the con-
tract). Your total cost in the plan includes every- Example. Bill Kirkland, age 65, began re-Who cannot use the General Rule.You can-thing that you paid. It also includes amounts ceiving retirement benefits on January 1, 2002,not use the General Rule if you receive youryour employer paid that were taxable at the time under a joint and survivor annuity. Bill’s annuitypension or annuity from a qualified plan andpaid. Cost does not include any amounts you starting date is January 1, 2002. The benefitsnone of the circumstances described in the pre-deducted or excluded from income. are to be paid for the joint lives of Bill and his wifeceding discussions apply to you. See Who must Kathy, age 65. Bill had contributed $31,000 to aFrom this total cost paid or considered paiduse the Simplified Method, earlier. qualified plan and had received no distributionsby you, subtract any refunds of premiums, re-
before the annuity starting date. Bill is to receivebates, dividends, unrepaid loans, or otherMore information. For complete informationa retirement benefit of $1,200 a month, andtax-free amounts you received by the later of theon using the General Rule, including the actua-Kathy is to receive a monthly survivor benefit ofannuity starting date or the date on which yourial tables you need, see Publication 939.$600 upon Bill’s death.received your first payment.
Bill must use the Simplified Method to figureYour annuity starting date is the later of theGuaranteed payments. Your annuity contract
his taxable annuity because his payments arefirst day of the first period for which you receivedprovides guaranteed payments if a minimum
from a qualified plan and he is under age 75.a payment, or the date the plan’s obligationsnumber of payments or a minimum amount (for
Because his annuity is payable over the lives ofbecame fixed. example, the amount of your investment) is pay-
more than one annuitant, he uses his andable even if you and any survivor annuitant doYour employer or the organization that pays Kathy’s combined ages and Table 2 at the bot-not live to receive the minimum. If the minimumyou the benefits (plan administrator) should tom of the worksheet in completing line 3 of theamount is less than the total amount of theshow your cost in Box 5 of your Form 1099–R. worksheet. His completed worksheet is shownpayments you are to receive, barring death, dur-
in Worksheet 11–A.ing the first 5 years after payments begin (fig-
Foreign employment contributions.If you ured by ignoring any payment increases), youBill’s tax-free monthly amount is $100
worked in a foreign country and your employerare entitled to less than 5 years of guaranteed ($31,000 ÷ 310 as shown on line 4 of the work-
contributed to your retirement plan, a part ofpayments. sheet). Upon Bill’s death, if Bill has not recov-
those payments may be considered part of yourIf you are the survivor of a deceased retiree, ered the full $31,000 investment, Kathy will also
cost. For more information about foreign em-you can use the Simplified Method if the retiree exclude $100 from her $600 monthly payment.
ployment contributions, see Publication 575.used it. The full amount of any annuity payments re-
Page 80 Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 83 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-Worksheet 11–A. Simplified Method Worksheet for Bill Kirkland
ments under the Simplified Method, the part of(Keep for Your Records)
each payment that is tax free is the same as the
tax-free amount figured by the retiree at the1.Enter the total pension or annuity payments received this year. annuity starting date. See Simplified Method,Also, add this amount to the total for Form 1040, line 16a, or Form earlier.1040A, line 12a.................................... 1. 14,400 In any case, if the annuity starting date is2.Enter your cost in the plan (contract) at the after 1986, the total exclusion over the yearsannuity starting date................... 2. 31,000 cannot be more than the cost.Note: If your annuity starting date wasbefore If you are the survivor of an employee, orthis year and you completed this worksheet former employee, who died before becominglast year, skip line 3 and enter the amount from entitled to any annuity payments, you must fig-line 4 of last year’s worksheet on line 4 below. ure the taxable and tax-free parts of your annuityOtherwise, go to line 3. payments using the method that applies as if3.Enter the appropriate number from Table 1 you were the employee.below. But if your annuity starting date was
after 1997 and the payments are for your life Estate tax.If your annuity was a joint and
and that of your beneficiary, enter the survivor annuity that was included in the
appropriate number from Table 2 below..... 3. 310 decedent’s estate, an estate tax may have been
4.Divide line 2 by the number on line 3....... 4. 100 paid on it. You can deduct, as a miscellaneous
5.Multiply line 4 by the number of months for itemized deduction, the part of the total estate
which this year’s payments were made. If your tax that was based on the annuity. This deduc-
annuity starting date was before 1987, enter tion is not subject to the 2%-of-
this amount on line 8 below and skip lines 6, 7, adjusted-gross-income limit. The deceased an-
10, and 11. Otherwise, go to line 6......... 5. 1,200 nuitant must have died after the annuity starting
date. (For details, see section 1.691(d)-1 of the6.Enter any amounts previously recovered tax
regulations.) This amount cannot be deducted infree in years after 1986................. 6. –0–
one year. It must be deducted in equal amounts7.Subtract line 6 from line 2............... 7. 31,000
over your remaining life expectancy.8.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 7...................... 8. 1,200
9. Taxable amount for year. Subtract line 8 from line 1. Enter the
result, but not less than zero. Also, add this amount to the total for How To Report
Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b................ 9. 13,200
If you file Form 1040, report your total annuity onNote: If your Form 1099–R shows a larger taxable amount, use
line 16a and the taxable part on line 16b. If yourthe amount on line 9 instead.
pension or annuity is fully taxable, enter it on line10.Add lines 6 and 8................................... 10. 1,200
16b; do not make an entry on line 16a.11. Balance of cost to be recovered. Subtract line 10 from line 2 . . .11. 29,800
If you file Form 1040A, report your total an-
nuity on line 12a and the taxable part on lineTABLE 1 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE
12b. If your pension or annuity is fully taxable,AND your annuity starting date was—
enter it on line 12b; do not make an entry on lineIF the age at annuity before November 19, after November 18, 12a.starting date was... 1996, enter on line 3... 1996, enter on line 3...
55 or under 300 360 More than one annuity.If you receive more56–60 260 310 than one annuity and at least one of them is not61–65 240 260 fully taxable, enter the total amount received66–70 170 210 from all annuities on line 16a, Form 1040, or line71 or older 120 160 12a, Form 1040A, and enter the taxable part on
line 16b, Form 1040, or line 12b, Form 1040A. If
TABLE 2 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE all the annuities you receive are fully taxable,
IF the combined ages enter the total of all of them on line 16b, Format annuity starting THEN  enter 1040, or line 12b, Form 1040A.date were... on line 3...
110 or under 410 Joint return.If you file a joint return and you
111–120 360 and your spouse each receive one or more pen-
121–130 310 sions or annuities, report the total of the pen-
131–140 260 sions and annuities on line 16a, Form 1040, or
141 or older 210 line 12a, Form 1040A, and report the taxable
part on line 16b, Form 1040, or line 12b, Form
1040A.
ceived after 310 payments are paid must be
Survivorsincluded in gross income. Lump-Sum DistributionsIf Bill and Kathy die before 310 payments areIf you receive a survivor annuity because of themade, a miscellaneous itemized deduction will If you receive a lump-sum distribution from adeath of a retiree who had reported the annuitybe allowed for the unrecovered cost on the final qualified employee plan or qualified employeeunder the Three-Year Rule, include the totalincome tax return of the last to die. This deduc- annuity and the plan participant was born beforereceived in income. (The retiree’s cost has al-tion is not subject to the 2%-of- 1936, you may be able to elect optional methodsready been recovered tax free.)adjusted-gross-income limit. of figuring the tax on the distribution. The partIf the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-
from active participation in the plan before 1974ments under the General Rule, apply the sameHad Bill’s retirement annuity payments
may qualify as capital gain subject to a 20% taxexclusion percentage the retiree used to yourbeen from a nonqualified plan, he
rate. The part from participation after 1973 (andinitial payment called for in the contract. Thewould have used the General Rule. He
TIP
any part from participation before 1974 that youresulting tax-free amount will then remain fixed.uses the Simplified Method Worksheet because
do not report as capital gain) is ordinary income.Any increases in the survivor annuity are fullyhis annuity payments are from a qualified plan.
You may be able to use the 10-year tax option,taxable.
discussed later, to figure tax on the ordinary
income part.
Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 81

Page 84 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use Form 4972 to figure the separate tax on 2) The plan participant’s taxable costs of any You generally must complete the rollover by
the 60th day following the day on which youa lump-sum distribution using the optional meth- life insurance contract distributed,
receive the distribution from your employer’sods. The tax figured on Form 4972 is added to3) Any employer contributions that were taxa-plan. (This 60-day period is extended for thethe regular tax figured on your other income.ble to the plan participant, and period during which the distribution is in a frozenThis may result in a smaller tax than you would
deposit in a financial institution.) For all rollovers4) Repayments of any loans that were taxa-pay by including the taxable amount of the distri-
to an IRA, you must irrevocably elect rolloverble to the plan participant.bution as ordinary income in figuring your regu-
treatment by written notice to the trustee or is-lar tax. You must reduce this cost by amounts previ-suer of the IRA.ously distributed tax free.Lump-sum distribution defined. A The IRS may waive the 60-day require-lump-sum distribution is the distribution or pay-NUA. The NUA in employer securities (box ment where the failure to do so wouldment in 1 tax year of a plan participant’s entire6 of Form 1099–R) received as part of a be against equity or good conscience,
TIP
balance from all of the employer’s qualifiedlump-sum distribution is generally tax free untilsuch as in the event of a casualty, disaster, orplans of one kind (for example, pension, you sell or exchange the securities. (For moreother event beyond your reasonable control.profit-sharing, or stock bonus plans). A distribu-information, see Distributions of employer se-
tion from a nonqualified plan (such as a privatelycurities under Taxation of Nonperiodic Pay-Eligible rollover distributions.Generally,purchased commercial annuity or a section 457ments, in Publication 575.) you can roll over any part of most nonperiodicdeferred compensation plan of a state or local distributions from a qualified retirement plan.government or tax-exempt organization) cannot
qualify as a lump-sum distribution. Capital Gain Treatment Rollover of nontaxable amounts.You may
The participant’s entire balance from a plan be able to roll over the nontaxable part of a
Capital gain treatment applies only to the taxa-does not include certain forfeited amounts. It distribution (such as your after-tax contributions)
ble part of a lump-sum distribution resulting fromalso does not include any deductible voluntary made to another qualified retirement plan or
participation in the plan before 1974. Theemployee contributions allowed by the plan after traditional IRA. The transfer must be made ei-
amount treated as capital gain is taxed at a 20%ther through a direct rollover to a qualified plan1981 and before 1987. For more information
rate. You can elect this treatment only once forthat separately accounts for the taxable andabout distributions that do not qualify as
any plan participant, and only if the plan partici-nontaxable parts of the rollover or through alump-sum distributions, see Distributions that do
pant was born before 1936. rollover to a traditional IRA.not qualify under Lump-Sum Distributions in
Complete Part II of Form 4972 to choose theIf you roll over only part of a distribution thatPublication 575.
20% capital gain election. For more information,includes both taxable and nontaxable amounts,
see Capital Gain Treatment under Lump-SumHow to treat the distribution.If you receive a the amount you roll over is treated as coming
Distributions in Publication 575.lump-sum distribution, you may have the follow- first from the taxable part of the distribution.
ing options for how you treat the taxable part. Hardship distributions.Hardship distribu-
tions are no longer treated as eligible rollover• Report the part of the distribution from par-10-Year Tax Option distributions.ticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if
you qualify) and the part from participationThe 10-year tax option is a special formula usedAdditional exceptions.For more informa-after 1973 as ordinary income. to figure a separate tax on the ordinary incometion about exceptions to eligible rollover distribu-
part of a lump-sum distribution. You pay the taxtions, see Publication 575.• Report the part of the distribution from par-
only once, for the year in which you receive theticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if Direct rollover option.You can choose todistribution, not over the next 10 years. You canyou qualify) and use the 10-year tax option have the administrator of your old plan transferelect this treatment only once for any plan par-to figure the tax on the part from partici- the distribution directly from your old plan to theticipant, and only if the plan participant was bornpation after 1973 (if you qualify). new plan (if permitted) or traditional IRA. If youbefore 1936.
• Use the 10-year tax option to figure the tax decide on a rollover, it is generally to your ad-The ordinary income part of the distribution ison the total taxable amount (if you qualify). vantage to choose this direct rollover option.the amount shown in box 2a of the Form Under this option, the plan administrator would1099–R given to you by the payer, minus the• Roll over all or part of the distribution. See not withhold tax from your distribution.amount, if any, shown in box 3. You also canRollovers, later. No tax is currently due on
treat the capital gain part of the distribution (boxthe part rolled over. Report any part not Withholding tax.If you choose to have the
3 of Form 1099–R) as ordinary income for therolled over as ordinary income. distribution paid to you, it is taxable in the year
10-year tax option if you do not choose capitaldistributed unless you roll it over to a new plan or• Report the entire taxable part of the distri-gain treatment for that part. IRA within 60 days. The plan administrator mustbution as ordinary income on your tax re-Complete Part III of Form 4972 to choose thewithhold income tax of 20% from the taxableturn. 10-year tax option. You must use the special taxdistribution paid to you. (See Pensions and An-
rates shown in the instructions for Part III tonuities under Withholding in chapter 5.)The first three options are explained in thefigure the tax. Publication 575 illustrates how tofollowing discussions. If you decide to roll over an amountcomplete Form 4972 to figure the separate tax. equal to the distribution before with-
Electing optional lump-sum treatment.You holding, your contribution to the newCAUTION
!
can choose to use the 10-year tax option orRollovers plan or IRA must include other money (for exam-
capital gain treatment only once after 1986 for ple, from savings or amounts borrowed) to re-
any plan participant. If you make this choice, you If you withdraw cash or other assets from aplace the amount withheld.
cannot use either of these optional treatments qualified retirement plan in an eligible rollover
The administrator must give you a writtenfor any future distributions for the participant. distribution, you can defer tax on the distribution
explanation of your distribution options within aby rolling it over to another qualified retirement
reasonable period of time before making an eli-Taxable and tax-free parts of the distribution.plan or a traditional IRA.
gible rollover distribution.The taxable part of a lump-sum distribution is theFor this purpose, the following plans are
employer’s contributions and income earned onqualified retirement plans. Rollover by surviving spouse.You may beyour account. You may recover your cost in the able to roll over tax free all or part of a distribu-• A qualified employee plan.lump sum and any net unrealized appreciation tion from a qualified retirement plan you receive(NUA) in employer securities tax free. • A qualified employee annuity. as the surviving spouse of a deceased em-
ployee. The rollover rules apply to you as if youCost. In general, your cost is the total of:• A tax sheltered annuity plan (403(b) plan).were the employee. You can roll over a distribu-
1) The plan participant’s nondeductible con-• An eligible state or local government sec-tion into a qualified retirement plan or a tradi-
tributions to the plan, tion 457 deferred compensation plan. tional IRA.
Page 82 Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 85 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A beneficiary other than the employee’s sur-• A tax-sheltered annuity plan, or penses (medical expenses that exceed
viving spouse cannot roll over a distribution. 7.5% of your adjusted gross income),• A state or local government section 457 whether or not you itemize your deduc-deferred compensation plan (to the extentAlternate payee under qualified domestic re- tions for the year,that any distribution is attributable tolations order.You may be able to roll over allamounts the plan received in a direct • From an employer plan under a writtenor any part of a distribution from a qualifiedtransfer or rollover from one of the other election that provides a specific scheduleretirement plan that you receive under a quali-plans listed here). for distribution of your entire interest if, asfied domestic relations order (QDRO). If you of March 1, 1986, you had separated fromreceive the distribution as an employee’s service and had begun receiving pay-spouse or former spouse (not as a nonspousal5% rate on certain early distributions from ments under the election,beneficiary), the rollover rules apply to you as ifdeferred annuity contracts.If an early with-
you were the employee. You can roll over thedrawal from a deferred annuity is otherwise sub-• From an employee stock ownership plan
distribution from the plan into a traditional IRA orject to the 10% additional tax, a 5% rate may for dividends on employer securities held
to another eligible retirement plan. See Publica-apply instead. A 5% rate applies to distributions by the plan, or
tion 575 for more information on benefits re-under a written election providing a specific• From a qualified retirement plan due to anceived under a QDRO. schedule for the distribution of your interest inIRS levy of the plan.the contract if, as of March 1, 1986, you had
Retirement bonds. If you redeem a retire-begun receiving payments under the election.Additional exceptions for nonqualified an-ment bond, you can defer the tax on the amountOn line 4 of Form 5329, multiply by 5% insteadnuity contracts.The tax does not apply toreceived by rolling it over to an IRA or qualifiedof 10%. Attach an explanation to your return.distributions that are:employer plan as discussed in Publication 590.
Exceptions to tax.Certain early distributionsFor more information on the rules for rolling over • From a deferred annuity contract to theare excepted from the early distribution tax. Ifdistributions, see Publication 575. extent allocable to investment in the con-the payer knows that an exception applies totract before August 14, 1982,your early distribution, distribution code “2,” “3,”
Special Additional Taxes • From a deferred annuity contract under aor “4” should be shown in box 7 of your Form
qualified personal injury settlement,1099–R and you do not have to report theTo discourage the use of pension funds for pur-distribution on Form 5329. If an exception ap-• From a deferred annuity contract pur-poses other than normal retirement, the law im-plies but distribution code “1” (early distribution,chased by your employer upon terminationposes additional taxes on early distributions ofno known exception) is shown in box 7, you of a qualified employee plan or qualifiedthose funds and on failures to withdraw themust file Form 5329. Enter the taxable amountemployee annuity plan and held by yourfunds timely. Ordinarily, you will not be subject toof the distribution shown in box 2a of your Formemployer until your separation from serv-these taxes if you roll over all early distributions1099–R on line 1 of Form 5329. On line 2, enterice, oryou receive, as explained earlier, and beginthe amount that can be excluded and the excep-drawing out the funds at a normal retirement • From an immediate annuity contract (ation number shown in the Form 5329 instruc-age, in reasonable amounts over your life ex- single premium contract providing sub-tions.pectancy. These special additional taxes are the stantially equal annuity payments that startIf distribution code “1” is incorrectlytaxes on: within one year from the date of purchaseshown on your Form 1099–R for a and are paid at least annually).• Early distributions, and distribution received when you were
TIP
age 591/2 or older, include that distribution on• Excess accumulation (not receiving mini-
Form 5329. Enter exception number “11” on lineTax on Excess Accumulationmum distributions).
2.These taxes are discussed in the following sec- To make sure that most of your retirement bene-
The early distribution tax does not apply totions. fits are paid to you during your lifetime, rather
any distribution that meets one of the followingthan to your beneficiaries after your death, theIf you must pay either of these taxes, reportexceptions. payments that you receive from qualified retire-them on Form 5329.  However, you do not have ment plans must begin no later than on yourGeneral exceptions.The tax does not ap-to file Form 5329 if you owe only the tax on early required beginning date (defined next).ply to distributions that are:distributions and your Form 1099–R shows a Unless the rule for 5% owners applies, you“1” in box 7. Instead, enter 10% of the taxable• Made as part of a series of substantiallymust begin to receive distributions from yourpart of the distribution on line 58 of Form 1040equal periodic payments (made at leastqualified retirement plan by April 1 of the yearand write “No” on the dotted line next to line 58.annually) for your life (or life expectancy)that follows the later of:Even if you do not owe any of these taxes,or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)
you may have to complete Form 5329 and at- of you and your designated beneficiary (if1) The calendar year in which you reach age
tach it to your Form 1040. This applies if youfrom a qualified retirement plan, the pay-701/2, or
received an early distribution and your Formments must begin after your separation2) The calendar year in which you retire.1099–R does not show distribution code “2,” from service),
“3,” or “4” in box 7 (or the code shown is incor- However, your plan may require you to begin to• Made because you are totally and perma-rect). receive distributions by April 1 of the year thatnently disabled, or follows the year in which you reach age 701/2,
• Made on or after the death of the planeven if you have not retired.
Tax on Early Distributions participant or contract holder. For this purpose, a qualified retirement
plan includes a:Most distributions (both periodic and nonperi-Additional exceptions for qualified retire-odic) from qualified retirement plans and non- 1) Qualified employee plan,ment plans. The tax does not apply to distri-qualified annuity contracts made to you beforebutions that are: 2) Qualified employee annuity plan,you reach age 591/2 are subject to an additional
• From a qualified retirement plan after yourtax of 10%. This tax applies to the part of the 3) Section 457 deferred compensation plan,
separation from service in or after the yeardistribution that you must include in gross in- or
you reached age 55,come.
4) Tax-sheltered annuity plan (for benefits ac-
• From a qualified retirement plan to an al-cruing after 1986).
ternate payee under a qualified domesticFor this purpose, a qualified retirement plan is: relations order, Age 701/2. You reach age 701/2 on the date that• A qualified employee plan, • From a qualified retirement plan to the ex- is 6 calendar months after the date of your 70th
• A qualified employee annuity plan, tent you have deductible medical ex- birthday.
Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 83

Page 86 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For example, if you are retired and your 70th ble error and that you are taking reasonableFor tax years ending after September
birthday was on June 30, 2001, you were age 10, 2001, disability payments for inju-steps to remedy the shortfall.
701/2 on December 31, 2001. If your 70th birth- ries incurred as a direct result of a
TIP
State insurer delinquency proceedings.day was on July 1, 2001, you reached age 701/2 terrorist attack directed against the UnitedYou might not receive the minimum distributionon January 1, 2002. States (or its allies), whether outside or withinbecause of state insurer delinquency proceed-the United States, are not included in income.5% owners. If you are a 5% owner of theings for an insurance company. If your pay-For more information about payments to survi-company maintaining your qualified retirementments are reduced below the minimum due tovors of terrorists attacks, see Publication 3920,plan, you must begin to receive distributions bythese proceedings, you should contact your planTax Relief for Victims of Terrorist Attacks.April 1 of the calendar year that follows the yearadministrator. Under certain conditions, you will
in which you reach age 701/2, regardless of when For more information on how to report disa-not have to pay the excise tax.
you retire. bility pensions, including military and certainForm 5329. You must file a Form 5329 ifgovernment disability pensions, see chapter 6.Required distributions.By the required be-you owe a tax because you did not receive a
ginning date, as explained above, you must ei-minimum required distribution from your quali-
ther: fied retirement plan.
• Receive your entire interest in the plan (for Purchased Annuitiesa tax-sheltered annuity, your entire benefit
accruing after 1986), or If you privately purchased an annuity contract
Disability Pensions• Begin receiving periodic distributions in from a commercial organization, such as an
annual amounts calculated to distribute insurance company, you generally must use theIf you retired on disability, you generally mustyour entire interest (for a tax-sheltered an- General Rule to figure the tax-free part of eachinclude in income any disability pension younuity, your entire benefit accruing after annuity payment. For more information aboutreceive under a plan that is paid for by your1986) over your life or life expectancy or the General Rule, get Publication 939. Also, see
employer. You must report your taxable disabil-over the joint lives or joint life expectan- Variable Annuities in Publication 575 for the
ity payments as wages on line 7 of Form 1040 orcies of you and a designated beneficiary special provisions that apply to these annuity
Form 1040A until you reach minimum retirement(or over a shorter period). contracts.
age. Minimum retirement age generally is the
age at which you can first receive a pension orAdditional information.For more informa- Sale of annuity.Gain on the exchange of antion on this rule, see Tax on Excess Accumula- annuity if you are not disabled. annuity contract is ordinary income to the extenttion in Publication 575. You may be entitled to a tax credit if you werethat the gain is due to interest accumulated on
permanently and totally disabled when you re-the contract and the exchange is for a life insur-Required distributions not made.If you
tired. For information on this credit, see chapterance or endowment contract. You do not recog-do not receive required minimum distributions,
34. nize gain or loss on an exchange of an annuityyou are subject to an additional excise tax. The
Beginning on the day after you reach mini-contract solely for another annuity contract if thetax equals 50% of the difference between the
mum retirement age, payments you receive areinsured or annuitant remains the same. Seeamount that must be distributed and the amount
taxable as a pension or annuity. Report theTransfers of Annuity Contracts in Publicationthat was distributed during the tax year. You can
payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or 575 for more information about exchanges ofget this excise tax waived if you establish that
annuity contracts.the shortfall in distributions was due to reasona- on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
Page 84 Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 87 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Supplemental annuity benefits. Base amount. Your base amount is:
For information on these benefits, see Publica-• $25,000 if you are single, head of house-
tion 575, Pension and Annuity Income. hold, or qualifying widow(er),12.
This chapter also does not cover the tax rules• $25,000 if you are married filing separately
for foreign social security or railroad retirement and lived apart from your spouse for all of
benefits. These benefits are taxable as annui- 2002,Social Security ties, unless they are exempt from U.S. tax under• $32,000 if you are married filing jointly, ora treaty. For more information, see Publication
• $–0– if you are married filing separately915.and Equivalent
and lived with your spouse at any time
during 2002.Useful ItemsRailroad You may want to see:
Worksheet. You can use the following
Publication worksheet to figure the amount of in-Retirement
come to compare with your base❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income amount. This is a quick way to check whether
Benefits ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangementssome of your benefits may be taxable.
(IRAs)
❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalent A. Write in the amount from box 5 of all
Introduction Railroad Retirement Benefits your Forms SSA – 1099 and
RRB – 1099. Include the full amountThis chapter explains the federal income tax of any lump-sum benefit paymentsForms (and Instructions)rules for social security benefits and equivalent received in 2002, for 2002 and earliertier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains:❏ 1040–ES Estimated Tax for Individuals years. (If you received more than one
form, combine the amounts from box❏ W–4V Voluntary Withholding Request• How to figure whether your benefits are 5 and write in the total.).........A .taxable, Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop
here; none of your benefits are taxable this year.• How to use the social security benefits
worksheet (with examples), B. Enter one-half of the amount on line
A .......................B .• How to report your taxable benefits, andAre Any of Your
C. Add your taxable pensions, wages,• How to treat repayments that are moreBenefits Taxable? interest, dividends, and other taxablethan the benefits you received during the income and write in the total......C .year. To find out whether any of your benefits areD. Write in any tax-exempt interest
taxable, compare the base amount for your income (such as interest onSocial security benefits include monthly survi-filing status with the total of: municipal bonds) plus any exclusionsvor and disability benefits. They do not include from income (listed earlier).......D .supplemental security income (SSI) payments,1) One-half of your benefits, plus E. Add lines B, C, and D and write in thewhich are not taxable.
total......................E .2) All your other income, including tax-ex-Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your baseempt interest.are the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroad amount  for your filing status. If the amount onemployee or beneficiary would have been enti-When making this comparison, do not re-line E equals or is less than the base amount fortled to receive under the social security system.duce your other income by any exclusions for: your filing status, none of your benefits are taxableThey are commonly called the social security this year. If the amount on line E is more than your
• Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene- base amount, some of your benefits may be
fits. taxable. You then need to complete Worksheet 1• Employer-provided adoption benefits, in Publication 915 (or the Social Security BenefitsIf you received these benefits during 2002,
Worksheet in your tax form instruction booklet).• Foreign earned income or foreign housing,you should have received a Form SSA–1099 or
orForm RRB–1099 (Form SSA–1042S or Form
RRB–1042S if you are a nonresident alien). • Income earned in American Samoa or Example. You and your spouse (both overThese forms show the amounts received and Puerto Rico by bona fide residents. 65) are filing a joint return for 2002, and you bothrepaid, and taxes withheld for the year. You may
received social security benefits during the year.receive more than one of these forms for the
Figuring total income.To figure the total ofIn January 2003, you received a Formsame year. You should add the amounts shown
one-half of your benefits plus your other income,SSA–1099 showing net benefits of $6,600 inon all forms you receive for the year to deter-
use the worksheet later in this discussion. If thebox 5. Your spouse received a Form SSA–1099mine the “total” amounts received and repaid,
total is more than your base amount, part of yourshowing net benefits of $2,400 in box 5. Youand taxes withheld for that year. See the Appen-
benefits may be taxable. also received a taxable pension of $17,000 anddix at the end of Publication 915 for more infor-
interest income of $500. You did not have anyIf you are married and file a joint return formation.
tax-exempt interest income. Your benefits are2002, you and your spouse must combine your
not taxable for 2002 because your income, asincomes and your benefits to figure whether anyNote. When the term “benefits” is used in
figured in the following worksheet, is not moreof your combined benefits are taxable. Even ifthis chapter, it applies to both social security
than your base amount ($32,000) for marriedyour spouse did not receive any benefits, youbenefits and the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad
filing jointly.must add your spouse’s income to yours to fig-retirement benefits.
Even though none of your benefits are taxa-ure whether any of your benefits are taxable.
ble, you must file a return for 2002 because yourWhat is not covered in this chapter.This If the only income you received duringtaxable gross income ($17,500) exceeds thechapter does not cover the tax rules for the 2002 was your social security or theminimum filing requirement amount for your fil-following railroad retirement benefits: SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retire-
TIP
ing status.ment benefits, your benefits generally are not• Non-social security equivalent benefit
taxable and you probably do not have to file a(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits,
return. If you have income in addition to your• Tier 2 benefits, benefits, you may have to file a return even if
• Vested dual benefits, and none of your benefits are taxable.
Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPage 85

Page 88 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form W–4V. For 2003, you can choose with-Which worksheet to use.A worksheet to fig-
A. Write in the amount from box 5 of holding at 7%, 10%, 15%, or 27% of your totalure your taxable benefits is in the instructions for
all your Forms SSA – 1099 and benefit payment. your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You can useRRB – 1099. Include the full If you do not choose to have income taxeither that worksheet or Worksheet 1 in Publica-amount of any lump-sum benefit withheld, you may have to request additionaltion 915, unless any of the following situationspayments received in 2002, for withholding from other income or pay estimatedapplies to you.2002 and earlier years. (If you
tax during the year. For details, get Publicationreceived more than one form,
505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, or the 1) You contributed to a traditional individualcombine the amounts from box 5
and write in the total.).......A . $  9,000 instructions for Form 1040–ES. retirement arrangement (IRA) and your
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop IRA deduction is limited because you or
here; none of your benefits are taxable this year. your spouse is covered by a retirement
plan at work. In this situation you mustB. Enter one-half of the amount on
line A..................B . 4,500 use the special worksheets in Appendix BHow To Report
of Publication 590 to figure both your IRAC. Add your taxable pensions,
deduction and your taxable benefits.Your Benefitswages, interest, dividends, and
other taxable income and write in 2) Situation (1) does not apply and you takethe total.................C .  17,500 If part of your benefits are taxable, you must usean exclusion for interest from qualifiedForm 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot useD. Write in any tax-exempt interest U.S. savings bonds (Form 8815), for adop-Form 1040EZ.income (such as interest on tion benefits (Form 8839), for foreignmunicipal bonds) plus any earned income or housing (Form 2555 orReporting on Form 1040. Report your netexclusions from income (listed Form 2555–EZ), or for income earned inbenefits (the amount in box 5 of your Formearlier)..................D . – 0 –
American Samoa (Form 4563) or PuertoSSA–1099 or Form RRB–1099) on line 20aE. Add lines B, C, and D and write in Rico by bona fide residents. In this situa-and the taxable part on line 20b. If you arethe total.................E . $22,000 tion, you must use Worksheet 1 in Publi-married filing separately and you lived apartNote. Compare the amount on line E to your base cation 915 to figure your taxable benefits.from your spouse for all of 2002, also enter “D”amount for your filing status. If the amount on line
to the right of the word “benefits” on line 20a.E equals or is less than the base amount for your 3) You received a lump-sum payment for anfiling status, none of your benefits are taxable this earlier year. In this situation, also completeReporting on Form 1040A. Report your netyear. If the amount on line E is more than your Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub-base amount, some of your benefits may be benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Form lication 915. See Lump-sum election.taxable. You then need to complete Worksheet 1 SSA–1099 or Form RRB–1099) on line 14a
in Publication 915 (or the Social Security Benefitsand the taxable part on line 14b. If you are
Worksheet in your tax form instruction booklet).married filing separately and you lived apartLump-sum election. You must include the
from your spouse for all of 2002, also enter “D”taxable part of a lump-sum (retroactive) pay-
to the right of the word “benefits” on line 14a.Who is taxed. The person who has the legal ment of benefits received in 2002 in your 2002
right to receive the benefits must determine income, even if the payment includes benefitsBenefits not taxable.If none of your benefitswhether the benefits are taxable. For example, if for an earlier year.are taxable, do not report any of them on youryou and your child receive benefits, but thetax return. But if you are married filing separatelyThis type of lump-sum benefit paymentcheck for your child is made out in your name,and you lived apart from your spouse for all of should not be confused with theyou must use only your part of the benefits to2002, make the following entries. On Form lump-sum death benefit that both the
TIP
see whether any benefits are taxable to you.1040, enter “D” to the right of the word “benefits”SSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficiaries.One-half of the part that belongs to your childon line 20a and “–0–” on line 20b. On Form No part of the lump-sum death benefit is subjectmust be added to your child’s other income to1040A, enter “D” to the right of the word “bene-to tax.see whether any of those benefits are taxable tofits” on line 14a and “–0–” on line 14b.your child. Generally, you use your 2002 income to fig-
ure the taxable part of the total benefits receivedRepayment of benefits. Any repayment of How Much Is Taxable? in 2002. However, you may be able to figure thebenefits you made during 2002 must be sub-
taxable part of a lump-sum payment for an ear-tracted from the gross benefits you received inIf part of your benefits are taxable, how much islier year separately, using your income for the2002. It does not matter whether the repaymenttaxable depends on the total amount of yourearlier year. You can elect this method if it low-was for a benefit you received in 2002 or in anbenefits and other income. Generally, the higherers your taxable benefits.earlier year. If you repaid more than the grossthat total amount, the greater the taxable part ofbenefits you received in 2002, see Repayments Making the election. If you received ayour benefits.More Than Gross Benefits, later. lump-sum benefit payment in 2002 that includesYour gross benefits are shown in box 3 ofMaximum taxable part.Generally, up to 50%benefits for one or more earlier years, follow theForm SSA–1099 or RRB–1099. Your repay- of your benefits will be taxable. However, up toinstructions in Publication 915 under Lump-Summents are shown in box 4. The amount in box 585% of your benefits can be taxable if either ofElectionto see whether making the election willshows your net benefits for 2002 (box 3 minusthe following situations applies to you. lower your taxable benefits. That discussionbox 4). Use the amount in box 5 to figure also explains how to make the election.whether any of your benefits are taxable. 1) The total of one-half of your benefits and
Since the earlier year’s taxable bene-all your other income is more than $34,000Tax withholding and estimated tax.You can fits are included in your 2002 income,($44,000 if you are married filing jointly).choose to have federal income tax withheld from no adjustment is made to the earlierCAUTION
!
your social security benefits and/or the SSEB 2) You are married filing separately and lived year’s return. Do not file an amended return forportion of your tier 1 railroad retirement benefits.with your spouse at any time during the earlier year.If you choose to do this, you must complete a 2002.
Page 86 Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 89 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. If line 9 is zero or less, stop • Foreign earned income or housing
here; none of your benefits are  (Form 2555, lines 43 and 48, or
Examples taxable. (Do not enter any amounts on  Form 2555 – EZ, line 18), and
Form 1040, line 20a or 20b, or on • Certain income of bona fide
Form 1040A, line 14a or 14b. But if  residents of AmericanThe following are a few examples you can use
you are married filing separately and  Samoa (Form 4563, line 15)as a guide to figure the taxable part of youryou lived apart from your spouse for  or Puerto Rico............. – 0 –benefits. all of 2002, enter “D” to the right of the 5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4............ 32,550
word “benefits” on line 20a, Form 6. Form 1040A filers: Enter the amountExample 1. George White is single and files1040, or to the right of the word from Form 1040A, line 20, minus any
“benefits” on line 14a, Form 1040A.Form 1040 for 2002. He received the following amounts on Form 1040A, lines 18 and
Also enter –0– o n  Form 1040, line 19.income in 2002:
20b or on Form 1040A, line 14b.) Form 1040 filers: Enter the amountOtherwise, go on to line 10. from Form 1040, line 34, minus anyFully taxable pension............. $18,600 10. Enter $9,000 ($12,000 if married filing amounts on Form 1040, lines 25 and 26 1,000Wages from part-time job..........  9,400 jointly; $0 if married filing separately 7. Subtract line 6 from line 5......... 31,550Taxable interest income........... 9 9 0 and you lived with your spouse at any 8. Enter $25,000 ($32,000 if married filingTotal....................... $28,990 time in 2002)................ 9,000 jointly; $0 if married filing separately11. Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero orGeorge also received social security benefits and you lived with your spouse at anyless, enter – 0 –.............. – 0 – time during 2002).............. 32,000during 2002. The Form SSA–1099 he received
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10 6,980 9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero orin January 2003 shows $5,980 in box 5. To13. Enter one-half of line 12......... 3,490 less, enter – 0 –............... – 0 –figure his taxable benefits, George completes14. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13 2,990 Note. If line 9 is zero or less, stop here;the worksheet shown here. 15. Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line 11 none of your benefits are taxable. (Do
is zero, enter – 0 –............ – 0 – not enter any amounts on Form 1040,Worksheet 1. 16. Add lines 14 and 15........... 2,990 line 20a or 20b, or on Form 1040A, lineFiguring Your Taxable Benefits 17. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85)....... 5,083 14a or 14b. But if you are married filing
separately and you lived apart from18. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of your spouse for all of 2002, enter “D” toof line 16 or line 17............ $2,990ALL  your Forms SSA – 1099 and the right of the word “benefits” on line• Enter the amount from line 1 aboveRRB – 1099.................  $5,980 20a, Form 1040, or to the right of the on Form 1040, line 20a or onNote. If line 1 is zero or less, stop here; word “benefits” on line 14a, Form Form 1040A, line 14a.none of your benefits are taxable. 1040A. Also enter –0– o n  Form 1040,• Enter the amount from line 18 aboveOtherwise, go on to line 2. line 20b or on Form 1040A, line 14b.) on Form 1040, line 20b or on2. Enter one-half of line 1.......... 2,990 Otherwise, go on to line 10. Form 1040A, line 14b.3. Enter the total of the amounts from: 10. Enter $9,000 ($12,000 if married filing
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9 – 14, jointly; $0 if married filing separatelyThe amount on line 18 of George’s work-15b, 16b, 17 – 19, and 21. and you lived with your spouse at any
sheet shows that $2,990 of his social securityForm 1040A: lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9, 10, time in 2002).................
11b, 12b, and 13............ 28,990 benefits is taxable. On line 20a of his Form11. Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or
4. Form 1040A filers: Enter the total of less, enter – 0 –...............1040, George enters his net benefits of $5,980.
any exclusions for qualified U.S. 12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10 . .On line 20b, he enters his taxable part of $2,990.savings bond interest ( Form 8815, 13. Enter one-half of line 12..........
line 14) or for adoption benefits ( Form 14. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13 . .Example 2. Ray and Alice Hopkins file a8839, line 30). 15. Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line 11joint return on Form 1040A for 2002. Ray isForm 1040 filers: Enter the total of is zero, enter – 0 –.............
any exclusions/adjustments for: retired and received a fully taxable pension of16. Add lines 14 and 15............
• Qualified U.S. savings bond $15,500. He also received social security bene-17. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85)........ interest (Form 8815, line 14), fits, and his Form SSA–1099 for 2002 shows18. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line line 16 or line 17..............net benefits of $5,600 in box 5. Alice worked 30), • Enter the amount from line 1 aboveduring the year and had wages of $14,000. She• Foreign earned income or housing  on Form 1040, line 20a or onmade a deductible payment to her IRA account (Form 2555, lines 43 and 48, or  Form 1040A, line 14a.of $1,000. Ray and Alice have two savings ac- Form 2555 – EZ, line 18), and • Enter the amount from line 18 abovecounts with a total of $250 in interest income.• Certain income of bona fide  on Form 1040, line 20b or on residents of American They complete Worksheet 1 and find that none  Form 1040A, line 14b. Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) of Ray’s social security benefits are taxable. or Puerto Rico............ – 0 – They leave lines 14a and 14b of their Form5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4........... 31,980 Example 3. Joe and Betty Johnson file a1040A blank.6. Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount joint return on Form 1040 for 2002. Joe is afrom Form 1040A, line 20, minus any Worksheet 1. retired railroad worker and in 2002 received theamounts on Form 1040A, lines 18 and
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits social security equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion19.
of tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. Joe’s FormForm 1040 filers: Enter the amount 1. Enter the total amount from box 5 offrom Form 1040, line 34, minus any RRB–1099 shows $10,000 in box 5. Betty is aALL  your Forms SSA – 1099 andamounts on Form 1040, lines 25 and retired government worker and receives a fullyRRB – 1099..................  $5,6002 6 ...................... – 0 – taxable pension of $38,000. They had $2,300 inNote. If line 1 is zero or less, stop here;7. Subtract line 6 from line 5........ 31,980 interest income plus interest of $200 on a quali-none of your benefits are taxable.8. Enter $25,000 ($32,000 if married Otherwise, go on to line 2. fied U.S. savings bond. The savings bond inter-filing jointly; $0 if married filing 2. Enter one-half of line 1........... 2,800 est qualified for the exclusion. Thus, they have aseparately and you lived with your
3. Enter the total of the amounts from:spouse at any time during 2002).... 25,000 total income of $40,300 ($38,000 + $2,300).
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9 – 14,9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or They figure their taxable benefits by completing15b, 16b, 17 – 19, and 21.less, enter – 0 –.............. 6,980 Worksheet 1.Form 1040A: lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9, 10,
11b, 12b, and 13............. 29,750 Worksheet 1.4. Form 1040A filers: Enter the total of Figuring Your Taxable Benefitsany exclusion for qualified U.S. savings
bond interest (Form 8815, line 14) or for 1. Enter the total amount from box 5 ofadoption benefits ( Form 8839, line 30). ALL  your Forms SSA – 1099 andForm 1040 filers: Enter the total of any RRB – 1099.................. $10,000exclusions/adjustments for: Note. If line 1 is zero or less, stop here;• Qualified U.S. savings bond none of your benefits are taxable. interest (Form 8815, line 14), Otherwise, go on to line 2.• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 2. Enter one-half of line 1........... 5,000 30),
Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPage 87

Page 90 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Enter the total of the amounts from: More than 50% of Joe’s net benefits are benefits when figuring if your combined benefits
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9 – 14, taxable because the income on line 7 of theare taxable.
15b, 16b, 17 – 19, and 21. worksheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. JoeForm 1040A: lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9, 10, and Betty enter $10,000 on line 20a, Form 1040,Example. John and Mary file a joint return11b, 12b, and 13............. 40,300
and $6,275 on line 20b, Form 1040. for 2002. John received Form SSA–1099 show-4. Form 1040A filers: Enter the total of
ing $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Formany exclusion for qualified U.S. savings
bond interest (Form 8815, line 14) or for SSA–1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500).
adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 30). John and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minus
Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any $500) as the amount of their net benefits whenDeductions Related toexclusions/adjustments for: figuring if any of their combined benefits are• Qualified U.S. savings bond
taxable. interest (Form 8815, line 14), Your Benefits
• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line
 30), Repayment of benefits received in an earlierYou may be entitled to deduct certain amounts• Foreign earned income or housing year. If the total amount shown in box 5 of allrelated to the benefits you receive. (Form 2555, lines 43 and 48, or of your Forms SSA–1099 and RRB–1099 is a Form 2555 – EZ, line 18), and Disability payments.You may have received negative figure, you can take an itemized deduc-• Certain income of bona fide disability payments from your employer or antion for the part of this negative figure that repre- residents of American
insurance company that you included as incomesents benefits you included in gross income in Samoa (Form 4563, line 15)
on your tax return in an earlier year. If you or Puerto Rico............. 2 0 0 an earlier year.
5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4............ 45,500 received a lump-sum payment from SSA or If this deduction is $3,000 or less, it is6. Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount RRB, and you had to repay the employer orsubject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomefrom Form 1040A, line 20, minus any insurance company for the disability payments,limit that applies to certain miscellaneous item-amounts on Form 1040A, lines 18 and you can take an itemized deduction for the partized deductions. Claim it on line 22, Schedule A19.
of the payments you included in gross income inForm 1040 filers: Enter the amount (Form 1040).the earlier year. If the amount you repay is morefrom Form 1040, line 34, minus any If this deduction is more than $3,000, youamounts on Form 1040, lines 25 and 26 – 0 –than $3,000, you may be able to claim a taxshould figure your tax two ways:7. Subtract line 6 from line 5......... 45,500 credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit in
8. Enter $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing the same way explained under Repayments 1) Figure your tax for 2002 with the itemizedjointly; $0 if married filing separately More Than Gross Benefits, later. deduction included on line 27 of Scheduleand you lived with your spouse at any
time during 2002).............. 32,000 A.Legal expenses. You can usually deduct le-9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or gal expenses that you pay or incur to produce or2) Figure your tax for 2002 in the followingless, enter – 0 –............... 13,500
collect taxable income or in connection with thesteps.Note. If line 9 is zero or less, stop here;
determination, collection, or refund of any tax.none of your benefits are taxable. (Do
a) Figure the tax without the itemized de-not enter any amounts on Form 1040, Legal expenses for collecting the taxable
line 20a or 20b, or on Form 1040A, line duction included on line 27 of Schedulepart of your benefits are deductible as a miscel-
14a or 14b. But if you are married filing laneous itemized deduction on line 22, Schedule A.separately and you lived apart from A (Form 1040).your spouse for all of 2002, enter “D” to b) For each year after 1983 for which part
the right of the word “benefits” on line of the negative figure represents a re-20a, Form 1040, or to the right of the Repayments More Than payment of benefits, refigure your taxa-word “benefits” on line 14a, Form
ble benefits as if your total benefits for1040A. Also enter –0– o n  Form 1040, Gross Benefits the year were reduced by that part ofline 20b or on Form 1040A, line 14b.)
Otherwise, go on to line 10. the negative figure. Then refigure theIn some situations, your Form SSA–1099 or10. Enter $9,000 ($12,000 if married filing tax for that year.Form RRB–1099 will show that the total bene-jointly; $0 if married filing separately
fits you repaid (box 4) are more than the grossand you lived with your spouse at any c) Subtract the total of the refigured tax
benefits (box 3) you received. If this occurred,time in 2002)................. 12,000 amounts in (b) from the total of your
11. Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or your net benefits in box 5 will be a negative actual tax amounts.
less, enter – 0 –............... 1,500 figure (a figure in parentheses) and none of your
d) Subtract the result in (c) from the result12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10 . . 12,000benefits will be taxable. If you receive more than
13. Enter one-half of line 12.......... 6,000 in (a).one form, a negative figure in box 5 of one form14. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13 . . 5,000is used to offset a positive figure in box 5 of15. Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line 11 Compare the tax figured in methods (1) andanother form for that same year.is zero, enter – 0 –............. 1,275 (2). Your tax for 2002 is the smaller of the twoIf you have any questions about this negative16. Add lines 14 and 15............ 6,275 amounts. If method (1) results in less tax, takefigure, contact your local SSA office or your local17. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85)........ 8,500 the itemized deduction on line 27, Schedule AU.S. RRB field office.18. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of
(Form 1040). If method (2) results in less tax,line 16 or line 17.............. $6,275
claim a credit for the amount from step 2(c)Joint return.If you and your spouse file a joint• Enter the amount from line 1 above
 on Form 1040, line 20a or on above on line 68 of Form 1040 and writereturn, and your Form SSA–1099 or
 Form 1040A, line 14a. “I.R.C. 1341” in the margin to the left of line 68.RRB–1099 has a negative figure in box 5, but
• Enter the amount from line 18 above If both methods produce the same tax, deductyour spouse’s does not, subtract the amount in on Form 1040, line 20b or on the repayment on line 27, Schedule A (Formbox 5 of your form from the amount in box 5 of Form 1040A, line 14b. 1040).your spouse’s form. You do this to get your net
Page 88 Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 91 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
both have agreed ahead of time as to the valueForm 1099–C. If a federal government
agency, financial institution, or credit unionof the services, that value will be accepted as
cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 orfair market value unless the value can be shown
13. more, you will receive a Form 1099–C, Cancel-to be otherwise.
lation of Debt. The amount of the canceled debtGenerally, you report this income on Sched-
is shown in box 2.ule C, Profit or Loss From Business, or Schedule
C–EZ, Net Profit From Business (Form 1040). Interest included in canceled debt.If anyOther Income But if the barter involves an exchange of some-interest is forgiven and included in the amount of
thing other than services, such as in Example 3 canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interest
below, you may have to use another form orwill also be shown in box 3. Whether or not you
schedule instead. must include the interest portion of the canceledIntroduction
debt in your income depends on whether theThis chapter discusses many kinds of incomeExample 1. You are a self-employed attor-interest would be deductible if you paid it. Seeand explains whether they are taxable or non-ney who performs legal services for a client, aDeductible debt, under Exceptions, later.taxable. small corporation. The corporation gives youIf the interest would not be deductible (suchshares of its stock as payment for your services.as interest on a personal loan), include in your• Income that is taxable must be reportedYou must include the fair market value of theincome the amount from box 2 of Form 1099–C.on your tax return and is subject to tax.shares in your income on Schedule C or Sched-If the interest would be deductible (such as on a• Income that is nontaxable may have to beule C–EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receivebusiness loan), include in your income the netshown on your tax return but is not taxa-them. amount of the canceled debt (the amount shownble. in box 2 less the interest amount shown in box
Example 2. You are self-employed and a3).This chapter begins with discussions of themember of a barter club. The club uses “credit
following income items. units” as a means of exchange. It adds creditDiscounted mortgage loan. If your financial
units to your account for goods or services youinstitution offers a discount for the early payment• Bartering. provide to members, which you can use to of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-
• Canceled debts. purchase goods and services offered by othercount is canceled debt. You must include the
members of the barter club. The club subtractscanceled amount in your income.• Life insurance proceeds. credit units from your account when you receive
• Partnership income. goods or services from other members. YouStockholder debt.If you are a stockholder in
must include in your income the value of thea corporation and the corporation cancels or• S Corporation income. credit units that are added to your account, evenforgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is
• Recoveries (including state income tax re-though you may not actually receive goods ordividend income to you.
funds). services from other members until a later taxIf you are a stockholder in a corporation and
year. you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-• Rents from personal property.
tion, you generally do not realize income. This is
• Repayments. Example 3. You own a small apartment because the canceled debt is considered as a
building. In return for 6 months rent-free use ofcontribution to the capital of the corporation• Royalties.
an apartment, an artist gives you a work of artequal to the amount of debt principal that you
• Unemployment benefits. she created. You must report as rental incomecanceled.
on Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss• Welfare and other public assistance bene-
(Form 1040), the fair market value of the art-fits. Exceptionswork, and the artist must report as income on
These discussions are followed by brief discus-Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) theThere are several exceptions to the inclusion ofsions of many income items arranged in alpha-fair rental value of the apartment. canceled debt in income. These are explainedbetical order. next.Form 1099–B from barter exchange. If youYou must include on your return all income
exchanged property or services through a barteryou receive in the form of money, property, and Nonrecourse debt. If you are not personallyexchange, you should receive  Form 1099–B,services unless the tax law states that you do liable for the debt (nonrecourse debt), differentProceeds From Broker and Barter Exchangenot include them. Some items, however, are rules apply. You may have a gain or loss if aTransactions, or a similar statement from theonly partly excluded from income. nonrecourse debt is canceled or forgiven in con-barter exchange by January 31, 2003. It shouldjunction with the foreclosure or repossession of
show the value of cash, property, services, cred-property to which the debt attaches. See Publi-Useful Items its, or scrip you received from exchanges duringcation 544 for more information.You may want to see: 2002. The IRS will also receive a copy of Form
1099–B. Student loans. Certain student loans containPublication a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to
❏ 520 Scholarships and Fellowships attend the qualified educational institution will be
canceled if you work for a certain period of time❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income in certain professions for any of a broad class ofCanceled Debts❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of employers.
Assets You do not have income if your student loanGenerally, if a debt you owe is canceled or
is canceled after you agreed to this provisionforgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses and then performed the services required. Tomust include the canceled amount in your in-
qualify, the loan must have been made by:come. You have no income from the canceled
debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt1) The federal government, a state or localincludes any indebtedness for which you are government, or an instrumentality, agency,liable or which attaches to property you hold.Bartering or subdivision thereof,If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the
canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040. If it isBartering is an exchange of property or services. 2) A tax-exempt public benefit corporation
a business debt, report the amount on ScheduleYou must include in your income, at the time that has assumed control of a state,
C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) (or on Sched-received, the fair market value of property or county, or municipal hospital, and whose
ule F, Profit or Loss From Farming (Form 1040),services you receive in bartering. If you ex- employees are considered public employ-
if you are a farmer).change services with another person and you ees under state law, or
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 89

Page 92 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) An educational institution: not specified, you include in your income the on the lives of insured individuals who are termi-
benefit payments that are more than the present nally or chronically ill and who meets the require-
a) Under an agreement with an entity de-value of the payments at the time of death. ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal
scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the Revenue Code.
funds to the institution to make theProceeds received in installments.If you re-
loan, or ceive life insurance proceeds in installments,Exclusion for terminal illness.Accelerated
you can exclude part of each installment fromdeath benefits are fully excludable if the insuredb) As part of a program of the institutionyour income. is a terminally ill individual. This is a person whodesigned to encourage students to To determine the excluded part, divide thehas been certified by a physician as having anserve in occupations or areas with un-amount held by the insurance company (gener-illness or physical condition that can reasonablymet needs and under which the serv-ally the total lump sum payable at the death ofbe expected to result in death within 24 monthsices provided are for or under the the insured person) by the number of install-from the date of the certification.direction of a governmental unit or aments to be paid. Include anything over thistax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza- Exclusion for chronic illness.If the insuredexcluded part in your income as interest.tion. is a chronically ill individual who is not terminallySurviving spouse. If your spouse died ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basisSection 501(c)(3) organizations are definedbefore October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-of costs incurred for qualified long-term carein Publication 525. ceeds paid to you because of the death of yourservices are fully excludable. Accelerated deathA loan to refinance a qualified student loanspouse are received in installments, you canbenefits paid on a per diem or other periodicwill also qualify if it was made by an educationalexclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-basis are excludable up to a limit. This limitinstitution or a tax-exempt 501(a) organizationcluded in the installments. If you remarry, youapplies to the total of the accelerated deathunder its program designed as described incan continue to take the exclusion. benefits and any periodic payments received(3)(b) above. from long-term care insurance contracts. ForMore information. For more information,
Deductible debt. You do not have income information on the limit and the definitions ofsee Life Insurance Proceeds in Publication 525.
from the cancellation of a debt if your payment of chronically ill individual and long-term care
Surrender of policy for cash.If you surren-the debt would be deductible. This exception insurance contracts, see Long-Term Care In-
der a life insurance policy for cash, you mustapplies only if you use the cash method of ac- surance Contracts under Sickness and Injury
include in income any proceeds that are morecounting. For more information, see chapter 5 of Benefits in chapter 6.
than the cost of the life insurance policy. InPublication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.
general, your cost (or investment in the contract)Exception. The exclusion does not apply toPrice reduced after purchase.Generally, ifis the total of premiums that you paid for the lifeany amount paid to a person (other than thethe seller reduces the amount of debt you oweinsurance policy, less any refunded premiums,insured) who has an insurable interest in the lifefor property you purchased, you do not haverebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that wereof the insured because the insured:income from the reduction. The reduction of thenot included in your income.debt is treated as a purchase price adjustment • Is a director, officer, or employee of theYou should receive a Form 1099–R showingand reduces your basis in the property. other person, orthe total proceeds and the taxable part. Report
these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of FormExcluded debt. Do not include a canceled • Has a financial interest in the person’s
1040, or lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.debt in your gross income in the following situa- business.
tions.
Endowment proceeds. Endowment pro-• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-ceeds paid in a lump sum to you at maturity areunder title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi- ated death benefits made on a per diem or othertaxable only if the proceeds are more than thecation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. periodic basis, you must file Form 8853, Archercost of the policy. To determine your cost, add
MSAs and Long-term Care Insurance Con-the aggregate amount of premiums (or other• The debt is canceled when you are insol- tracts, with your return. You do not have to fileconsideration) paid for the contract and subtractvent. However, you cannot exclude any Form 8853 to exclude accelerated death bene-any amount that you previously received underamount of canceled debt that is more than fits paid on the basis of actual expenses in-the contract and excluded from your income.the amount by which you are insolvent. curred.Include the part of the lump sum payment that isSee Publication 908.
more than your cost in your income.• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-
celed by a qualified person. See chapter 4Deceased public safety officers.If you are a
of Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide. survivor of a public safety officer who died in thePartnership Incomeline of duty, you may be able to exclude from• The debt is qualified real property busi-
income certain amounts you receive.ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publication A partnership generally is not a taxable entity.For this purpose, the term public safety334. The income, gains, losses, deductions, andofficer includes police and law enforcement of-credits of a partnership are passed through toficers, firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squadthe partners based on each partner’s distributiveand ambulance crew members. See Publicationshare of these items.525 for more information.
Life Insurance Schedule K–1 (Form 1065).Although a part-
nership generally pays no tax, it must file anAccelerated DeathProceeds information return on Form 1065, U.S. Return ofBenefits Partnership Income, and send Schedule K–1
Life insurance proceeds paid to you because of (Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, theCertain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-the death of the insured person are not taxable partnership will send each partner a copy of theefits under a life insurance contract or viaticalunless the policy was turned over to you for a Partner’s Instructions for Schedule K–1 (Formsettlement before the insured’s death are ex-price. This is true even if the proceeds were paid 1065) to help each partner report his or hercluded from income if the insured is terminally orunder an accident or health insurance policy or share of the partnership’s income, deductions,chronically ill.an endowment contract. credits, and tax preference items.
Proceeds not received in installments.If Viatical settlement.This is the sale or assign- Keep Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) for
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or ment of any part of the death benefit under a lifeyour records. Do not attach it to your
other than at regular intervals, include in your insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-Form 1040.RECORDS
income only the benefits that are more than the vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person
amount payable to you at the time of the insured who regularly engages in the business of buying For more information on partnerships, get
person’s death. If the benefit payable at death is or taking assignment of life insurance contracts Publication 541, Partnerships.
Page 90 Chapter 13 Other Income

Page 93 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Interest on recovery.Interest on any of the 10 of Form 1040, and the balance of your recov-
amounts you recover must be reported as inter- eries, $525, on line 21 of Form 1040.S Corporation Income est income in the year received. For example,Standard deduction for earlier years.To de-report any interest you received on state or localIn general, an S corporation does not pay tax on termine if amounts recovered in 2002 must beincome tax refunds on line 8a of Form 1040.its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc- included in your income, you must know the
tions, and credits of the corporation are passed standard deduction for your filing status for theRecovery and expense in same year.If thethrough to the shareholders. year the deduction was claimed. Standard de-refund or other recovery and the expense occur
duction amounts for 2001, 2000, and 1999 are inin the same year, the recovery reduces the de-Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S). An S corpora- Publication 525.duction or credit and is not reported as income.tion must file a return on Form 1120S, U.S.
Income Tax Return for an S Corporation, and Recovery for 2 or more years.If you receive Example. You filed a joint return for 2001send Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S) to each a refund or other recovery that is for amountswith taxable income of $25,000. Your itemizedshareholder. In addition, the S corporation willyou paid in 2 or more separate years, you mustdeductions were $8,700. The standard deduc-send each shareholder a copy of the allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recoveredtion that you could have claimed was $7,600. InShareholder’s Instructions for Schedule K–1amount between the years in which you paid it.2002 you recovered $2,400 of your 2001 item-(Form 1120S) to help each shareholder reportThis allocation is necessary to determine theized deductions. None of the recoveries werehis or her share of the S corporation’s income,amount of recovery from any earlier years and tomore than the actual deductions for 2001. In-losses, credits, and deductions. determine the amount, if any, of your allowableclude $1,100 of the recoveries in your 2002
deduction for this item for the current year. Forincome. This is the smaller of your recoveriesKeep Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S) for
information on how to compute the allocation,($2,400) or the amount by which your itemizedyour records. Do not attach it to your
see Recoveries in Publication 525. deductions were more than the standard deduc-Form 1040.RECORDS
tion ($8,700 − 7,600 = $1,100).
For more information on S corporations andItemized Deduction Recovery limited to deduction.You do nottheir shareholders, see the instructions for Form
include in your income any amount of your re-1120S. Recoveries
covery that is more than the amount you de-
If you recover any amount that you deducted inducted in the earlier year. The amount you
an earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), youinclude in your income is limited to the smaller
generally must include the full amount of theof:Recoveries recovery in your income in the year you receive• The amount deducted on Schedule Ait.A recovery is a return of an amount you de- (Form 1040), or
ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. TheWhere to report.Enter your state or local in-• The amount recovered.most common recoveries are refunds, reim-come tax refund on line 10 of Form 1040, and
bursements, and rebates of deductions itemizedthe total of all other recoveries as other income
on Schedule A (Form 1040). You may also have Example. During 2001 you paid $1,700 foron line 21 of Form 1040. You cannot use Form
recoveries of non-itemized deductions (such as medical expenses. From this amount you sub-1040A or Form 1040EZ.
payments on previously deducted bad debts) tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted
and recoveries of items for which you previously gross income. Your actual medical expense de-Standard deduction limit.You generally are
claimed a tax credit. duction was $200. In 2002, you received a $500allowed to claim the standard deduction if you do
reimbursement from your medical insurance fornot itemize your deductions. Only your itemized
Tax benefit rule.You must include a recovery your 2001 expenses. The only amount of thedeductions that are more than your standard
in your income in the year you receive it up to the $500 reimbursement that must be included indeduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-
amount by which the deduction or credit you your income for 2002 is $200—the amount ac-less you are required to itemize your deduc-
took for the recovered amount reduced your tax tually deducted.tions). If your total deductions on the earlier year
in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-return were not more than your income for thatOther recoveries.See Recoveries in Publica-crease to an amount carried over to the currentyear, include in your income this year thetion 525 if:year that resulted from the deduction or credit issmaller of:
considered to have reduced your tax in the ear- • You have recoveries of items other than• Your recoveries, orlier year. For more information, get Publication itemized deductions, or525. • The amount by which your itemized de- • You received a recovery for an item forductions exceeded the standard deduc-Federal income tax refund.Refunds of fed- which you claimed a tax credit (other thantion.eral income taxes are not included in your in- investment credit or foreign tax credit) in a
come because they are never allowed as a prior year.
Example. For 2001, you filed a joint return.deduction from income.
Your taxable income was $20,000 and you were
State income tax refund.If you received anot entitled to any tax credits. Your standard
state or local income tax refund (or credit ordeduction was $7,600, and you had itemized
offset) in 2002, you must include it in income ifdeductions of $9,000. In 2002, you received theRents from Personal
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. Youfollowing recoveries for amounts deducted on
should receive Form 1099–G, Certain Govern- your 2001 return: Property
ment Payments, from the payer by January 31,
Medical expenses.............. $2002003. The IRS will also receive a copy of the If you rent out personal property, such as equip-
State and local income tax refund.... 4 0 0Form 1099–G. Use the worksheet in the 2002 ment or vehicles, how you report your income
Refund of mortgage interest........ 3 2 5Form 1040 Instructions for line 10 to figure the and expenses is generally determined by:
amount (if any) to include in your income.Total recoveries............... $925 1) Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-
Mortgage interest refund.If you received a None of the recoveries were more than the ness, and
refund or credit in 2002 of mortgage interest paid deductions taken for 2001. 2) Whether or not the rental activity is con-in an earlier year, the amount should be shown Because your total recoveries are less thanducted for profit.in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interestthe amount by which your itemized deductions
Statement. Do not subtract the refund amount exceeded the standard deduction ($9,000 − Generally, if your primary purpose is income or
from the interest you paid in 2002. You may 7,600 = $1,400), you must include your total profit and you are involved in the rental activity
have to include it in your income under the rules recoveries in your income for 2002. Report the with continuity and regularity, your rental activity
explained in the following discussions. state and local income tax refund of $400 on line is a business. See Publication 535 for details on
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 91

Page 94 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deducting expenses for both business and Method 1. Figure your tax for 2002 claiming gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,
not-for-profit activities. a deduction for the repaid amount. If you must get Publication 544.
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,Sale of property interest.If you sell yourReporting business income and expenses. enter it on line 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040).complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,If you are in the business of renting personal
Method 2. Figure your tax for 2002 claimingthe amount you receive is considered paymentproperty, report your income and expenses on
a credit for the repaid amount. Follow thesefor the sale of section 1231 property, not royaltySchedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
steps. income. Under certain circumstances, the saleThe form instructions have information on how
to complete them. is subject to capital gain or loss treatment on1) Figure your tax for 2002 without deduct- Schedule D (Form 1040). For more informationing the repaid amount.Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3not in the business of renting personal property, of Publication 544. If you retain a royalty, an2) Refigure your tax from the earlier yearreport your rental income on line 21 of Form overriding royalty, or a net profit interest in awithout including in income the amount1040. List the type and amount of the income on mineral property for the life of the property, youyou repaid in 2002.the dotted line to the left of the amount you have made a lease or a sublease, and any cash3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownreport on line 21. you receive for the assignment of other interestson your return for the earlier year. This isin the property is ordinary income subject to aReporting nonbusiness expenses. If you the credit. depletion allowance.rent personal property for profit, include your
4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forrental expenses in the total amount you enter on Part of future production sold.If you own2002 figured without the deduction (Stepline 34 of Form 1040. Also enter the amount and mineral property but sell part of the future pro-1).“PPR” on the dotted line to the left of line 34. duction, you generally treat the money you re-If you do not rent personal property for aIf method 1 results in less tax, deduct theceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as aprofit, your deductions are limited and you can-amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,loan from the buyer. Do not include it in yournot report a loss to offset other income. Seeclaim a credit for the amount repaid on line 68 ofincome or take depletion based on it.Activity not for profit, under Other Income, later. Form 1040, and write “I.R.C. 1341” next to lineWhen production begins, you include all the
68. proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-
An example of this computation can be foundtion expenses, and deduct depletion from that
in Publication 525. amount to arrive at your taxable income from the
Repayments property.Repaid social security benefits.If you re-
paid social security benefits, see Repayment ofIf you had to repay an amount that you included
benefits in chapter 12.in your income in an earlier year, you may be
able to deduct the amount repaid from your
Unemploymentincome for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you
Benefitsmay be able to take a credit against your tax forRoyalties
the year in which you repaid it. Generally, you
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits youcan claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,receive depends on the type of program payingment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred inand mineral properties are taxable as ordinarythe benefits.your trade or business or in a for-profit transac-income.
tion. You generally report royalties in Part I of
Unemployment compensation. You must in-Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you holdType of deduction.The type of deduction you clude in your income all unemployment compen-an operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are inare allowed in the year of repayment depends sation you receive. You should receive a Formbusiness as a self-employed writer, inventor,on the type of income you included in the earlier 1099–G, Certain Government Payments, show-artist, etc., report your income and expenses onyear. You generally deduct the repayment on ing the amount paid to you. Generally, you enterSchedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).the same form or schedule on which you previ- unemployment compensation on line 19 of Formously reported it as income. For example, if youCopyrights and patents. Royalties from 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Formreported it as self-employment income, deduct itcopyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works,1040EZ.as a business expense on Schedule C or Sched-and similar property, or from patents on inven-Types of unemployment compensation.ule C–EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to useUnemployment compensation generally in-1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deductyour work over a specified period of time. Royal-cludes any amount received under an unem-it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). Ifties are generally based on the number of unitsployment compensation law of the United Statesyou reported it as wages, unemployment com-sold, such as the number of books, tickets to aor of a state. It includes the following benefits.pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deductperformance, or machines sold.it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction on • Benefits paid by a state or the District ofSchedule A (Form 1040). Oil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income from Columbia from the Federal Unemploymentoil, gas, and mineral properties is the amountRepayment — $3,000 or less.If the amount Trust Fund.you receive when natural resources are ex-you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from • State unemployment insurance benefits.tracted from your property. The royalties areyour income in the year you repaid it. If you mustbased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., anddeduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction, • Railroad unemployment compensationare paid to you by a person or company whoenter it on line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). benefits.leases the property from you.
• Disability payments from a governmentRepayment — over $3,000. If the amount Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco- program paid as a substitute for unem-you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de-nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gasployment compensation. (Amounts re-duct the repayment, as described earlier. How-wells, you can recover your investment throughceived as workers’ compensation forever, you can instead choose to take a tax creditthe depletion allowance. For information on thisinjuries or illness are not unemploymentfor the year of repayment if you included thesubject, see chapter 10 of Publication 535, Busi- compensation. See chapter 6 for more in-income under a claim of right. This means thatness Expenses. formation.)at the time you included the income, it appeared
that you had an unrestricted right to it. If youCoal and iron ore.Under certain circum- • Trade readjustment allowances under thequalify for this choice, figure your tax under both stances, you can treat amounts you receiveTrade Act of 1974.methods and compare the results. Use the from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-
• Benefits under the Airline Deregulation Actmethod (deduction or credit) that results in less ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather
of 1978.tax. than as royalty income. For information about
Page 92 Chapter 13 Other Income

Page 95 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Unemployment assistance under the Dis- if the amounts you receive are more than your homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-
aster Relief Act Amendments of 1974. total payments into the fund. Report the taxable gram cannot be deducted.
amount on line 21 of Form 1040. Nutrition Program for the Elderly.FoodGovernmental program. If you contributePayments by a union.Benefits paid to you as benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-to a governmental unemployment compensa- an unemployed member of a union from regular gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-tion program and your contributions are not de-union dues are included in your gross income on pare and serve free meals for the program,ductible, amounts you receive under the line 21 of Form 1040. include in your income as wages the cash payprogram are not included as unemployment you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodcompensation until you recover your contribu-Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re- benefits.tions. ceive from your employer during periods of un-
employment, under a union agreement that Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.Repayment of unemployment compensa- guarantees you full pay during the year, arePayments made by a state to qualified people totion. If you repaid in 2002 unemployment taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 ofreduce their cost of winter energy use are notcompensation you received in 2002, subtractForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formtaxable.the amount you repaid from the total amount you1040EZ.received and enter the difference on line 19 of
Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 ofState employees. Payments similar to a
Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to yourstate’s unemployment compensation may be
Other Incomeentry write “Repaid” and the amount you repaid.made by the state to its employees who are not
If you repaid unemployment compensation incovered by the state’s unemployment compen-
The following brief discussions are arranged in2002 that you included in income in an earliersation law. Although the payments are fully taxa-
alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-year, you can deduct the amount repaid onble, do not report them as unemployment
cussed in greater detail in another publicationSchedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-compensation. Report these payments on line
include a reference to that publication.tions. For more information, see  Repayments, 21 of Form 1040.
earlier. Activity not for profit.You must include on
your return income from an activity from whichTax withholding.You can choose to have
you do not expect to make a profit. An examplefederal income tax withheld from your unem-
Welfare and Other of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm youployment compensation. To make this choice,
operate mostly for recreation and pleasure.complete Form W–4V, Voluntary Withholding
Public Assistance Enter this income on line 21 of Form 1040.Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax will
Deductions for expenses related to the activitybe withheld at 10% of your payment.
Benefits are limited. They cannot total more than theIf you do not choose to have tax with- income you report and can be taken only if youheld from your unemployment com- Do not include in your income benefit paymentsitemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).pensation, you may be liable forCAUTION
!
from a public welfare fund, such as paymentsSee Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publi-estimated tax. For more information on esti-due to blindness. Payments from a state fund forcation 535 for information on whether an activitymated tax, see chapter 5. the victims of crime should not be included in theis considered carried on for a profit.
victims’ incomes if they are in the nature ofSupplemental unemployment benefits. Alaska Permanent Fund dividend income.welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-Benefits received from an employer-financed If you received a payment from Alaska’s mineralpenses that are reimbursed by such a fund. Youfund (to which the employees did not contribute) income fund (Alaska Permanent Fund divi-must include in your income any welfare pay-are not unemployment compensation. They are dend), report it as income on line 21 of Formments obtained fraudulently.taxable as wages and are subject to withholding 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form
for income tax. They may be subject to socialAlaska residents. Payments the state of 1040EZ. The state of Alaska sends each recipi-
security and Medicare taxes. For more informa-Alaska makes to its citizens who meet certainent a document that shows the amount of the
tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefitsage and residency tests that are not based onpayment with the check. The amount is also
in section 5 of Publication 15–A, Employer’s need are not welfare benefits. Include them inreported to IRS.
Supplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay- income on line 21 of Form 1040. Alimony. Include in your income on line 11 ofments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orPersons with disabilities.If you have a disa-Form 1040 any alimony payments you receive.on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. bility, you must include in income compensationAmounts you receive for child support are not
Repayment of benefits.You may have to you receive for services you perform unless theincome to you. Alimony and child support pay-
repay some of your supplemental unemploy-compensation is otherwise excluded. However,ments are discussed in chapter 20.
ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustmentyou do not include in income the value of goods,Campaign contributions. These contribu-allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If youservices, and cash that you receive, not in returntions are not income to a candidate unless theyrepay supplemental unemployment benefits infor your services, but for your training and reha-are diverted to his or her personal use. To bethe same year you receive them, reduce thebilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-exempt from tax, the contributions must betotal benefits by the amount you repay. If youble amounts include payments for transportationspent for campaign purposes or kept in a fundrepay the benefits in a later year, you mustand attendant care, such as interpreter servicesfor use in future campaigns. However, interestinclude the full amount of the benefits receivedfor the deaf, reader services for the blind, andearned on bank deposits, dividends received onin your income for the year you received them.services to help mentally retarded persons docontributed securities, and net gains realized ontheir work.Deduct the repayment in the later year as an sales of contributed securities are taxable andadjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (YouDisaster relief grants.Grants made under must be reported on Form 1120–POL, U.S.cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In-the Disaster Relief Act of 1974 to help victims ofIncome Tax Return for Certain Political Organi-clude the repayment on line 34 of Form 1040,natural disasters are not included in income. Dozations. Excess campaign funds transferred toand write “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on thenot deduct casualty losses or medical expensesan office account must be included in thedotted line next to line 34. If the amount youthat are specifically reimbursed by these disas-officeholder’s income on line 21 of Form 1040 inrepay in a later year is more than $3,000, youter relief grants. Unemployment assistance pay-the year transferred.may be able to take a credit against your tax forments under the Act are taxable unemploymentCash rebates. A cash rebate you receive fromthe later year instead of deducting the amountcompensation. See Unemployment compensa- a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy isrepaid. For more information on this, see Repay- tion, earlier. not income.ments, earlier.
Mortgage assistance payments. Payments
Private unemployment fund. Unemploy- made under section 235 of the National HousingExample. You buy a new car for $9,000
ment benefit payments from a private fund to Act for mortgage assistance are not included in cash and receive a $400 rebate check from the
which you voluntarily contribute are taxable only the homeowner’s income. Interest paid for the manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you.
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 93

Page 96 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your cost is $8,600. This is your basis on which ties for the purchase or installation of an energy• A corporate director, you figure gain or loss if you sell the car, and conservation measure for a dwelling unit.
• An executor or administrator of an estate,depreciation if you use it for business. Energy conservation measure. This in-
• A notary public, orcludes installations or modifications that are pri-Casualty insurance and other reimburse-
marily designed to reduce consumption ofments. You generally should not report these • An election precinct official.electricity or natural gas, or improve the man-reimbursements on your return. Get Publication
agement of energy demand.547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts, for more Nonemployee compensation. If you are
information. Dwelling unit.This includes a house, apart-not an employee and the fees for your services
ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-from the same payer total $600 or more for theChild support payments.You should not re-lar property. If a building or structure containsyear, you may receive a Form 1099–MISC. Youport these payments on your return. Get Publi-both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustmay need to report your fees as self-employ-cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals,be properly allocated. ment income. See Self-Employed Persons, infor more information.
chapter 1, for a discussion of when you areEstate and trust income.An estate or trust,Court awards and damages. To determine if considered self-employed.unlike a partnership, may have to pay federalsettlement amounts you receive by compromise
income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estateCorporate director. Corporate directoror judgment must be included in your income,
or trust, you may be taxed on your share of itsfees are self-employment income. Report theseyou must consider the item that the settlement
income distributed or required to be distributedpayments on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZreplaces. Include the following as ordinary in-
to you. However, there is never a double tax.come. (Form 1040).
Estates and trusts file their returns on Form
Executor or administrator of an estate.If1) Interest on any award. 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and
you are not in the trade or business of being anTrusts, and your share of the income is reported2) Compensation for lost wages or lost profits executor (for instance, you are the executor of ato you on Schedule K–1 of Form 1041.in most cases. friend’s or relative’s estate), report these fees onCurrent income required to be distributed.3) Punitive damages. It does not matter if line 21 of Form 1040. If you provide the servicesIf you are the beneficiary of a trust that mustthey relate to a physical injury or physical as a trade or business, report them as self-em-distribute all of its current income, you mustsickness. ployment income on Schedule C or Schedulereport your share of the distributable net income,
C–EZ (Form 1040).4) Amounts received in settlement of pensionwhether or not you actually received it.
rights (if you did not contribute to the plan). Notary public.Report payments for theseCurrent income not required to be
services on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ5) Damages for: distributed.If you are the beneficiary of an
(Form 1040). These payments are not subjectestate or trust and the fiduciary has the choice of
a) Patent or copyright infringement, to self-employment tax. (See the separate in-whether to distribute all or part of the current
structions for Schedule C (Form 1040) for de-income, you must report:b) Breach of contract, or
tails.)• All income that is required to be distributedc) Interference with business operations.
Election precinct official.You should re-to you, whether or not it is actually distrib-
uted, plus ceive a Form W–2 showing payments for serv-6) Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
ices performed as an election official or electiontress received to satisfy a claim under Title• All other amounts actually paid or creditedVII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. worker. Report these payments on line 7 ofto you,
Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or on line 1 of FormDo not include in your income compensatoryup to the amount of your share of distributable1040EZ.damages for personal physical injury or physicalnet income.sickness (whether received in a lump sum or
How to report. Treat each item of incomeinstallments). Foster-care providers.Payments you re-the same way that the estate or trust would treatceive from a state, political subdivision, or aEmotional distress.Damages you receive it. For example, if a trust’s dividend income isqualified foster care placement agency for pro-for emotional distress due to a physical injury ordistributed to you, you report the distribution asviding care to qualified foster individuals in yoursickness are treated as received for the physicaldividend income on your return. The same rulehome generally are not included in your income.injury or sickness. Do not include them in yourapplies to distributions of tax-exempt interestincome. If the emotional distress is due to a However, you must include in your income pay-and capital gains.personal injury that is unrelated to a physical ments received for the care of more than 5The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tellinjury or sickness (for example, employment dis- individuals age 19 or older and certainyou the type of items making up your share ofcrimination or injury to reputation), you must difficulty-of-care payments.the estate or trust income and any credits youinclude the damages in your income, except forare allowed on your individual income tax return.A qualified foster individual is a person who:any damages you receive for medical care due
Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-to that emotional distress. Emotional distress 1) Is living in a foster family home, andally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.includes physical symptoms that result from
emotional distress, such as headaches, insom- 2) Was placed there by:Grantor trust.Income earned by a grantornia, and stomach disorders. trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-a) An agency of a state or one of its politi-ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overCredit card insurance.Generally, if you re- cal subdivisions, orthe trust. (The grantor is the one who transferredceive benefits under a credit card disability or b) A qualified foster care placementproperty to the trust.) This rule applies if theunemployment insurance plan, the benefits are
property (or income from the property) put intoagency.taxable to you. These plans make the minimum
the trust will or may revert (be returned) to themonthly payment on your credit card account if
grantor or the grantor’s spouse.you cannot make the payment due to injury, Difficulty-of-care payments.These areGenerally, a trust is a grantor trust if theillness, disability, or unemployment. Report on additional payments that are designated by thegrantor has a reversionary interest valued (atline 21 of Form 1040 the amount of benefits you payer as compensation for providing the addi-the date of transfer) at more than 5% of thereceived during the year that is more than the tional care that is required for physically, men-value of the transferred property.amount of the premiums you paid during the tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified fosteryear. individuals. A state must determine that the ad-Fees for services.Include all fees for your
ditional compensation is needed, and the careEnergy conservation subsidies. You can services in your income. Examples of these fees
for which the payments are made must be pro-exclude from gross income any subsidy pro- are amounts you receive for services you per-
vided in your home.vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili- form as:
Page 94 Chapter 13 Other Income

Page 97 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must include in your income ited amount in your income. See chapter 11 ifInterest on qualified savings bonds.You
difficulty-of-care payments received for more you inherited a pension. See chapter 18 if you may be able to exclude from income the interest
than: inherited an IRA. from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if
you pay qualified higher educational expenses• 10 qualified foster individuals under ageHobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notin the same year. For more information on this19, or deductible from other income. A hobby is anexclusion, see Education Savings Bond Pro-
activity from which you do not expect to make a• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or gram under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 8.
profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier.older.
Job interview expenses.If a prospective em-
If you collect stamps, coins, or otherployer asks you to appear for an interview andMaintaining space in home.If you are paid items as a hobby for recreation andeither pays you an allowance or reimburses youto maintain space in your home for emergency pleasure, and you sell any of the items,CAUTION
!
for your transportation and other travel ex-foster care, you must include the payment inyour gain is taxable as a capital gain. (Seepenses, the amount you receive is generally notyour income. chapter 17.) However, if you sell items from yourtaxable. You include in income only the amount
collection at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss.Reporting taxable payments. If you re- you receive that is more than your actual ex-
ceive payments that you must include in your penses.
income, you are in business as a foster-careHolocaust victims restitution.Restitution Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must beprovider and you are self-employed. Report thepayments you receive as a Holocaust victim (orincluded in your income on line 21 of Form 1040.payments on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ the heir of a Holocaust victim) after DecemberIf you must give the pay to your employer be-(Form 1040). Get Publication 587, Business Use 31, 1999 (and interest earned on the payments,cause your employer continues to pay your sal-of Your Home (Including Use by Day-Care Prov-including interest earned on amounts held inary while you serve on the jury, you can deductiders), to help you determine the amount youcertain escrow accounts or funds) are not taxa-the amount turned over to your employer as ancan deduct for the use of your home. ble. You also do not include them in any compu-adjustment to your income. Include the amounttations in which you would ordinarily addFree tour. If you received a free tour from a you repay your employer on line 34 of Formexcludable income to your adjusted gross in-travel agency for organizing a group of tourists, 1040. Write “Jury Pay” and the amount on thecome, such as the computation to determine theyou must include its value in your income. Re- dotted line next to line 34.taxable part of social security benefits. If theport the fair market value of the tour on line 21 of
payments are made in property, your basis inForm 1040 if you are not in the trade or business Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks, sidethe property is its fair market value when youof organizing tours. You cannot deduct your commissions, push money, or similar paymentsreceive it.expenses in serving as the voluntary leader of you receive in your income on line 21 of FormExcludable restitution payments are pay-the group at the group’s request. If you organize 1040, or on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZments or distributions made by any country ortours as a trade or business, report the tour’s (Form 1040), if from your self-employment activ-any other entity because of persecution of anvalue on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form ity.individual on the basis of race, religion, physical1040).
or mental disability, or sexual orientation by NaziExample. You sell cars and help arrangeGambling winnings. You must include your Germany, any other Axis regime, or any othercar insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers paygambling winnings in income on line 21 of FormNazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whetherback part of their commissions to you for refer-1040. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-the payments are made under a law or as aring customers to them. You must include theule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gamblingresult of a legal action. They include compensa-kickbacks in your income.losses you had during the year, but only up totion or reparation for property losses resulting
the amount of your winnings. See chapter 30 forfrom Nazi persecution, including proceedsMedical savings accounts (MSAs). You
information on recordkeeping. under insurance policies issued before and dur-generally do not include in income amounts you
ing World War II by European insurance compa-withdraw from your Archer MSA orLotteries and raffles.Winnings from lotter-nies. Medicare+Choice MSA if you use the money toies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi- pay for qualified medical expenses. Generally,tion to cash winnings, you must include in yourAmending your 2000 and 2001 returns.If qualified medical expenses are those you canincome the fair market value of bonds, cars,your treatment of restitution payments receiveddeduct on Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemizedhouses, and other noncash prizes. in 2000 and 2001 was different from the treat-Deductions. For more information about quali-ment described above and caused you to payIf you win a state lottery prize payable fied medical expenses, see chapter 23. Formore tax, you should file an amended return onin installments, see Publication 525 for more information about Archer MSAs orForm 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Incomemore information. Medicare+Choice MSAs, see Publication 969,
TIP
Tax Return. To claim a refund of tax, you gener-Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs).ally should file the amended return by April 15,Form W–2G. You may have received a 2004, for your 2000 return and April 15, 2005, forYou cannot buy health insurance withForm W–2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, your 2001 return. See the form instructions for distributions from your MSA unless youshowing the amount of your gambling winningsmore information. are receiving unemployment benefits,CAUTION
!
and any tax taken out of them. Include the buying continuation coverage required by fed-amount from box 1 on the “Other Income” line ofIllegal income.Illegal income, such as stoleneral law, or buying long-term care insurance.Form 1040. Include the amount shown in box 2or embezzled funds, must be included in your
on your Form 1040 as federal income tax with-income on line 21 of Form 1040, or on ScheduleTaxable distributions and penalty.If youheld. C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) if from youruse the money from your MSA for any purpose
self-employment activity. besides qualified medical expenses, it will beGifts and inheritances.Generally, property
taxable income that you must report on your taxyou receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance isIndian fishing rights.If you are a member ofreturn. In addition to the tax, you will be chargednot included in your income. However, if prop-a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rightsa 15% penalty for an early distribution. The pen-erty you receive this way later produces incomesecured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofalty will not be charged if you are disabled, agesuch as interest, dividends, or rents, that incomeCongress as of March 17, 1988, do not include65, or die during the year.is taxable to you. If property is given to a trustin your income amounts you receive from activi-and the income from it is paid, credited, or dis- Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in aties related to those fishing rights. The income istributed to you, that income is also taxable to lucky number drawing, television or radio quiznot subject to income tax, self-employment tax,you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the program, beauty contest, or other event, youor employment taxes.income from the property, that income is taxable must include it in your income. For example, ifto you. Interest on frozen deposits.In general, you you win a $50 prize in a photography contest,
Inherited pension or IRA.If you inherited a exclude from your income the amount of interest you must report this income on line 21 of Form
pension or an individual retirement arrangement earned on a frozen deposit. See  Interest income1040. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not
(IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-on frozen deposits in chapter 8. include its value in your income.
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 95

Page 98 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Prizes and awards in goods or services must penses. However, until 2004, the beneficiary For information about the rules that apply to
be included in your income at their fair market must include in income any earnings distributed a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to
value. from a QTP established and maintained by an employees and their families by an educational
eligible educational institution. See Publication institution, see Publication 520.Employee awards or bonuses. Cash 970, Tax Benefits for Education, for more infor-awards or bonuses given to you by your em- VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-mation.ployer for good work or suggestions generally partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in
must be included in your income as wages.Railroad retirement annuities.The following your income. These allowances are not consid-
However, certain noncash employee achieve- types of payments are treated as pension or ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
ment awards can be excluded from income. See annuity income and are taxable under the rulesPrizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestBonuses and awards in chapter 6. explained in chapter 12. are not scholarships or fellowships if you do not
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If you
• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are have to use the prizes for educational purposes.
were awarded a prize in recognition of past more than the social security equivalentYou must include these amounts in your income
accomplishments in religious, charitable, scien-benefit. on line 21 of Form 1040, whether or not you use
tific, artistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, the amounts for educational purposes.• Tier 2 benefits.you generally must include the value of the prize Transporting school children.Do not in-• Vested dual benefits.in your income. However, you do not include this clude in your income a school board mileageprize in your income if you meet all of the follow- allowance for taking children to and from schooling requirements. Sale of home. You may be able to exclude if you are not in the business of taking children to
from income all or part of any gain from the sale• You were selected without any action on school. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-
or exchange of a personal residence. See chap-your part to enter the contest or proceed- ing this transportation.
ter 16.ing. Union benefits and dues.Amounts deducted
Sale of personal items.If you sold an item• You are not required to perform substan- from your pay for union dues, assessments,
you owned for personal use, such as a car,tial future services as a condition to receiv- contributions, or other payments to a union can-
refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, oring the prize or award. not be excluded from your income.
silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.You may be able to deduct some of these• The prize or award is transferred by theReport it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-payments as a miscellaneous deduction subjectpayer directly to a governmental unit ornot deduct a loss. to the 2% limit if they are related to your job andtax-exempt charitable organization as des-However, if you sold an item you held forif you itemize your deductions on Schedule Aignated by you. investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,(Form 1040). For more information, see  Union
See Publication 525 for more information about or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gainDues and Expenses in chapter 30.
the conditions that apply to the transfer. and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.Strike and lockout benefits.Benefits paid
Scholarships and fellowships.A candidate to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,Qualified tuition programs.A qualified tui-for a degree can exclude amounts received as aincluding both cash and the fair market value oftion program (also known as a 529 plan or pro-qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualifiedother property, are usually included in your in-gram) is a program set up to allow you to eitherscholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-come as compensation. You can exclude theseprepay, or contribute to an account establishedceive that is for: benefits from your income only when the factsfor paying, a student’s qualified higher educa- clearly show that the union intended them as• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend antion expenses at an eligible educational insti- gifts to you.educational institution, ortution. Prior to 2002, a program could only be
established and maintained by a state or an Utility rebates.If you are a customer of an• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-agency or instrumentality of the state. Beginning electric utility company and you participate in thequired for courses at the educational insti-in 2002, QTPs (formerly called QSTPs) can also utility’s energy conservation program, you maytution.be established and maintained by eligible edu- receive on your monthly electric bill either:
Amounts used for room and board do not qual-cational institutions. • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-ify. Get Publication 520 for more information onThe part of a distribution representing the tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), orqualified scholarships and fellowship grants.amount paid or contributed to a QTP is not
• A nonrefundable credit against theincluded in income. This is a return of the invest-Payment for services.Generally, you must purchase price of the electricity.ment in the plan. include in income the part of any scholarship orBeginning in 2002, the beneficiary generallyfellowship that represents payment for past,The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-does not include in income any earnings distrib-present, or future teaching, research, or otherable credit is not included in your income.uted from a QTP established and maintained byservices. This applies even if all candidates for aa state (or an agency or instrumentality of thedegree must perform the services to receive thestate) if the total distribution is less than or equaldegree.to adjusted qualified higher education ex-
Page 96 Chapter 13 Other Income

Page 99 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Three.
The four chapters in this part discuss investment gains and losses, includingGains and how to figure your basis in property. A gain from selling or trading stocks,
bonds, or other investment property may be taxed or it may be tax free, atLosses least in part. A loss may or may not be deductible. These chapters also
discuss gains from selling property you personally use — including the special
rules for selling your home. Nonbusiness casualty and theft losses are dis-
cussed in chapter 27 in Part Five.
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses Fair market value (FMV) is the price at
which the property would change hands be-❏ 551 Basis of Assets tween a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither
14. ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions having to buy or sell, who both have reasonable
knowledge of all the necessary facts. Sales of❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property similar property on or about the same date may
be helpful in figuring the FMV of the property.Basis of
Assumption of mortgage. If you buy prop-
erty and assume (or buy subject to) an existingProperty Cost Basis mortgage on the property, your basis includes
the amount you pay for the property plus theThe basis of property you buy is usually its cost.amount to be paid on the mortgage.The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtIntroduction obligations, other property, or services. YourSettlement costs.You can include in the ba-This chapter discusses how to figure your basiscost also includes amounts you pay for the fol-sis of property you buy the settlement fees andin property. It is divided into the following sec-lowing items. closing costs for buying the property. (A fee fortions. • Sales tax. buying property is a cost that must be paid even
• Cost basis. if you buy the property for cash.) You cannot• Freight. include fees and costs for getting a loan on the• Adjusted basis. • Installation and testing. property in your basis.
• Basis other than cost. The following are some of the settlement• Excise taxes. fees or closing costs you can include in the basis
Basis is the amount of your investment in• Legal and accounting fees (when they of your property.
property for tax purposes. Use the basis of prop-must be capitalized). • Abstract fees (abstract of title fees).erty to figure gain or loss on the sale, exchange,• Revenue stamps.or other disposition of property. Also use it to • Charges for installing utility services.
figure deductions for depreciation, amortization,• Recording fees. • Legal fees (including title search and prep-depletion, and casualty losses. You must keep• Real estate taxes (if assumed for the aration of the sales contract and deed).accurate records of all items that affect the basisseller).of property so you can make these computa- • Recording fees.
tions. In addition, the basis of real estate and business• Surveys.If you use property for both business and assets may include other items.
personal purposes, you must allocate the basis • Transfer taxes.
based on the use. Only the basis allocated to theLoans with low or no interest.If you buy • Owner’s title insurance.business use of the property can be depreci- property on a time-payment plan that charges
ated. little or no interest, the basis of your property is • Any amounts the seller owes that you
your stated purchase price minus any amountYour original basis in property is adjusted agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-
considered to be unstated interest. You gener-(increased or decreased) by certain events. If est, recording or mortgage fees, charges
ally have unstated interest if your interest rate isyou make improvements to the property, in- for improvements or repairs, and sales
less than the applicable federal rate.crease your basis. If you take deductions for commissions.
For more information, see Unstated Interestdepreciation or casualty losses, reduce your ba-
and Original Issue Discount in Publication 537.sis. Settlement costs do not include amounts
placed in escrow for the future payment of items
such as taxes and insurance.
Useful Items Real Property The following are some of the settlementYou may want to see:
fees and closing costs you cannot include in theReal property, also called real estate, is land and
basis of property. generally anything built on, growing on, or at-Publication
tached to land. 1) Fire insurance premiums.❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe If you buy real property, certain fees andBenefits other expenses you pay are part of your cost2) Rent for occupancy of the property before
basis in the property. closing.❏ 523 Selling Your Home
If you buy buildings and the land on which3) Charges for utilities or other services re-❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income they stand for a lump sum, allocate the basislated to occupancy of the property beforeamong the land and the buildings so you can❏ 535 Business Expenses closing.figure the allowable depreciation on the build-❏ 537 Installment Sales ings. Land is not depreciable. Allocate the cost 4) Charges connected with getting a loan.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of according to the fair market values of the land The following are examples of these
Assets and buildings at the time of purchase. charges.
Chapter 14 Basis of Property Page 97

Page 100 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a) Points (discount points, loan originationTable 14–1. Examples of Adjustments to Basis
fees).
b) Mortgage insurance premiums. Increases to Basis Decreases to Basis
c) Loan assumption fees. • Capital improvements: • Exclusion from income of
 Putting an addition on your home subsidies for energy conservationd) Cost of a credit report.
 Replacing an entire roof measures.e) Fees for an appraisal required by a  Paving your drivewaylender.  Installing central air conditioning• Casualty or theft loss deductions
 Rewiring your home and insurance reimbursements5) Fees for refinancing a mortgage.
• Assessments for local improvements: • Credit for qualified electric vehiclesReal estate taxes.If you pay real estate taxes
 Water connectionsthe seller owed on real property you bought, and
 Sidewalks • Section 179 deductionthe seller did not reimburse you, treat those
 Roadstaxes as part of your basis. You cannot deduct
them as taxes. • Deduction for clean-fuel vehicles
If you reimburse the seller for taxes the seller• Casualty losses: and clean-fuel vehicle refueling property
paid for you, you can usually deduct that amountRestoring damaged property
as an expense in the year of purchase. Do not • Depreciation
include that amount in the basis of your property.• Legal fees:If you did not reimburse the seller, you mustCost of defending and perfecting a title• Nontaxable corporate distributionsreduce your basis by the amount of those taxes.
• Zoning costsPoints.
If you pay points to get a loan (including a
mortgage, second mortgage, line of credit, or a
home equity loan), do not add the points to theAssessments for local improvements.
• Gas-guzzler tax.
basis of the related property. Generally, youAdd assessments for improvements such as • Adoption tax benefits.deduct the points over the term of the loan. Forstreets and sidewalks to the basis of the prop-
more information on how to deduct points, see • Credit for employer-provided child care.erty if they increase the value of the property
Points in chapter 5 of Publication 535. assessed. Do not deduct them as taxes. How-
ever, you can deduct as taxes assessments forPoints on home mortgage. Special rules Casualties and thefts.If you have a casualtymaintenance, repairs, or interest charges on themay apply to points you and the seller pay when or theft loss, decrease the basis in your propertyimprovements.you get a mortgage to buy your main home. If by any insurance proceeds or other reimburse-
certain requirements are met, you can deduct ment and by any deductible loss not covered byExample. Your city changes the street inthe points in full for the year in which they are insurance.front of your store into an enclosed pedestrianpaid. Reduce the basis of your home by any You must increase your basis in the propertymall and assesses you and other affected prop-seller-paid points. For more information, see by the amount you spend on repairs that sub-erty owners for the cost of the conversion. AddPoints in chapter 25. stantially prolong the life of the property, in-the assessment to your property’s basis. In thiscrease its value, or adapt it to a different use. Toexample, the assessment is a depreciable as-make this determination, compare the repairedset. property to the property before the casualty.
For more information on casualty and theftAdjusted Basis Decreases to Basis losses, see chapter 27.
Before figuring gain or loss on a sale, exchange,The following items reduce the basis of yourDepreciation and section 179 deduction.or other disposition of property or figuring allow-property. Decrease the basis of your qualifying businessable depreciation, depletion, or amortization,
property by any section 179 deduction you takeyou must usually make certain adjustments (in-• The section 179 deduction.
and the depreciation you deducted, or couldcreases and decreases) to the basis of the prop-• The deduction for clean-fuel vehicles andhave deducted, on your tax returns under theerty. The result of these adjustments to the basisclean-fuel vehicle refueling property.method of depreciation you selected.is the adjusted basis.
For more information about depreciation and• Nontaxable corporate distributions (see
the section 179 deduction, see Publication 946.chapter 9).Increases to Basis
• Deductions previously allowed (or allowa-Example You owned a duplex used asIncrease the basis of any property by all itemsble) for amortization, depreciation, and de-rental property that cost you $40,000, of whichproperly added to a capital account. These in-pletion. $35,000 was allocated to the building andclude the cost of any improvements having a $5,000 to the land. You added an improvement• Exclusion of subsidies for energy conser-useful life of more than 1 year. Other items to the duplex that cost $10,000. In February lastvation measures (see Energy conserva-added to the basis of property include the cost of year the duplex was damaged by fire. Up to thattion subsidies in chapter 13).extending utility service lines to the property and time you had been allowed depreciation oflegal fees, such as the cost of defending and• Credit for qualified electric vehicles.$23,000. You sold some salvaged material forperfecting title. $1,300 and collected $19,700 from your insur-• Postponed gain from the sale of your
ance company. You deducted a casualty loss ofImprovements. Add the cost of improve- home.
$1,000 on your income tax return for last year.ments to your basis in the property if they in-• Casualty and theft losses and insuranceYou spent $19,000 of the insurance proceedscrease the value of the property, lengthen its life,reimbursements. for restoration of the duplex, which was com-or adapt it to a different use. For example, im-
pleted this year. You must use the duplex’sprovements include putting a recreation room in• Certain canceled debt excluded from in-
adjusted basis after the restoration to determineyour unfinished basement, adding another bath-come.
depreciation for the rest of the property’s recov-room or bedroom, putting up a fence, putting in• Rebates from a manufacturer or seller.ery period. Figure the adjusted basis of the du-new plumbing or wiring, installing a new roof, or
plex as follows:paving your driveway. • Easements.
Page 98 Chapter 14 Basis of Property

Page 101 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Original cost of duplex......... $35,000 b) Any cost of acquiring the replacementProperty Received forAddition to duplex............ 10,000 property.
Total cost of duplex........... $45,000 Services
Minus: Depreciation.......... 23,000
Money or property not similar or related. IfAdjusted basis before casualty.... $22,000 If you receive property for your services, include
you receive money or property not similar orMinus: Insurance its FMV in income. The amount you include in
related in service or use to the converted prop-proceeds ...... $19,700 income becomes your basis. If the services
erty, and you buy replacement property similarDeducted casualty were performed for a price agreed on before-
or related in service or use to the convertedloss.......... 1,000 hand, it will be accepted as the FMV of the
property, the basis of the replacement propertySalvage proceeds  1,300  22,000 property if there is no evidence to the contrary.
Adjusted basis after casualty..... $–0– is its cost decreased by the gain not recognized
Restricted property.If you receive prop-Add: Cost of restoring duplex..... 19,000 on the conversion.
erty for your services and the property is subjectAdjusted basis after restoration $19,000
to certain restrictions, your basis in the propertyExample. The state condemned your prop-Your basis in the land is its original cost ofis its FMV when it becomes substantially vested.erty. The adjusted basis of the property was$5,000. However, this rule does not apply if you make an$26,000 and the state paid you $31,000 for it.
election to include in income the FMV of theYou realized a gain of $5,000 ($31,000 −
Easements. The amount you receive for property at the time it is transferred to you, less$26,000). You bought replacement property
granting an easement is generally considered toany amount you paid for it. Property becomessimilar in use to the converted property for
be from the sale of an interest in real property. Itsubstantially vested when your rights in the$29,000. You recognize a gain of $2,000
reduces the basis of the affected part of theproperty or the rights of any person to whom you($31,000 − $29,000), the unspent part of the
property. If the amount received is more than the transfer the property are not subject to a sub-payment from the state. Your unrecognized gain
stantial risk of forfeiture. For more information,basis of the part of the property affected by the is $3,000, the difference between the $5,000
see Restricted Property in Publication 525.easement, reduce your basis in that part to zero realized gain and the $2,000 recognized gain.
and treat the excess as a recognized gain. The basis of the replacement property is figuredBargain purchases. A bargain purchase is
as follows:If the gain is on a capital asset, see chaptera purchase of an item for less than its FMV. If, as
17 for information about how to report it. If thecompensation for services, you buy goods orCost of replacement property...... $29,000gain is on property used in a trade or business,other property at less than FMV, include theMinus: Gain not recognized....... 3,000see Publication 544 for information about how todifference between the purchase price and theBasis of replacement property... $26,000report it. property’s FMV in your income. Your basis in the
property is its FMV (your purchase price plus theAllocating the basis.If you buy more thanCredit for qualified electric vehicles.If you amount you include in income). one piece of replacement property, allocate yourclaim the credit for a qualified electric vehicle,If the difference between your purchasebasis among the properties based on their re-you must reduce your basis in that vehicle by theprice and the FMV is a qualified employee dis-spective costs.maximum credit allowable even if the credit al-count, do not include the difference in income.
lowed is less than that maximum amount. For However, your basis in the property is still its
FMV. See Employee Discounts in Publicationinformation on this credit, see chapter 12 in Nontaxable Exchanges
15–B.Publication 535.
A nontaxable exchange is an exchange in which
you are not taxed on any gain and you cannotDeduction for clean-fuel vehicle and refuel-Taxable Exchanges deduct any loss. If you receive property in aing property. If you take the deduction for
nontaxable exchange, its basis is generally theclean-fuel vehicles or clean-fuel vehicle refuel-A taxable exchange is one in which the gain issame as the basis of the property you trans-ing property, decrease the basis of the propertytaxable or the loss is deductible. A taxable gainferred. See Nontaxable Trades in chapter 15.by the amount taken. For more informationor deductible loss also is known as a recognized
about these deductions, see chapter 12 in Publi-gain or loss. If you receive property in exchange
cation 535. for other property in a taxable exchange, theLike-Kind Exchanges
basis of the property you receive is usually its
The exchange of property for the same kind ofExclusion of subsidies for energy conserva-FMV at the time of the exchange.
property is the most common type of nontaxabletion measures. You can exclude from gross
exchange. To qualify as a like-kind exchange,income any subsidy you received from a publicInvoluntary Conversions the property traded and the property receivedutility company for the purchase or installation of
must be both of the following.an energy conservation measure for a dwellingIf you receive property as a result of an involun-
unit. Reduce the basis of the property for whichtary conversion, such as a casualty, theft, or• Qualifying property.
you received the subsidy by the excluded condemnation, you can figure the basis of the• Like-kind property.amount. For more information about this sub-replacement property using the basis of the con-
sidy, see chapter 13. verted property. The basis of the property you receive is gener-
ally the same as the basis of the property youPostponed gain from sale of home.If you Similar or related property.If you receive gave up. If you trade property in a like-kindpostponed gain from the sale of your main home property similar or related in service or use to theexchange and also pay money, the basis of theconverted property, the replacement property’sunder rules in effect before May 7, 1997, you property received is the basis of the property youbasis is the same as the converted property’smust reduce the basis of the home you acquired gave up increased by the money you paid.basis on the date of the conversion, with theas a replacement by the amount of the post-
following adjustments.poned gain. For more information on the rules Qualifying property.In a like-kind exchange,
for the sale of a home, see Publication 523. you must hold for investment or for productive1) Decrease the basis by the following. use in your trade or business both the property
you give up and the property you receive.a) Any loss you recognize on the conver-
sion. Like-kind property.There must be an ex-
Basis Other Than Cost change of like property. The exchange of realb) Any money you receive that you do not
estate for real estate or personal property forspend on similar property.There are many times when you cannot use cost similar personal property is an exchange of like
as basis. In these cases, the fair market value or property.2) Increase the basis by the following.the adjusted basis of the property can be used.
Fair market value (FMV) and adjusted basis a) Any gain you recognize on the conver-Example. You trade in an old truck used in
were discussed earlier. sion. your business with an adjusted basis of $1,700
Chapter 14 Basis of Property Page 99

Page 102 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for a new one costing $6,800. The dealer allows The amount of the gift is its value for gift taxProperty Received as ayou $2,000 on the old truck, and you pay $4,800. purposes after reduction by any annual exclu-
GiftThis is a like-kind exchange. The basis of the sion and marital or charitable deduction that
new truck is $6,500 (the adjusted basis of the old applies to the gift. For information on the gift tax,
To figure the basis of property you receive as aone, $1,700, plus the amount you paid, $4,800). see Publication 950, Introduction to Estate andgift, you must know its adjusted basis to theGift Taxes.If you sell your old truck to a third party fordonor just before it was given to you, its FMV at$2,000 instead of trading it in and then buy athe time it was given to you, and any gift tax paidExample. In 2002, you received a gift ofnew one from the dealer, you have a taxableon it. property from your mother that had an FMV ofgain of $300 on the sale ($2,000 sale price
$50,000. Her adjusted basis was $20,000. Theminus $1,700 basis). The basis of the new truckFMV less than donor’s adjusted basis.If the amount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasis the price you pay the dealer. FMV of the property at the time of the gift is less$39,000 ($50,000 minus the $11,000 annualthan the donor’s adjusted basis, your basis de-
exclusion). She paid a gift tax of $9,000 on thePartially nontaxable exchange.A partiallypends on whether you have a gain or a loss
property. Your basis is $26,930, figured as fol-nontaxable exchange is an exchange in whichwhen you dispose of the property. Your basis for
lows:you receive unlike property or money in additionfiguring gain is the same as the donor’s adjusted
to like property. The basis of the property youbasis plus or minus any required adjustments to
Fair market value.............. $50,000basis while you held the property. Your basis forreceive is the total adjusted basis of the property Minus: Adjusted basis........... −20,000figuring loss is its FMV when you received theyou gave up, with the following adjustments. Net increase in value........... $30,000gift plus or minus any required adjustments to
1) Decrease the basis by the following basis while you held the property. See Adjusted Gift tax paid................. $9,000amounts. Basis, earlier. Multiplied by ($30,000 ÷ $39,000) . . .× .77
Gift tax due to net increase in value $6,930a) Any money you receive. Example. You received an acre of land as aAdjusted basis of property to yourgift. At the time of the gift, the land had an FMVb) Any loss you recognize on the ex- mother..................... +20,000of $8,000. The donor’s adjusted basis waschange. Your basis in the property....... $26,930$10,000. After you received the property, no
events occurred to increase or decrease your2) Increase the basis by the following
basis. If you later sell the property for $12,000,amounts. Inherited Property
you will have a $2,000 gain because you must
use the donor’s adjusted basis at the time of thea) Any additional costs you incur. Your basis in property you inherit from a dece-
gift ($10,000) as your basis to figure gain. If youdent is generally one of the following.b) Any gain you recognize on the ex- sell the property for $7,000, you will have achange. $1,000 loss because you must use the FMV at• The FMV of the property at the date of the
the time of the gift ($8,000) as your basis toindividual’s death.
figure loss.Allocation of basis.Allocate the basis first • The FMV on the alternate valuation date ifIf the sales price is between $8,000 andto the unlike property, other than money, up to the personal representative for the estate$10,000, you have neither gain nor loss.its FMV on the date of the exchange. The rest is chooses to use alternate valuation.the basis of the like-kind property. Business property. If you hold the gift as• The value under the special-use valuationbusiness property, your basis for figuring anymethod for real property used in farmingMore information.See Like-Kind Exchanges depreciation, depletion, or amortization deduc-
or a closely held business if chosen forin chapter 1 of Publication 544 for more informa-tion is the same as the donor’s adjusted basis
estate tax purposes.tion. plus or minus any required adjustments to basis
while you hold the property. • The decedent’s adjusted basis in land to
Property Transferred the extent of the value excluded from theFMV equal to or greater than donor’s ad- decedent’s taxable estate as a qualifiedFrom a Spouse justed basis.If the FMV of the property is conservation easement.equal to or greater than the donor’s adjusted
The basis of property transferred to you or trans-basis, your basis is the donor’s adjusted basis atIf a federal estate tax return does not have toferred in trust for your benefit by your spouse isthe time you received the gift. Increase yourbe filed, your basis in the inherited property is itsthe same as your spouse’s adjusted basis. Thebasis by all or part of any gift tax paid, dependingappraised value at the date of death for statesame rule applies to a transfer by your formeron the date of the gift, explained later.inheritance or transmission taxes.spouse that is incident to divorce. However, ad-Also, for figuring gain or loss from a sale or
For more information, see the instructions tojust your basis for any gain recognized by yourother disposition or for figuring depreciation, de-
spouse or former spouse on property trans- Form 706, U.S. Estate Tax Return.pletion, or amortization deductions on business
ferred in trust. This rule applies only to a transferproperty, you must increase or decrease your
basis by any required adjustments to basis whileof property in trust in which the liabilities as- Property Changed toyou held the property. See Adjusted Basis, ear-sumed, plus the liabilities to which the property
Business or Rental Uselier.is subject, are more than the adjusted basis of
the property transferred. Gift received before 1977.If you receivedIf you hold property for personal use and thenIf the property transferred to you is a seriesa gift before 1977, increase your basis in the giftchange it to business use or use it to produceE, series EE, or series I U.S. savings bond, theby any gift tax paid on it. However, do not in-rent, you must figure its basis for depreciation.transferor must include in income the interestcrease your basis above the FMV of the gift atAn example of changing property held for per-accrued to the date of transfer. Your basis in thethe time it was given to you. sonal use to business use would be renting outbond immediately after the transfer is equal toGift received after 1976.If you received ayour former personal residence.the transferor’s basis increased by the interestgift after 1976, increase your basis in the gift byincome includible in the transferor’s income. Forthe part of the gift tax paid on it that is due to themore information on these bonds, see chapter 8. Basis for depreciation.The basis for depre-net increase in value of the gift. Figure the in-ciation is the lesser of the following amounts.At the time of the transfer, the transferorcrease by multiplying the gift tax paid by a frac-
must give you the records needed to determinetion. The numerator of the fraction is the net• The FMV of the property on the date of thethe adjusted basis and holding period of theincrease in value of the gift and the denominatorchange.property as of the date of the transfer. is the amount of the gift.
• Your adjusted basis on the date of theFor more information about the transfer ofThe net increase in value of the gift is the
change.property from a spouse, see chapter 15. FMV of the gift minus the donor’s adjusted basis.
Page 100 Chapter 14 Basis of Property

Page 103 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Several years ago, you paid deductions of $37,500. In this case, you wouldIdentifying stocks or bonds sold.If you can
$160,000 to have your house built on a lot thatstart with the FMV on the date of the change toadequately identify the shares of stock or the
cost $25,000. You paid $20,000 for permanentrental use ($180,000), because it is less than thebonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other
improvements to the house and claimed a adjusted basis of $203,000 ($178,000 + basis of the particular shares of stocks or bonds.
$2,000 casualty loss deduction for damage to$25,000) on that date. Reduce that amountIf you buy and sell securities at various times in
the house before changing the property to rental($180,000) by the depreciation deductions tovarying quantities and you cannot adequately
use last year. Because land is not depreciable,arrive at a basis for loss of $142,500 ($180,000identify the shares you sell, the basis of the
you include only the cost of the house when− $37,500). securities you sell is the basis of the securitiesfiguring the basis for depreciation. you acquired first. For more information aboutYour adjusted basis in the house when you identifying securities you sell, see Stocks andStocks and Bondschanged its use was $178,000 ($160,000 + Bonds under Basis of Investment Property in$20,000 − $2,000). On the same date, yourThe basis of stocks or bonds you buy generallychapter 4 of Publication 550.property had an FMV of $180,000, of whichis the purchase price plus any costs of purchase,$15,000 was for the land and $165,000 was forsuch as commissions and recording or transferMutual fund shares.If you sell mutual fundsthe house. The basis for figuring depreciation onfees. If you get stocks or bonds other than byyou acquired at various times and prices, youthe house is its FMV on the date of the change
purchase, your basis is usually determined bycan choose to use an average basis. For more($165,000) because it is less than your adjusted
the FMV or the previous owner’s adjusted basis,information, see Average Basis in Publicationbasis ($178,000).
as discussed earlier. 564.Sale of property.If you later sell or dispose ofYou must adjust the basis of stocks for cer-property changed to business or rental use, thetain events that occur after purchase. For exam-Bond premium. If you buy a taxable bond at abasis you use will depend on whether you areple, if you receive additional stock frompremium and choose to amortize the premium,figuring gain or loss. nontaxable stock dividends or stock splits, di-reduce the basis of the bond by the amortized
Gain. The basis for figuring a gain is yourvide the adjusted basis of the old stock by thepremium you deduct each year. See Bond Pre-
adjusted basis in the property when you sell.number of shares of old and new stock. This rulemium Amortization in chapter 3 of Publication
applies only when the additional stock received550 for more information. Although you cannot
Example. Assume the same facts as in theis identical to the stock held. Also reduce yourdeduct the premium on a tax-exempt bond, youprevious example except that you sell the prop-basis when you receive nontaxable distribu-must amortize the premium each year and re-erty at a gain after being allowed depreciationtions. They are a return of capital. duce your basis in the bond by the amortizeddeductions of $37,500. Your adjusted basis for amount.figuring gain is $165,500 ($178,000 + $25,000Example. In 2000 you bought 100 shares of
(land) − $37,500). XYZ stock for $1,000 or $10 a share. In 2001Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-you bought 100 shares of XYZ stock for $1,600Loss. Figure the basis for a loss starting ments. You must increase your basis in anor $16 a share. In 2002 XYZ declared a 2-for-1with the smaller of your adjusted basis or the OID debt instrument by the OID you include instock split. You now have 200 shares of stockFMV of the property at the time of the change to income for that instrument. See Original Issuewith a basis of $5 a share and 200 shares with abusiness or rental use. Then adjust this amount Discount in chapter 8.basis of $8 a share.for the period after the change in the property’s
Tax-exempt bonds. OID on tax-exemptuse, as discussed earlier under Adjusted Basis,
bonds is generally not taxable. However, thereOther basis. There are other ways to figureto arrive at a basis for loss.
are special rules for figuring the basis of thesethe basis of stocks or bonds depending on how
bonds issued after September 3, 1982, and ac-you acquired them. For detailed information, seeExample. Assume the same facts as in the
quired after March 1, 1984. See chapter 4 ofStocks and Bonds under Basis of Investmentprevious example, except that you sell the prop-
Publication 550.Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550.erty at a loss after being allowed depreciation
Chapter 14 Basis of Property Page 101

Page 104 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Redemption or retirement of bonds.A re-Useful Items
demption or retirement of bonds or notes at theirYou may want to see:
maturity is generally treated as a sale or trade.
15. Publication Surrender of stock.A surrender of stock by a
dominant shareholder who retains control of the❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
corporation is treated as a contribution to capital
❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions rather than as an immediate loss deductibleSale of Property
from taxable income. The surrendering share-
Form (and Instructions) holder must reallocate his or her basis in the
surrendered shares to the shares he or she❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
retains.Important Reminder and Losses
Worthless securities.Stocks, stock rights,❏ 8824 Like-Kind ExchangesForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen who and bonds (other than those held for sale by a
sells property located outside the United States, securities dealer) that became worthless during
you must report all gains and losses from the the tax year are treated as though they were
sale of that property on your tax return unless it sold on the last day of the tax year. This affects
is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you whether your capital loss is long-term orSales and Trades
reside inside or outside the United States and short-term. See Holding Period, later.
If you are a cash basis taxpayer and makewhether or not you receive a Form 1099 from theIf you sold property such as stocks, bonds, or
payments on a negotiable promissory note thatpayer. certain commodities through a broker during the
you issued for stock that became worthless, youyear, you should receive, for each sale, a Form
can deduct these payments as losses in the1099–B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-
years you actually make the payments. Do notchange Transactions, or an equivalent state-
deduct them in the year the stock became worth-ment from the broker. You should receive theIntroduction less.statement by January 31 of the next year. It will
This chapter discusses the tax consequences ofshow the gross proceeds from the sale. The IRSHow to report loss.Report worthless se-selling or trading investment property. It ex-will also get a copy of Form 1099–B from thecurities on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Formplains: broker. 1040), whichever applies. In columns (c) and
Use Form 1099–B (or an equivalent state-(d), write “Worthless.” Enter the amount of your• What is a sale or trade, ment received from your broker) to completeloss in parentheses in column (f).
• When you have a nontaxable trade, Schedule D of Form 1040. Filing a claim for refund.If you do not
• What to do with a related party transac- claim a loss for a worthless security on your
What is a Sale or Trade?tion, original return for the year it becomes worthless,
you can file a claim for a credit or refund due to• Whether the property you sell is a capitalThis section explains what is a sale or trade. Itthe loss. You must use Form 1040X, Amendedasset or a noncapital asset, also explains certain transactions and eventsU.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to amend
that are treated as sales or trades.• Whether you have a capital or ordinary your return for the year the security became
A sale is generally a transfer of property forgain or loss from the sale of property, worthless. You must file it within 7 years from the
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise todate your original return for that year had to be• How to determine your holding period, andpay money. A trade is a transfer of property forfiled, or 2 years from the date you paid the tax,
other property or services and may be taxed in• When you can make a tax-free rollover of whichever is later. For more information about
the same way as a sale.a gain from selling certain securities. filing a claim, see Amended Returns and Claims
for Refund in chapter 1.
Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transactionSales not discussed in this chapter.Certain is not a trade when you voluntarily sell propertyHow To Figuresales or trades of property are not discussedfor cash and immediately buy similar property tohere. Gain or Lossreplace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-
rate transactions. But see Like-kind exchangesInstallment sales are covered in Publication You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade ofunder Nontaxable Trades, later.537, Installment Sales. property by comparing the amount you realize
with the adjusted basis of the property.Transfers of property at death are covered inRedemption of stock.A redemption of stock
Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, and Ad-is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to theGain. If the amount you realize from a sale orministrators. capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-trade is more than the adjusted basis of the
demption is a dividend or other distribution onproperty you transfer, the difference is a gain.Transactions involving business property arestock.covered in Publication 544, Sales and Other Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property you
Dispositions of Assets. Dividend versus sale or trade.Whether a transfer is more than the amount you realize, the
redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,difference is a loss.Dispositions of an interest in a passive activityor other distribution depends on the circum-are covered in Publication 925, Passive Activity Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of prop-stances in each case. Both direct and indirectand At-Risk Rules. erty is your original cost or other original basisownership of stock will be considered. The re-
properly adjusted (increased or decreased) fordemption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if: Sales of a main home are covered in chapter
certain items. See chapter 14 for more informa-16.
tion about determining the adjusted basis of1) The redemption is not essentially
property.equivalent to a dividend (see chapter 9),Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex-
penses (Including Capital Gains and Losses), Amount realized. The amount you realize2) There is a substantially disproportionate
provides more detailed discussion about sales from a sale or trade of property is everything youredemption of stock,
and trades of investment property. Publication receive for the property. This includes the3) There is a complete redemption of all the550 includes information about the rules cover- money you receive plus the fair market value ofstock of the corporation owned by theing nonbusiness bad debts, straddles, section any property or services you receive.shareholder, or1256 contracts, puts and calls, commodity fu- If you finance the buyer’s purchase of your
tures, short sales, and wash sales. It also dis-4) The redemption is a distribution in partial property and the debt instrument does not pro-
cusses investment-related expenses. liquidation of a corporation. vide for adequate stated interest, the unstated
Page 102 Chapter 15 Sale of Property

Page 105 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
interest will reduce the amount realized. For receive for productive use in your trade orLike property and money transferred. If
more information, see Publication 537. conditions (1) – (6) are met, you have a nontax-business or for investment. Neither prop-
able trade even if you pay money in addition toerty may be property used for personalFair market value.Fair market value is the the like property.purposes, such as your home or familyprice at which the property would change handscar.between a buyer and a seller, neither being Basis of property received.To figure the ba-
forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable2) The property must not be held primarily forsis of the property received, see Nontaxable
knowledge of all the relevant facts. Exchanges in chapter 14.sale. The property you trade and the prop-
The fair market value of notes or other debterty you receive must not be property youHow to report. You must report the trade ofinstruments you receive as a part of the salesell to customers, such as merchandise.like property on Form 8824. If you figure a rec-price is usually the best amount you can get3) The property must not be stocks, bonds,ognized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onfrom selling them to, or discounting them with, anotes, choses in action, certificates of trustSchedule D of Form 1040 or on Form 4797,bank or other buyer of debt instruments.
or beneficial interest, or other securities orSales of Business Property, whichever applies.
For information on using Form 4797, seeevidences of indebtedness or interest, in-Example. You trade A Company stock with
chapter 4 of Publication 544.cluding partnership interests. However,an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company
you can have a nontaxable trade of corpo-stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which Corporate stocks. The following trades ofrate stocks under a different rule, as dis-is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 corporate stocks generally do not result in acussed later.($10,000 minus $7,000). If you also receive a taxable gain or a deductible loss.
note for $6,000 that has a discount value of4) There must be a trade of like property. TheCorporate reorganizations.In some in-$4,000, your gain is $7,000 ($10,000 plus trade of real estate for real estate, or per-stances, a company will give you common stock$4,000 minus $7,000). sonal property for similar personal propertyfor preferred stock, preferred stock for commonis a trade of like property. The trade of anDebt paid off.A debt against the property, stock, or stock in one corporation for stock inapartment house for a store building, or aor against you, that is paid off as a part of the another corporation. If this is a result of apanel truck for a pickup truck, is a trade oftransaction, or that is assumed by the buyer, merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledlike property. The trade of a piece of ma-must be included in the amount realized. This is corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-chinery for a store building is not a trade oftrue even if neither you nor the buyer is person- porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-like property. Real property located in theally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.United States and real property locatedtrade property that is subject to a nonrecourse
Stock for stock of the same corporation.outside the United States are not like prop-loan, the amount you realize generally includes
You can exchange common stock for commonerty. Also, personal property usedthe full amount of the note assumed by the buyer
stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in thepredominantly within the United States andeven if the amount of the note is more than the
same corporation without having a recognizedpersonal property used predominantlyfair market value of the property.
gain or loss. This is true for a trade between twooutside the United States are not like prop-
stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-erty.Example. You sell stock that you had
holder and the corporation.pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.5) The property to be received must be iden-Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer Convertible stocks and bonds.You gen-tified within 45 days after the date youpays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in erally will not have a recognized gain or loss iftransfer the property given up in the trade.cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000 you convert bonds into stock or preferred stock6) The property to be received must be re-plus $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 into common stock of the same corporation ac-
ceived by the earlier of:minus $6,000). cording to a conversion privilege in the terms of
the bond or the preferred stock certificate.Payment of cash. If you trade property and a) The 180th day after the date on which
cash for other property, the amount you realizeyou transfer the property given up inProperty for stock of a controlled corpora-
is the fair market value of the property you re-the trade, or tion. If you transfer property to a corporation
ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,b) The due date, including extensions, fortracting the cash you pay plus the adjusted basis and immediately after the trade you are in con-your tax return for the year in which theof the property you traded in from the amount trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will nottransfer of the property given up oc-you realize. If the result is a positive number, it is recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies bothcurs.a gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-
loss. erty to a corporation. It does not apply if theIf you trade property with a related party in acorporation is an investment company.No gain or loss.You may have to use a basis like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-for figuring gain that is different from the basisSee Related Party Transactions, later in thisration, you or your group of transferors mustused for figuring loss. In this case, you may havechapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544own, immediately after the exchange, at leastneither a gain nor a loss. See Basis Other Than for more information on exchanges of business80% of the total combined voting power of allCost in chapter 14. property and special rules for exchanges usingclasses of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%qualified intermediaries or involving multipleof the outstanding shares of each class of non-properties.Nontaxable Trades voting stock of the corporation.
If this provision applies to you, you mustPartially nontaxable exchange.If you re-This section discusses trades that generally do attach to your return a complete statement of all
ceive cash or unlike property in addition to likenot result in a taxable gain or deductible loss. facts pertinent to the exchange.
property, and the above six conditions are met,For more information on nontaxable trades, see
Additional information.For more informa-you have a partially nontaxable trade. You arechapter 1 of Publication 544.
tion on trades of stock, see Nontaxable Tradestaxed on any gain you realize, but only up to the
in chapter 4 of Publication 550.Like-kind exchanges. If you trade businessamount of the cash and the fair market value of
or investment property for other business orthe unlike property you receive. You cannot de-Insurance policies and annuities.You willinvestment property of a like kind, you do notduct a loss. not have a recognized gain or loss if you trade:pay tax on any gain or deduct any loss until youLike property and unlike property trans-sell or dispose of the property you receive. To be 1) A life insurance contract for another lifeferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-nontaxable, a trade must meet all six of the insurance contract or for an endowment ortion to the like property, you must recognize gainfollowing conditions. annuity contract,or loss on the unlike property you give up. The
gain or loss is the difference between the ad-1) The property must be business or invest- 2) An endowment contract for an annuity
justed basis of the unlike property and its fairment property. You must hold both the contract or for another endowment con-
market value.property you trade and the property you tract that provides for regular payments
Chapter 15 Sale of Property Page 103

Page 106 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
beginning at a date not later than the be- This rule also applies to trades of property 9) Two partnerships if the same persons
between related parties, defined next underginning date under the old contract, or own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%
Losses on sales or trades of property. However, of the capital interests or the profit inter-3) An annuity contract for another annuityif either you or the related party disposes of theests in both partnerships.contract. like property within 2 years after the trade, you
both must report any gain or loss not recognizedThe insured or annuitant must be the same Multiple property sales or trades.If you
on the original trade on your return filed for theunder both contracts. Exchanges of contracts sell or trade to a related party a number of blocks
year in which the later disposition occurs.not included in this list, such as an annuity con- of stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, you
tract for an endowment contract, or an annuity or must figure the gain or loss separately for each
Losses on sales or trades of property.Youendowment contract for a life insurance con- block of stock or piece of property. The gain on
cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade oftract, are taxable. each item may be taxable. However, you cannot
property, other than a distribution in completededuct the loss on any item. Also, you cannotDemutualization of life insurance compa-liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction isreduce gains from the sales of any of thesenies. If you received stock in exchange fordirectly or indirectly between you and the follow-items by losses on the sales of any of the otheryour equity interest as a policyholder or an annu-ing related parties. items.itant, you generally will not have a recognized
gain or loss. See Demutualization of Life Insur- Indirect transactions.You cannot deduct1) Members of your family. This includes only
ance Companies in Publication 550. your loss on the sale of stock through youryour brothers and sisters, half-brothers
and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-broker if, under a prearranged plan, a related
U.S. Treasury notes or bonds.You can trade ents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-party buys the same stock you had owned. This
certain issues of U.S. Treasury obligations forscendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).does not apply to a trade between related par-
other issues designated by the Secretary of the ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-2) A partnership in which you directly or indi-Treasury, with no gain or loss recognized on the dental and is not prearranged.rectly own more than 50% of the capitaltrade.
interest or the profits interest. Constructive ownership of stock.In de-
termining whether a person directly or indirectly3) A corporation in which you directly or indi-Transfers Between owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-rectly own more than 50% in value of thetion, the following rules apply.Spouses outstanding stock. (See Constructive own-
ership of stock, later.) Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned byGenerally, no gain or loss is recognized on a or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust4) A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-transfer of property from an individual to (or in is considered owned proportionately by or for itsganization that is directly or indirectly con-trust for the benefit of) a spouse, or if incident to shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.trolled, in any manner or by any method,a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition
by you or by a member of your family, Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownrule does not apply if the recipient spouse or
whether or not this control is legally en-the stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orformer spouse is a nonresident alien. The rule
forceable. for his or her family. Family includes only broth-also does not apply to a transfer in trust to the
ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,extent the adjusted basis of the property is lessIn addition, a loss on the sale or trade of
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.than the amount of the liabilities assumed plusproperty is not deductible if the transaction is
any liabilities on the property. directly or indirectly between the following re-Rule 3. An individual owning, other than byAny transfer of property to a spouse or for-lated parties. applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation ismer spouse on which gain or loss is not recog- considered to own the stock that is directly or1) A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciarynized is treated by the recipient as a gift and is indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.and beneficiary, of any trust.not considered a sale or exchange. The
Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stockrecipient’s basis in the property will be the same2) Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or theconstructively owned by a person under rule 1 isas the adjusted basis of the giver immediatelyfiduciary and beneficiary of two differenttreated as actually owned by that person. Butbefore the transfer. This carryover basis ruletrusts, if the same person is the grantor ofstock constructively owned by an individualapplies whether the adjusted basis of the trans-both trusts. under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned byferred property is less than, equal to, or greater
that individual for again applying either rule 2 or3) A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whichthan either its fair market value at the time of
rule 3 to make another person the constructivemore than 50% in value of the outstandingtransfer or any consideration paid by the recipi-
owner of the stock.stock is directly or indirectly owned by orent. This rule applies for purposes of determin-
for the trust, or by or for the grantor of theing loss as well as gain. Any gain recognized on
trust. Property received from a related party.Ifa transfer in trust increases the basis.
you sell or trade at a gain property that youA transfer of property is incident to a divorce4) A corporation and a partnership if theacquired from a related party, you recognize theif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the datesame persons own more than 50% in gain only to the extent it is more than the losson which the marriage ends, or if the transfer isvalue of the outstanding stock of the cor-previously disallowed to the related party. Thisrelated to the ending of the marriage. poration and more than 50% of the capitalrule applies only if you are the original transfereeinterest, or the profits interest, in the part-
and you acquired the property by purchase ornership.Related Party Transactions exchange. This rule does not apply if the related
5) Two S corporations if the same personsparty’s loss was disallowed because of the washSpecial rules apply to the sale or trade of prop-own more than 50% in value of the out-sale rules described in chapter 4 of Publicationerty between related parties. standing stock of each corporation. 550 under Wash Sales.
If you sell or trade at a loss property that you6) Two corporations, one of which is an SGain on sale or trade of depreciable prop-
acquired from a related party, you cannot recog-corporation, if the same persons own moreerty. Your gain from the sale or trade of prop-
nize the loss that was not allowed to the relatedthan 50% in value of the outstanding stockerty to a related party may be ordinary income,
party.of each corporation.rather than capital gain, if the property can be
depreciated by the party receiving it. See chap-7) An executor and a beneficiary of an estateExample 1. Your brother sells you stock forter 3 of Publication 544 for more information.(except in the case of a sale or trade to$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brothersatisfy a pecuniary bequest). cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sellLike-kind exchanges.Generally, if you trade
business or investment property for other busi- the same stock to an unrelated party for8) Two corporations that are members of the
ness or investment property of a like kind, no $10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-same controlled group. (Under certain con-
gain or loss is recognized. See Like-kind ex- able gain is $500 — the $2,900 gain minus theditions, however, these losses are not dis-
changes earlier under Nontaxable Trades. $2,400 loss not allowed to your brother.allowed but must be deferred.)
Page 104 Chapter 15 Sale of Property

Page 107 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the come a part of the merchandise that is forDiscounted Debt Instruments
stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog- sale to customers.
Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minus2) Depreciable property used in your trade or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument$6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that wasor business, even if fully depreciated.originally issued at a discount or bought at anot allowed to your brother.
discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-3) Real property used in your trade or busi-
plained in the following discussions.ness.
Short-term government obligations.Treat4) A copyright, a literary, musical, or artis-
gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-tic composition, a letter or memoran-Capital Gains
ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-dum, or similar property:
gations) as ordinary income up to your ratableand Losses
a) Created by your personal efforts, share of the acquisition discount. This treatment
applies to obligations that have a fixed maturityThis section discusses the tax treatment of b) Prepared or produced for you as a let-
date not more than 1 year from the date of issue.gains and losses from different types of invest-ter, memorandum, or similar property,
Acquisition discount is the stated redemptionment transactions. or
price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-
c) Acquired under circumstances (for ex-tion.Character of gain or loss.You need to clas- ample, by gift) entitling you to the basisHowever, do not treat these gains as incomesify your gains and losses as either ordinary orof the person who created the propertyto the extent you previously included the dis-capital gains or losses. You then need to classifyor for whom it was prepared or pro-count in income. See Discount on Short-Termyour capital gains and losses as either duced. Obligations in chapter 1 of Publication 550.short-term or long-term. If you have long-term
gains and losses, you must identify your 28% Short-term nongovernment obligations.5) Accounts or notes receivable acquiredrate gains and losses. If you have a net capital Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-in the ordinary course of a trade or busi-gain, you must also identify your qualified 5-year gations as ordinary income up to your ratableness for services rendered or from the salegain and any unrecaptured section 1250 gain. share of original issue discount (OID). This treat-of property described in (1).The correct classification and identification ment applies to obligations that have a fixed
6) U.S. Government publications that youhelps you figure the limit on capital losses and maturity date of not more than 1 year from the
received from the government free or forthe correct tax on capital gains. Reporting capi- date of issue.
less than the normal sales price, or thattal gains and losses is explained in chapter 17. However, to the extent you previously in-
you acquired under circumstances entitlingcluded the discount in income, you do not have
you to the basis of someone who receivedto include it in income again. See Discount onCapital or Ordinary the publications free or for less than theShort-Term Obligations in chapter 1 of Publica-
Gain or Loss normal sales price. tion 550.
7) Certain commodities derivative finan-Tax-exempt state and local governmentIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible losscial instruments held by commodities de-bonds. If these bonds were originally issuedfrom a transaction, it may be either a capital gainrivatives dealers. at a discount before September 4, 1982, or youor loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on
acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat yourthe circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of8) Hedging transactions, but only if the
part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figurea capital asset (defined next) results in a capitaltransaction is clearly identified as a hedg-
your gain or loss on the sale or trade of thesegain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asseting transaction before the close of the day
bonds, reduce the amount realized by your partgenerally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-on which it was acquired, originated, or
of the OID.pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss onentered into.
If the bonds were issued after September 3,a sale or trade of property used in a trade or9) Supplies of a type you regularly use or1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-business may be treated as either capital orconsume in the ordinary course of yourcrease the adjusted basis by your part of theordinary, as explained in Publication 544. Intrade or business. OID to figure gain or loss. For more informationsome situations, part of your gain or loss may be
on the basis of these bonds, see Discounteda capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi-
Debt Instruments in chapter 4 of Publicationnary gain or loss.
550.Investment Property
Any gain from market discount is usuallyCapital Assets and taxable on disposition or redemption of tax-ex-Investment property is a capital asset. Any gain
empt bonds. If you bought the bonds before MayNoncapital Assets or loss from its sale or trade is generally a capital
1, 1993, the gain from market discount is capitalgain or loss.
For the most part, everything you own and use gain. If you bought the bonds after April 30,
for personal purposes, pleasure, or investment 1993, the gain is ordinary income.Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.
is a capital asset. Some examples are: You figure the market discount by sub-These are capital assets except when they are
tracting the price you paid for the bond from theheld for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss you• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac- sum of the original issue price of the bond andhave from their sale or trade generally is a capi-count, the amount of accumulated OID from the date oftal gain or loss.
issue that represented interest to any earlier• A house owned and used by you and your
holders. For more information, see Market Dis-family, Stocks, stock rights, and bonds.All of thesecount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550.(including stock received as a dividend) are cap-• Household furnishings, A loss on the sale or other disposition of aital assets except when held for sale by a securi-tax-exempt state or local government bond is• A car used for pleasure or commuting,ties dealer. However, if you own small businessdeductible as a capital loss.stock, see Losses on Section 1244 (Small Busi-• Coin or stamp collections,
ness) Stock and Losses on Small Business In- Redeemed before maturity. If a state or• Gems and jewelry, and vestment Company Stock in chapter 4 of local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980,
Publication 550. is redeemed before it matures, the OID is not• Gold, silver, or any other metal.
taxable to you.
Personal use property.Property held for per-If a state or local bond issued after June 8,Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-
sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part ofcept the following noncapital assets.
capital asset, and you must report a gain from itsthe OID that is earned while you hold the bond is
sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot1) Property held mainly for sale to cus- not taxable to you. However, you must report the
deduct a loss from selling personal use property.tomers or property that will physically be- unearned part of the OID as a capital gain.
Chapter 15 Sale of Property Page 105

Page 108 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. On July 1, 1991, the date of is- March 1, 1984, you generally must include the mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as a
sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond OID in your income currently, and your gain orbad debt. If the actual loss is less than the
for $800. The face amount of the bond was loss on its sale or retirement is generally capitalamount deducted as an estimated loss, you
$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap-must include in income (in the final determina-
the bond was issued, the issuer had no intention plies if the obligation is a loan between individu-tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov-
of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was als and all of the following requirements are met.eries in Publication 525, Taxable and
callable at its face amount beginning 10 years Nontaxable Income.
1) The lender is not in the business of lendingafter the issue date. Nonbusiness bad debt. If you choose tomoney.The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of treat the loss as a bad debt, see How to report11 years (July 1, 2002) for its face amount of2) The amount of the loan, plus the amountbad debts, later.$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. Theof any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000OID earned during the time you held the bond,or less.$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual Sale of Annuity3) Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-interest also is not taxable. However, you must
cipal purposes of the loan.report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a The part of any gain on the sale of an annuitycapital gain. If the exception applies, or the obligation wascontract before its maturity date that is based on
issued before March 2, 1984, you do not includeinterest accumulated on the contract is ordinaryLong-term debt instruments issued after
the OID in your income currently. When you sell1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July income.
or redeem the obligation, the part of your gain2, 1982, if a government instrument).If you
that is not more than your accrued share of thesell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these
OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest ofdebt instruments, the part of your gain that is not Nonbusiness Bad Debts
the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on themore than your ratable share of the OID at the
sale or redemption is capital loss. If someone owes you money that you cannottime of the sale or redemption is ordinary in-
collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able tocome. The rest of the gain is capital gain. If,
deduct the amount owed to you when you figurehowever, there was an intention to call the debt
Deposit in Insolvent or Bankrupt your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-instrument before maturity, all of your gain that is
less. A debt must be genuine for you to deduct anot more than the entire OID is treated as ordi-Financial Institution
loss. A debt is genuine if it arises from anary income at the time of the sale. This treat-
If you lose money you have on deposit in adebtor-creditor relationship based on a valid andment of taxable gain also applies to corporate
qualified financial institution that becomes insol-enforceable obligation to repay a fixed or deter-instruments issued after May 27, 1969, under a
vent or bankrupt, you may be able to deductwritten commitment that was binding on May 27, minable sum of money.
your loss in one of three ways.1969, and at all times thereafter. Bad debts that you did not get in the course
of operating your trade or business are nonbusi-Long-term debt instruments issued after 1) Ordinary loss, ness bad debts. To be deductible, nonbusinessMay 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-
2) Casualty loss, or bad debts must be totally worthless. You cannoternment instrument).If you hold one of these
deduct a partly worthless nonbusiness debt.debt instruments, you must include a part of the3) Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital
OID in your gross income each year that you loss). Basis in bad debt required.To deduct a badown the instrument. Your basis in that debt in-
debt, you must have a basis in it — that is, youstrument is increased by the amount of OID thatOrdinary loss or casualty loss.If you can
must have already included the amount in youryou have included in your gross income. Seereasonably estimate your loss, you can choose
income or loaned out your cash. For example,Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 8 forto treat the estimated loss as either an ordinary
you cannot claim a bad debt deduction forinformation about the OID that you must reportloss or a casualty loss in the current year. Either
court-ordered child support not paid to you byon your tax return. way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-
your former spouse. If you are a cash methodIf you sell or trade the debt instrument beforetion.
taxpayer (as most individuals are), you generallymaturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, ifIf you claim an ordinary loss, report it as acannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaidat the time the instrument was originally issuedmiscellaneous itemized deduction on line 22 ofsalaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,there was an intention to call it before its matur-Schedule A (Form 1040). The maximum amountand similar items.ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to theyou can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you are
extent of the entire OID reduced by any amountsmarried filing separately) reduced by any ex-
of OID previously includible in your income. In How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi-pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss is
this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain. ness bad debts as short-term capital losses onsubject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
Schedule D (Form 1040).limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinaryMarket discount bonds.If the debt instru-
In Part I, line 1 of Schedule D, enter theloss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.ment has market discount and you chose to
name of the debtor and “statement attached” inIf you claim a casualty loss, attach Forminclude the discount in income as it accrued,
column (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.increase your basis in the debt instrument by the
parentheses in column (f). Use a separate lineEach loss must be reduced by $100. Your totalaccrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on
for each bad debt.casualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%its disposition. If you did not choose to include
of your adjusted gross income. For each bad debt, attach a statement tothe discount in income as it accrued, you must
your return that contains:report gain as ordinary interest income up to theYou cannot choose either of these methods
instrument’s accrued market discount. The restif:
1) A description of the debt, including theof the gain is capital gain. See Market Discount
amount, and the date it became due,1) You own at least 1% of the financial insti-Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
tution,A different rule applies to market discount 2) The name of the debtor, and any business
bonds issued before July 19, 1984, and pur- or family relationship between you and the2) You are an officer of the institution, orchased by you before May 1, 1993. See chapter debtor,3) You are related to such an owner or of-4 of Publication 550.
3) The efforts you made to collect the debt,ficer. You are related if you and the ownerRetirement of debt instrument. Any andor officer are “related parties,” as definedamount that you receive on the retirement of aearlier under Related Party Transactions, 4) Why you decided the debt was worthless.debt instrument is treated in the same way as ifor if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, orFor example, you could show that the bor-you had sold or traded that instrument. niece of the owner or officer. rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-
gal action to collect would probably notNotes of individuals.If you hold an obligation If the actual loss that is finally determined is
result in payment of any part of the debt.of an individual that was issued with OID after more than the amount you deducted as an esti-
Page 106 Chapter 15 Sale of Property

Page 109 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filing a claim for refund.If you do not Example. You are a cash method, calendar day as the holding period of the underlying
deduct a bad debt on your original return for the year taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De- stock. The holding period for stock acquired
year it becomes worthless, you can file a claim cember 27, 2002. According to the rules of the through the exercise of stock rights begins on
for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do stock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery the date the right was exercised.
this, use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individualof the stock three trading days after the sale, on
Income Tax Return, to amend your return for the January 2, 2003. You received payment of theRollover of Gain Fromyear the debt became worthless. You must file it sales price on that same day. Report your gain
Publicly Traded Securitieswithin 7 years from the date your original return on your 2002 return, even though you received
for that year had to be filed, or 2 years from the the payment in 2003. The gain is long term or
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certaindate you paid the tax, whichever is later. For short term depending on whether you held the
gains from the sale of publicly traded securities.more information about filing a claim, seestock more than 1 year. Your holding period
This means that if you buy certain replacementAmended Returns and Claims for Refund in ended on December 27. If you had sold the
property and make the choice described in thischapter 1. stock at a loss, you would also report it on your
section, you postpone part or all of your gain.2002 return.
Additional information.For more informa- You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis
Nontaxable trades.If you acquire investmenttion, see Nonbusiness Bad Debts in Publication of the replacement property as described in Ba-
property in a trade for other investment property550. For information on business bad debts, see sis of replacement property, later. This
and your basis for the new property is deter-chapter 11 of Publication 535, Business Ex- postpones your gain until the year you dispose
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in thepenses. of the replacement property.
old property, your holding period for the newYou qualify to make this choice if you meet
property begins on the day following the dateall the following tests.
you acquired the old property.Losses on Small Business Stock
1) You sell publicly traded securities at a
Property received as a gift.If you receive aYou can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-
gift of property and your basis is determined byas a capital loss, your loss on the sale, trade, or ties traded on an established securities
the donor’s adjusted basis, your holding periodworthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report the market.
is considered to have started on the same dayloss on Form 4797, line 10. Any gain on this 2) Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.the donor’s holding period started.stock is capital gain and is reported on Schedule
If your basis is determined by the fair marketD (Form 1040) if the stock is a capital asset in 3) During the 60-day period beginning on the
value of the property, your holding period startsyour hands. See Losses on Section 1244 (Small date of the sale, you buy replacement
on the day after the date of the gift.Business) Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550. property. This replacement property must
be either common stock or a partnershipInherited property.If you inherit investment interest in a specialized small business in-property, your capital gain or loss on any laterLosses on Small Business vestment company (SSBIC). This is anydisposition of that property is treated as apartnership or corporation licensed by theInvestment Company Stock long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-Small Business Administration under sec-gardless of how long you actually held the prop-See Losses on Small Business Investment tion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest-erty.Company Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550. ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13,
1993.Real property bought. To figure how long
you have held real property bought under anHolding Period
unconditional contract, begin counting on theAmount of gain recognized.If you make the
day after you received title to it or on the dayIf you sold or traded investment property, you choice described in this section, you must rec-
after you took possession of it and assumed themust determine your holding period for the prop- ognize gain only up to the following amount:
burdens and privileges of ownership, whichevererty. Your holding period determines whether
happened first. However, taking delivery or pos-1) The amount realized on the sale, minusany capital gain or loss was a short-term or
session of real property under an option agree-long-term capital gain or loss. 2) The cost of any common stock or partner-ment is not enough to start the holding period.ship interest in an SSBIC that you boughtLong term or short term.If you hold invest-The holding period cannot start until there is anduring the 60-day period beginning on thement property more than 1 year, any capital actual contract of sale. The holding period of thedate of sale (and did not previously takegain or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. Ifseller cannot end before that time. into account on an earlier sale of publiclyyou hold the property 1 year or less, any capital traded securities).Automatic investment service.In determin-gain or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.
ing your holding period for shares bought by theTo determine how long you held the invest- If this amount is less than the amount of your
bank or other agent, full shares are consideredment property, begin counting on the date after gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,
bought first and any fractional shares are con-the day you acquired the property. The day you subject to the limit described next. If this amount
sidered bought last. Your holding period startsdisposed of the property is part of your holding is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,
on the day after the bank’s purchase date. If aperiod. you must recognize the full amount of your gain.
share was bought over more than one purchase
Limit on gain postponed.The amount ofdate, your holding period for that share is a splitExample. If you bought investment property
gain you can postpone each year is limited to theholding period. A part of the share is consideredon February 5, 2001, and sold it on February 5,
smaller of:to have been bought on each date that stock2002, your holding period is not more than 1
was bought by the bank with the proceeds ofyear and you have a short-term capital gain or 1) $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married andavailable funds.loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2002, your file a separate return), orholding period is more than 1 year and you willStock dividends.The holding period for stock2) $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married andhave a long-term capital gain or loss. you received as a taxable stock dividend beginsfile a separate return), minus the amounton the date of distribution.Securities traded on established market. of gain you postponed for all earlier years.The holding period for new stock you re-For securities traded on an established securi-
ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onties market, your holding period begins the day Basis of replacement property.You mustthe same day as the holding period of the oldafter the trade date you bought the securities, subtract the amount of postponed gain from thestock. This rule also applies to stock acquired inand ends on the trade date you sold them. basis of your replacement property.a “spin-off,” which is a distribution of stock or
Do not confuse the trade date with thesecurities in a controlled corporation.
settlement date, which is the date by How to report and postpone gain. See
which the stock must be delivered andNontaxable stock rights.Your holding period chapter 4 of Publication 550 for details on how toCAUTION
!
payment must be made. for nontaxable stock rights begins on the same report and postpone the gain.
Chapter 15 Sale of Property Page 107

Page 110 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
At the time this publication was beingMore than one home. If you have more than
prepared for print, regulations relatingone home, you can exclude gain only from the
to gain from the sale or exchange ofsale of your main home. You must include inCAUTION
!
16. your home were awaiting approval. These regu-income the gain from the sale of any other
lations would provide a list of factors and rules tohome. If you have two homes and live in both of
consider in determining whether a home is yourthem, your main home is ordinarily the one you
main home, whether vacant land is part of it, andlive in most of the time.
Selling Your whether gain must be allocated between resi-
Example 1. You own and live in a house indential and nonresidential uses. They would
the city. You also own a beach house, which youalso explain the circumstances under which theHome use during summer months. The house in theprimary reason a home is sold or exchanged is a
city is your main home.change in place of employment, health, or un-
foreseen circumstances. In addition, the regula-
Example 2. You own a house, but you live intions would provide rules for figuring a reducedImportant Change another house that you rent. The rented house ismaximum exclusion, for determining if more
your main home.than one exclusion is available to joint owners orUnforeseen circumstances — September to those who file jointly, and rules for applying11, 2001, terrorists attacks.If you are an these regulations retroactively. For more infor-Property used partly as your main home.Ifindividual affected by the September 11, 2001,mation on the rules included in the new regula-you use only part of the property as your mainterrorists attacks, you may qualify for a reducedtions, see Publication 523, Selling Your Home, home, the rules discussed in this chapter applymaximum exclusion of gain on the sale or ex-and Publication 553, Highlights of 2002 Taxonly to the gain or loss on the sale of that part ofchange of your main home. See Reduced Maxi- Changes. the property. For details, see Property usedmum Exclusion, later. partly as your home and partly for business or
rental during the year of sale under BusinessUseful Items Use or Rental of Home, later.
You may want to see:
Important Reminders
Publication
Change of address. If you change your mail- How To Figure Gain or❏ 523 Selling Your Homeing address, be sure to notify the IRS using
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-TimeForm 8822, Change of Address. Mail it to the LossHomeownersInternal Revenue Service Center for your old
address. (Addresses for the Service Centers are To figure the gain or loss on the sale of yourForm (and Instructions)on the back of the form.) main home, you must know the selling price,
the amount realized, and the adjusted basis.❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital GainsHome sold with undeducted points.If you and Losseshave not deducted all the points you paid to
Selling price.The selling price is the totalsecure a mortgage on your old home, you may❏ 8822 Change of Address amount you receive for your home. It includesbe able to deduct the remaining points in the❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage money, all notes, mortgages, or other debts as-year of the sale. See Mortgage ending early Subsidy sumed by the buyer as part of the sale, and theunder Points in chapter 25.
fair market value of any other property or any
services you receive.
Payment by employer. You may have to
sell your home because of a job transfer. If yourIntroduction Main Home employer pays you for a loss on the sale or for
This chapter explains the tax rules that apply your selling expenses, do not include the pay-Usually, the home you live in most of the time iswhen you sell your main home. Generally, your ment as part of the selling price. Your employeryour main home and can be a:main home is the one in which you live most of will include it in box 1 of your Form W–2 and you
the time. will include it in your gross income as wages on• House, line 7 of Form 1040.
Gain. If you have a gain from the sale of your• Houseboat, Option to buy.If you grant an option to buymain home, you may be able to exclude up to your home and the option is exercised, add the• Mobile home,$250,000 of the gain from your income amount you receive for the option to the selling($500,000 on a joint return in most cases). Any• Cooperative apartment, or price of your home. If the option is not exercised,gain not excluded is taxable. See Excluding the you must report the amount as ordinary income• Condominium.Gain, later. in the year the option expires. Report this
amount on line 21 of Form 1040.To exclude gain under the rules of this chap-
Loss. You cannot deduct a loss from the saleter, you generally must have owned and lived in
of your main home. the property as your main home for at least 2Form 1099–S. If you received Form 1099–S,
years during the 5-year period ending on theProceeds From Real Estate Transactions, box 2
Worksheets. Publication 523, Selling Your date of sale. (gross proceeds) should show the total amount
Home,  includes worksheets to help you figure you received for your home.
the adjusted basis of the home you sold, the However, box 2 will not include the fair mar-Land. If you sell the land on which your main
gain (or loss) on the sale, and the amount of the ket value of any property other than cash orhome is located, but not the house itself, you
gain that you can exclude. notes, or any services, you received or will re-cannot exclude any gain you have from the sale
ceive. Instead, box 4 will be checked to indicateof the land.
your receipt (or expected receipt) of these items.Reporting the sale.Do not report the sale of
your main home on your tax return unless youExample. On March 4, 2002, you sell the If you can exclude the entire gain, the person
have a gain and at least part of it is taxable. land on which your main home is located. You responsible for closing the sale generally will not
Report any taxable gain on Schedule D (Form buy another piece of land and move your house have to report it on Form 1099–S. If you do not
1040). You may also have to include Form 4797, to it. This sale is not considered a sale of your receive Form 1099–S, use sale documents and
Sales of Business Property. See Reporting the main home, and you cannot exclude tax on any other records to figure the total amount you
Gain in chapter 2 of Publication 523. gain on the sale of the land. received for your home.
Page 108 Chapter 16 Selling Your Home

Page 111 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Amount realized. The amount realized is the liable for repaying the debt secured by the a mortgage loan. Therefore, a fee paid for buy-
selling price minus selling expenses. home. Get Publication 523 for more information.ing the home is any fee you would have had to
pay even if you paid cash for the home.Selling expenses. Selling expenses in- Form 1099–A and Form 1099–C. If your
Chapter 14 lists some of the settlement feesclude: debt is canceled, you may receive Form
and closing costs that you can include in the1099–C, Cancellation of Debt. Generally, you• Commissions, basis of property, including your home. It alsowill receive Form 1099–A, Acquisition or Aban-
lists some settlement costs that cannot be in-• Advertising fees, donment of Secured Property, from your lender.
cluded in basis.This form will have the information you need to• Legal fees, and Also see chapter 2 of Publication 523 fordetermine the amount of your gain or loss and
additional items and a discussion of basis other• Loan charges paid by the seller, such asany ordinary income from cancellation of debt.
than cost.loan placement fees or “points.”
Abandonment. If you abandon your home,
you may have ordinary income. If the aban-
Adjusted basis.  While you owned your doned home secures a debt for which you areAdjusted Basishome, you may have made adjustments (in- personally liable and the debt is canceled, you
creases or decreases) to the basis. This ad-have ordinary income equal to the amount of theAdjusted basis is your basis increased or de-
justed basis must be determined before you cancanceled debt. Get Publication 523 for morecreased by certain amounts.
figure gain or loss on the sale of your home. Forinformation.
information on how to figure your home’s ad- Increases to basis.These include any:Transfer to spouse.If you transfer your homejusted basis, see Basis later.
to your spouse, or to your former spouse inci-1) Additions and other improvements thatAmount of gain or loss.To figure the amountdent to your divorce, you generally have no gainhave a useful life of more than 1 year,of gain or loss, compare the amount realized toor loss. This is true even if you receive cash or
the adjusted basis. 2) Special assessments for local improve-other consideration for the home. Therefore, the
ments, andrules in this chapter do not apply.Gain on sale.If the amount realized is more
than the adjusted basis, the difference is a gain 3) Amounts you spent after a casualty to re-More information.If you need more infor-
and, except for any part you can exclude, gener- store damaged property.mation, see Transfer to spouse in Publication
ally is taxable. 523 and Property Settlements in Publication
504, Divorced or Separated Individuals.Loss on sale.If the amount realized is less Decreases to basis.These include any:
than the adjusted basis, the difference is a loss.
A loss on the sale of your main home cannot be 1) Gain you postponed from the sale of aBasis
deducted. previous home before May 7, 1997,
You need to know your basis in your home to2) Deductible casualty losses,Jointly owned home. If you and your spousedetermine any gain or loss when you sell it. Your
sell your jointly owned home and file a jointbasis in your home is determined by how you got3) Insurance payments you received or ex-
return, you figure your gain or loss as one tax-the home. Your basis is its cost if you bought it orpect to receive for casualty losses,
payer. built it. If you got it in some other way (inheri-4) Payments you received for granting antance, gift, etc.), its basis is either its fair marketSeparate returns.If you file separate re- easement or right-of-way,value when you got it or the adjusted basis of theturns, each of you must figure your own gain or
person you got it from. 5) Depreciation allowed or allowable if youloss according to your ownership interest in the
While you owned your home, you may have used your home for business or rental pur-home. Your ownership interest is determined by
made adjustments (increases or decreases) toposes,state law.
your home’s basis. The result of these adjust-6) Residential energy credit (generally al-Joint owners not married.If you and a ments is your home’s adjusted basis, which is lowed from 1977 through 1987) claimedjoint owner other than your spouse sell yourused to figure gain or loss on the sale of yourfor the cost of energy improvements thatjointly owned home, each of you must figurehome. See Adjusted Basis, later. you added to the basis of your home,your own gain or loss according to your owner-You can find more information on basis and
ship interest in the home. Each of you appliesadjusted basis in chapter 14 of this publication7) Adoption credit you claimed for improve-the rules discussed in this chapter on an individ-and in Publication 523. ments added to the basis of your home,ual basis.
8) Nontaxable payments from an adoption
Trading homes. If you trade your old home for assistance program of your employer thatCost As Basisanother home, treat the trade as a sale and a you used for improvements you added to
purchase. the basis of your home,The cost of property is the amount you pay for it
in cash, debt obligations, other property, or serv-9) First-time homebuyer credit (allowed toExample. You owned and lived in a homeices. certain first-time buyers of a home in thethat had an adjusted basis of $41,000. A real District of Columbia), andestate dealer accepted your old home as aPurchase. If you buy your home, your basis is
trade-in and allowed you $50,000 toward a newits cost to you. This includes the purchase price10) Energy conservation subsidy excluded
home priced at $80,000. This is treated as a saleand certain settlement or closing costs. Gener-from your gross income because you re-
of your old home for $50,000 with a gain ofally, your purchase price includes your downceived it (directly or indirectly) from a pub-
$9,000 ($50,000 – $41,000). payment and any debt, such as a first or secondlic utility after 1992 to buy or install any
If the dealer had allowed you $27,000 andmortgage or notes you gave the seller in pay-energy conservation measure. An energy
assumed your unpaid mortgage of $23,000 onment for the home. If you build, or contract toconservation measure is an installation or
your old home, your sales price would still bebuild, a new home, your purchase price can modification that is primarily designed ei-
$50,000 (the $27,000 trade-in allowed plus theinclude costs of construction, as discussed inther to reduce consumption of electricity or
$23,000 mortgage assumed). chapter 2 of Publication 523. natural gas or to improve the management
of energy demand for a home.
Foreclosure or repossession.If your home Settlement fees or closing costs.When you
was foreclosed on or repossessed, you have a bought your home, you may have paid settle-
Improvements. These add to the value ofsale. ment fees or closing costs in addition to the
your home, prolong its useful life, or adapt it toYou figure the gain or loss from the sale in contract price of the property. You can include in
new uses. You add the cost of additions andgenerally the same way as gain or loss from any your basis the settlement fees and closing costs
other improvements to the basis of your prop-sale. But the amount of your gain or loss de- you paid for buying the home. You cannot in-
erty.pends, in part, on whether you were personally clude in your basis the fees and costs for getting
Chapter 16 Selling Your Home Page 109

Page 112 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Examples. Putting a recreation room or an- 2) You meet the use test.
1) A qualified individual (as defined below)other bathroom in your unfinished basement,3) During the 2-year period ending on the was killed.putting up a new fence, putting in new plumbingdate of the sale, you did not exclude gainor wiring, putting on a new roof, or paving your 2) A qualified individual lost employment andfrom the sale of another home.unpaved driveway are improvements. An addi- became eligible for unemployment com-
tion to your house, such as a new deck, a sun-You can exclude the entire gain on the salepensation (as defined by federal law).
room, or a garage, is also an improvement.of your main home up to $500,000 if all of the
3) A qualified individual experienced afollowing are true.
change in employment or self-employmentRepairs. These maintain your home in good
that resulted in your (if you are the tax-condition but do not add to its value or prolong1) You are married and file a joint return for
payer) inability to pay reasonable basic liv-its life. You do not add their cost to the basis ofthe year.
ing expenses (as defined below) for youryour property. 2) Either you or your spouse meets the own-household.
ership test.Examples. Repainting your house inside or 4) Your (if you are the taxpayer) main home
outside, fixing your gutters or floors, repairing3) Both you and your spouse meet the use was damaged (even if you are entitled to a
leaks or plastering, and replacing broken win-test. casualty loss deduction).
dow panes are examples of repairs. 4) During the 2-year period ending on the
Qualified individual.The term “qualified in-Recordkeeping. You should keep rec- date of the sale, neither you nor your
dividual” means, as of September 11, 2001, anyords to prove your home’s adjusted spouse excluded gain from the sale of an-
of the following.basis. Ordinarily, you must keep rec-other home.RECORDS
ords for 3 years after the due date for filing your • The taxpayer.return for the tax year in which you sold your
• The taxpayer’s spouse.home. But if you sold a home before May 7,Reduced Maximum
1997, and postponed tax on any gain, the basis • A co-owner of the home.Exclusionof that home affects the basis of the new home
• A person whose main home is the sameyou bought. Keep records proving the basis ofYou can claim an exclusion, but the maximum as the taxpayer’s.both homes as long as they are needed for taxamount of gain you can exclude will be reduced,purposes. if either of the following is true. Reasonable basic living expenses.Rea-The records you should keep include:
sonable basic living expenses for your house-1) You did not meet the ownership and usehold (if you are the taxpayer), include the• Proof of the home’s purchase price and tests, but you sold the home due to: following expenses.purchase expenses,
a) A change in place of employment, • Amounts spent for food.• Receipts and other records for all improve-
b) Health, orments, additions, and other items that af- • Amounts spent for clothing.fect the home’s adjusted basis, c) Unforeseen circumstances, to the ex-• Housing and related expenses.• Any worksheets you used to figure the ad- tent provided in regulations (as dis-
• Medical expenses.justed basis of the home you sold, the cussed later).
gain or loss on the sale, the exclusion, and • Transportation expenses.the taxable gain, 2) Your exclusion would have been disal-
• Tax payments.lowed because of the rule described in• Any Form 2119 that you filed to postpone More Than One Home Sold During 2-Year • Court-ordered payments.gain from the sale of a previous home Period, later, except that you sold thebefore May 7, 1997, and • Expenses reasonably necessary to pro-home due to:
duce income.• Any worksheets you used to prepare Form
a) A change in place of employment,2119, such as the Adjusted Basis of Home
Amounts spent on these items to maintain anSold Worksheet or the Capital Improve- b) Health, or affluent or luxurious standard of living are notments Worksheet from the Form 2119 in-
c) Unforeseen circumstances, to the ex-reasonable basic living expenses.structions.
tent provided in regulations (as dis-2001 home sales. If you are an individualcussed next). affected by the September 11, 2001, terrorists
attacks, and you qualify for a reduced maximumUse Worksheet 3 in Publication 523 to figureexclusion of gain on a 2001 sale or exchange ofyour reduced maximum exclusion.Excluding the Gain your main home, you can claim the exclusion on
your 2001 return. If you have filed your return forYou may qualify to exclude from your income allUnforeseen circumstances.The IRS has not 2001, you can file an amended return to claimor part of any gain from the sale of your mainyet issued regulations defining unforeseen cir-the exclusion. See Amended Returns andhome. This means that, if you qualify, you willcumstances. Generally, you cannot claim anClaims for Refund, in chapter 1..not have to pay tax on the gain up to the limitexclusion based on unforeseen circumstances
described under Maximum Amount of Exclu- until the IRS issues final regulations or other
More Than One Home Soldsion, next. To qualify, you must meet the owner-appropriate guidance. For more information,
ship and use tests described later. see Caution at the beginning of this chapter.During 2-Year PeriodYou can choose not to take the exclusion. InSeptember 11, 2001, terrorists attacks.that case, you must include in income your en- You cannot exclude gain on the sale of yourRecently, the IRS issued a notice explaining thetire gain. home if, during the 2-year period ending on thecircumstances under which these terrorists at-
date of the sale, you sold another home at a gaintacks qualify as unforeseen circumstances forand excluded all or part of that gain. If youMaximum Amount of purposes of the reduced maximum exclusion. Ifcannot exclude the gain, you must include it inyou are an individual affected by the SeptemberExclusion your income.11, 2001, terrorists attacks, you may qualify for a
However, you can still claim an exclusion ifreduced maximum exclusion of gain on the saleYou can exclude the entire gain on the sale of you sold the home due to:or exchange of your main home. You are anyour main home up to $250,000 if all of the
affected individual if you sold or exchanged yourfollowing are true. 1) A change in place of employment,main home because you were affected by the
1) You meet the ownership test. attacks in one or more of the following ways. 2) Health, or
Page 110 Chapter 16 Selling Your Home

Page 113 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) Unforeseen circumstances, to the extent tion he claimed while renting the house. See of the basis of the home you sold depended on
provided in regulations (as discussed ear-Depreciation after May 6, 1997, later. the basis of the destroyed or condemned home.
lier). Otherwise, you must have owned and lived in
Ownership and use tests met at different the same home for 2 of the 5 years before theThe maximum amount you can exclude is re-times. You can meet the ownership and usesale to qualify for the exclusion.duced. See Reduced Maximum Exclusion, ear- tests during different 2-year periods. However,
lier. you must meet both tests during the 5-year pe-
riod ending on the date of the sale. Married Persons
Ownership and Use Tests
Example. In 1993, Helen Jones lived in aIf you and your spouse file a joint return for the
rented apartment. The apartment building wasTo claim the exclusion, you must meet the own- year of sale, you can exclude gain if either
later changed to a condominium, and sheership and use tests. This means that during the spouse meets the ownership and use tests. (But
bought her apartment on December 1, 1999. In5-year period ending on the date of the sale, see Maximum Amount of Exclusion, earlier.)
2000, Helen became ill and on April 14 of thatyou must have:
year she moved to her daughter’s home. On JulyExample 1 – one spouse sells a home.1) Owned the home for at least 2 years (the 10, 2002, while still living in her daughter’sEmily sells her home in June 2002. She marriesownership test), and home, she sold her apartment. Jamie later in the year. She meets the owner-
Helen can exclude gain on the sale of hership and use tests, but Jamie does not. She can2) Lived in the home as your main home for
apartment because she met the ownership andexclude up to $250,000 of gain on a separate orat least 2 years (the use test).
use tests. Her 5-year period is from July 11,joint return for 2002.
1997, to July 10, 2002, the date she sold theException. If you owned and lived in the prop-
apartment. She owned her apartment from De-Example 2 – each spouse sells a home.erty as your main home for less than 2 years,
cember 1, 1999, to July 10, 2002 (over 2 years).The facts are the same as in Example 1 exceptyou can still claim an exclusion in some cases.
She lived in the apartment from July 11, 1997that Jamie also sells a home in 2002. He meetsThe maximum amount you can claim will be
(the beginning of the 5-year period), to April 14,the ownership and use tests on his home. Emilyreduced. See Reduced Maximum Exclusion,
2000 (over 2 years). and Jamie can each exclude up to $250,000 ofearlier.
gain.At the time this publication was beingCooperative apartment.If you sold stock in a
prepared for print, legislation wascooperative housing corporation, the ownershipDeath of spouse before sale.If your spouse
pending that would suspend the 5-yearand use tests are met if, during the 5-year periodCAUTION
!
died before the date of sale, you are considered
period for certain members of the uniformedending on the date of sale, you: to have owned and lived in the property as your
services. For the latest developments, see Pub- main home during any period of time when your1) Owned the stock for at least 2 years, andlication 553. spouse owned and lived in it as a main home.
2) Lived in the house or apartment that the
Home transferred from spouse. If yourstock entitles you to occupy as your main
Period of Ownership and home was transferred to you by your spouse (orhome for at least 2 years.
former spouse if the transfer was incident toUse.
divorce), you are considered to have owned itException for individuals with a disability.
during any period of time when your spouseThe required 2 years of ownership and use dur-There is an exception to the use test if during the
owned it.ing the 5-year period ending on the date of the5-year period before the sale of your home:
sale do not have to be continuous.
Use of home after divorce.You are consid-1) You become physically or mentally unable You meet the tests if you can show that you
ered to have used property as your main hometo care for yourself, andowned and lived in the property as your main
during any period when:home for either 24 full months or 730 days (3652) You owned and lived in your home as your× 2) during the 5-year period ending on the datemain home for a total of at least 1 year.1) You owned it, andof sale.
Under this exception, you are considered to live2) Your spouse or former spouse is allowedTemporary absence. Short temporary ab- in your home during any time that you own theto live in it under a divorce or separationsences for vacations or other seasonal ab-home and live in a facility (including a nursinginstrument.sences, even if you rent the property during thehome) that is licensed by a state or politicalabsences, are counted as periods of use. subdivision to care for persons in your condition.
If you meet this exception to the use test, youBusiness Use orExample. Professor Paul Beard, who is sin-still have to meet the 2-out-of-5-year ownershipgle, bought and moved into a house on August Rental of Hometest to claim the exclusion.28, 1999. He lived in it as his main home contin-
You may be able to exclude your gain from theuously until January 5, 2001, when he wentGain postponed on sale of previous home.
sale of a home that you have used for businessabroad for a 1-year sabbatical leave. During partFor the ownership and use tests, you may be
or to produce rental income. But you must meetof the period of leave, the house was unoccu-able to add the time you owned and lived in a
the ownership and use tests.pied, and during the rest of the period, he rentedprevious home to the time you lived in the home
it. On January 5, 2002, he sold the house at aon which you wish to exclude gain. You can do
Example 1. On May 30, 1996, Amy boughtgain. this if you postponed all or part of the gain on the
a house. She moved in on that date and lived inBecause his leave was not a short temporarysale of the previous home, under rules in effect
it until May 31, 1998, when she moved out of theabsence, he cannot include the period of leavebefore May 7, 1997, because of buying the
house and put it up for rent. The house wasto meet the 2-year use test. He cannot excludehome on which you wish to exclude gain.
rented from June 1, 1998, to March 31, 2000.any part of his gain, unless he sold the house
Amy moved back into the house on April 1,due to a change in place of employment, health,Previous home destroyed or condemned.
2000, and lived there until she sold it on Januaryor unforeseen circumstances, as explainedFor the ownership and use tests, you add the
31, 2002. During the 5-year period ending on theunder Reduced Maximum Exclusion, earlier. time you owned and lived in a previous home
date of the sale (February 1, 1997 – January 31,Even if he did sell the house due to a change in that was destroyed or condemned to the time
2002), Amy owned and lived in the house forplace of employment or health, he cannot ex- you owned and lived in the home on which you
more than 2 years as shown in the table below.clude the part of the gain equal to the deprecia- wish to exclude gain. This rule applies if any part
Chapter 16 Selling Your Home Page 111

Page 114 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Five Year Used as Used as that year). See Business Use or Rental of HomeSpecial SituationsPeriod  Home  Rental in chapter 2 of Publication 523.
 2/1/97 – The situations that follow may affect your exclu- Installment sale.Some sales are made under5/31/98 16 months sion. arrangements that provide for part or all of the
 6/1/98 – selling price to be paid in a later year. TheseExpatriates.You cannot claim the exclusion if3/31/00  22 months sales are called “installment sales.” If you fi-the expatriation tax applies to you. The expatria-nance the buyer’s purchase of your home your- 4/1/00 – tion tax applies to U.S. citizens who have re-self, instead of having the buyer get a loan or1/31/02 22 months nounced their citizenship (and long-term mortgage from a bank, you probably have an38 months 22 months residents who have ended their residency) if oneinstallment sale. You may be able to report theof their principal purposes was to avoid U.S.Amy can exclude gain up to $250,000. But she part of the gain you cannot exclude on the in-taxes. See chapter 4 of Publication 519, U.S.cannot exclude the part of the gain equal to the stallment basis.Tax Guide for Aliens, for more information aboutdepreciation she claimed, or should have Use Form 6252, Installment Sale Income, toexpatriation tax.claimed, for renting the house, as explained report the sale. Enter your exclusion on line 15after Example 2. of Form 6252.Home destroyed or condemned. If your
home was destroyed or condemned, any gain Seller-financed mortgage.If you sell yourExample 2. William owned and used a (for example, because of insurance proceedshome and hold a note, mortgage, or other finan-house as his main home from 1996 through you received) qualifies for the exclusion.cial agreement, the payments you receive gen-1999. On January 1, 2000, he moved to another
Any part of the gain that cannot be excludederally consist of both interest and principal. Youstate. He rented his house from that date until
(because it is more than the limit) may be post-must report the interest you receive as part ofApril 30, 2002, when he sold it. During the 5-year
poned under the rules explained in: each payment separately as interest income. Ifperiod ending on the date of sale (May 1, 1997 –
the buyer of your home uses the property as aApril 30, 2002), William owned and lived in the• Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, main or second home, you must also report thehouse for 32 months (more than 2 years). He and Thefts, in the case of a home that wasname, address, and social security numbercan exclude gain up to $250,000. However, hedestroyed, or (SSN) of the buyer on line 1 of either Schedule Bcannot exclude the part of the gain equal to the
• Chapter 1 of Publication 544, Sales and (Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A). Thedepreciation he claimed, or should have
Other Dispositions of Assets, in the case buyer must give you his or her SSN and youclaimed, for renting the house, as explained
of a home that was condemned. must give the buyer your SSN. Failure to meetnext.
these requirements may result in a $50 penalty
Depreciation after May 6, 1997.If you were for each failure. If you or the buyer does notSale of remainder interest.Subject to theentitled to take depreciation deductions be- have and is not eligible to get an SSN, seeother rules in this chapter, you can choose tocause you used your home for business pur- Social Security Number in chapter 1.exclude gain from the sale of a remainder inter-poses or as rental property, you cannot excludeest in your home. If you make this choice, youMore information.For more information onthe part of your gain equal to any depreciationcannot choose to exclude gain from your sale ofinstallment sales, see Publication 537, Install-allowed as a deduction for periods after May 6,any other interest in the home that you sellment Sales.1997. If you cannot show by adequate recordsseparately.or other evidence that the depreciation deduc-
Exception for sales to related persons.tion allowed was less than the amount allowa-
You cannot exclude gain from the sale of able, the amount you cannot exclude is the
remainder interest in your home to a relatedamount allowable. Recapture of
person. Related persons include your brothers
and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,Example. Ray sold his main home in 2002 Federal Subsidy
spouse, ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),at a $30,000 gain. He meets the ownership and
and lineal descendants (children, grandchildren,use tests to exclude the gain from his income. If you financed your home under a federally
etc.). Related persons also include certain cor-However, he used part of the home for business subsidized program (loans from tax-exempt
porations, partnerships, trusts, and exempt or-in 2001 and claimed $500 depreciation. He can qualified mortgage bonds or loans with mort-
ganizations.exclude $29,500 ($30,000 – $500) of his gain. gage credit certificates), you may have to recap-
He has a taxable gain of $500. ture all or part of the benefit you received from
that program when you sell or otherwise disposeReporting the GainProperty used partly as your home and of your home. You recapture the benefit by in-
partly for business or rental during the year creasing your federal income tax for the year ofDo not report the 2002 sale of your main homeof sale.In the year of sale you may have used the sale. You may have to pay this recapture taxon your tax return unless:part of your property as your home and part of it even if you can exclude your gain from income;
• You have a gain and you do not qualify tofor business or to produce income. Examples that exclusion does not affect the recapture tax.
exclude all of it, orare:
Loans subject to recapture rules.The re-• You have a gain and you choose not to• A working farm on which your house was capture applies to loans that:exclude it.located,
1) Came from the proceeds of qualified mort-• An apartment building in which you lived inIf you have any taxable gain on the sale ofgage bonds, orone unit and rented out the others, your main home that cannot be excluded, report
the entire gain realized on Schedule D (Form2) Were based on mortgage credit certifi-• A store building with an upstairs apartment
1040). Report it on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,cates.in which you lived, or
depending on how long you owned the home. IfThe recapture also applies to assumptions of• A home with a room used for business you qualify for an exclusion, show it on the linethese loans.(home office) or to produce income. directly below the line on which you report the
gain. Write “Section 121 exclusion” in column (a)If you sell the entire property you should con- When the recapture applies.The recaptureof that line and show the amount of the exclusionsider the transaction as the sale of two proper- of the federal mortgage subsidy applies only ifin column (f) as a loss (in parentheses).ties. The sale of the part of your property used you meet both of the following conditions. for business or rental is reported on Form 4797. If you used the home for business or to
For more information, see Property used partlyproduce rental income during the year of sale,1) You sell or otherwise dispose of your
as your home and partly for business or rentalyou must use Form 4797 to report the sale of thehome:
during the year of sale under Business Use or business or rental part (or the sale of the entire
Rental of Home in chapter 2 of Publication 523. property if used entirely for business or rental in a) At a gain, and
Page 112 Chapter 16 Selling Your Home

Page 115 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b) During the first 9 years after the date• You dispose of the home more than 9 Notice of amounts. At or near the time of
you closed your mortgage loan. settlement of your mortgage loan, you shouldyears after the date you closed your mort-
receive a notice that provides the federally sub-gage loan,
2) Your income for the year of disposition is sidized amount and other information you will
• You transfer the home to your spouse, ormore than that year’s adjusted qualifying need to figure your recapture tax.
to your former spouse incident to a di-income for your family size for that year How to figure and report the recapture.Thevorce, where no gain is included in your(related to the income requirements a per- recapture tax is figured on Form 8828, Recap-income,son must meet to qualify for the federally ture of Federal Mortgage Subsidy. If you sellsubsidized program). • You dispose of the home at a loss, your home and your mortgage is subject to re-
capture rules, you must file Form 8828 even if• Your home is destroyed by a casualty, andWhen recapture does not apply.The recap- you do not owe a recapture tax. Attach Formture does not apply if any of the following situa-you repair it or replace it on its original site8828 to your Form 1040. For more information,tions apply to you: within 2 years after the end of the tax yearsee Form 8828 and its instructions.
when the destruction happened, or• Your mortgage loan was a qualified home
improvement loan of not more than • You refinance your mortgage loan (unless
$15,000, you later meet all of the conditions listed
previously under When the recapture ap-• The home is disposed of as a result of
your death, plies).
Chapter 16 Selling Your Home Page 113

Page 116 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of Part I or line 8 of Part II, as appropriate.Reconciling Forms 1099 with Schedule D.
Include all these transactions even if you did not Add the following amounts reported to you for
receive a Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Broker 2002 on Forms 1099–B and 1099–S (or on
17. and Barter Exchange Transactions, or Form substitute statements):
1099–S, Proceeds From Real Estate Transac-
1) Proceeds from transactions involvingtions (or substitute statement). You can use
stocks, bonds, and other securities, andSchedule D–1 as a continuation schedule to
Reporting Gains report more transactions. 2) Gross proceeds from real estate transac-
tions (other than the sale of your mainInstallment sales.You cannot use the install-home if you had no taxable gain) not re-and Losses ment method to report a gain from the sale ofported on another form or schedule.stock or securities traded on an established se-
curities market. You must report the entire gainIf this total is more than the total of lines 3 and 10
in the year of sale (the year in which the tradeof Schedule D, attach a statement to your returnImportant Reminder date occurs). explaining the difference.
8% capital gain rate.The 10% capital gain Passive activity gains and losses.If you Sale of property bought at various times.Ifrate was lowered to 8% for qualified 5-year gain.have gains or losses from a passive activity, youyou sell a block of stock or other property thatFor more information, see Capital Gain Tax may also have to report them on Form 8582. In you bought at various times, report theRates, later. some cases, the loss may be limited under theshort-term gain or loss from the sale on one line
passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and itsin Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain or
separate instructions for more information aboutloss on one line in Part II. Write “Various” in
reporting capital gains and losses from a pas-column (b) for the “Date acquired.” See the
sive activity. Comprehensive Example later in this chapter.Introduction
Form 1099–B transactions.If you sold prop-This chapter discusses how to report capital Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba-
erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-gains and losses from sales, exchanges, and sis any expense of sale such as brokers’ fees,
ties, through a broker, you should receive Formother dispositions of investment property on commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and
1099–B or equivalent statement from the bro-Schedule D of Form 1040. The discussion in- option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in
ker. Use the Form 1099–B or the equivalentcludes: column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule
statement to complete Schedule D. D, whichever applies, unless you reported the• How to report short-term gains and losses,Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 ofnet sales price amount in column (d).
Form 1099–B as the gross sales price in col-• How to report long-term gains and losses, For more information about adjustments toumn (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,basis, see chapter 14.• How to figure capital loss carryovers,whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-
vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099–B, that gross• How to figure your tax using the lower tax Short-term gains and losses.Capital gain orproceeds (gross sales price) less commissionsrates on a net capital gain, and loss on the sale or trade of investment propertyand option premiums were reported to the IRS,held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or• An illustrated example of how to completeenter that net sales price in column (d) of eitherloss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If theSchedule D. line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies.amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show itIf the net amount is entered in column (d), do notin parentheses.If you sell or otherwise dispose of propertyinclude the commissions and option premiumsYou combine your share of short-term capitalused in a trade or business or for the productionin column (e). gains or losses from partnerships, S corpora-of income, see Publication 544, Sales and Other
tions, and fiduciaries, and any short-term capitalDispositions of Assets, before completing Form 1099–S transactions. If you sold or
loss carryover, with your other short-term capitalSchedule D. traded reportable real estate, you generally
gains and losses to figure your net short-termshould receive from the real estate reporting
capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.person a Form 1099–S showing the gross pro-Useful Items
ceeds.You may want to see: Long-term gains and losses.A capital gain“Reportable real estate” is defined as anyor loss on the sale or trade of property held morepresent or future ownership interest in any of thePublication than 1 year is a long-term capital gain or loss.following: You report it in Part II of Schedule D. If the❏ 537 Installment Sales
amount in column (f) is a loss, show it in paren-1) Improved or unimproved land, including air❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of theses.space,Assets You also report the following in Part II of2) Inherently permanent structures, including❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses Schedule D:any residential, commercial, or industrial
building,Form (and Instructions) 1) Undistributed long-term capital gains from
3) A condominium unit and its accessory fix-a regulated investment company (mutual❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains tures and common elements, including fund) or real estate investment trustand Losses land, and (REIT),
❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property 4) Stock in a cooperative housing corporation2) Your share of long-term capital gains or
❏ 6252 Installment Sale Income (as defined in section 216 of the Internal losses from partnerships, S corporations,
Revenue Code). and fiduciaries,❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
A “real estate reporting person” could include3) All capital gain distributions from mutual
the buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title orfunds and REITs not reported directly on
escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro-line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form
ker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiring1040, and
the biggest interest in the property.Schedule D 4) Long-term capital loss carryovers.Your Form 1099–S will show the gross pro-
Report capital gains and losses on Schedule D ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol- The result after combining these items with
(Form 1040). Enter your sales and trades of low the instructions for Schedule D to report your other long-term capital gains and losses is
stocks, bonds, etc., and real estate (if not re- these transactions and include them on line 1 or your net long-term capital gain or loss ( line 16 of
quired to be reported on another form) on line 1 8 as appropriate. Schedule D).
Page 114 Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 117 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% rate gain or loss.Enter in column (g) 2) Your total net loss as shown on line 17 of earlier year) can be deducted only on the final
the amount, if any, from column (f) that is a 28%Schedule D. income tax return filed for the decedent. The
rate gain or loss. Enter any loss in parentheses. capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply inYou can use your total net loss to reduceA 28% rate gain or loss is: this situation. The decedent’s estate cannot de-your income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000duct any of the loss or carry it over to following• Any collectibles gain or loss, or limit. years.
• The part of your gain on qualified small Joint and separate returns.If you and yourCapital loss carryover.If you have a total netbusiness stock that is equal to the section spouse once filed separate returns and are nowloss on line 17 of Schedule D that is more than1202 exclusion. filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you
For more information, see Capital Gain Tax tal loss carryovers. However, if you and yourcan carry over the unused part to the next year
Rates, later. spouse once filed a joint return and are nowand treat it as if you had incurred it in that next
filing separate returns, any capital loss carryoveryear. If part of the loss is still unused, you canCapital gain distributions only.You do from the joint return can be deducted only on thecarry it over to later years until it is completelynot have to file Schedule D if all of the following return of the person who actually had the loss.used up.are true.
When you figure the amount of any capital
1) The only amounts you would have to re-loss carryover to the next year, you must take
port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-the current year’s allowable deduction into ac-Capital Gain Tax Ratesbutions from box 2a of Form 1099–DIV (orcount, whether or not you claimed it.
substitute statement). When you carry over a loss, it remains longThe tax rates that apply to a net capital gain areterm or short term. A long-term capital loss you2) You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c, generally lower than the tax rates that apply tocarry over to the next tax year will reduce that2d, or 2e of any Form 1099–DIV (or sub- other income. These lower rates are called theyear’s long-term capital gains before it reducesstitute statement). maximum capital gain rates.that year’s short-term capital gains. The term “net capital gain” means the3) You do not file Form 4952 or, if you do, the
Figuring your carryover.The amount of amount by which your net long-term capital gainamount on line 4e of that form is not more
your capital loss carryover is the amount of yourfor the year is more than your net short-termthan zero.
total net loss that is more than the lesser of:capital loss.If all the above statements are true, report your The maximum capital gain rate can be 8%,capital gain distributions directly on line 13 of1) Your allowable capital loss deduction for10%, 20%, 25%, or 28%. See Table 17–1 forForm 1040 and check the box on that line. Also,the year, or details.use the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form
The maximum capital gain rate does not ap-2) Your taxable income increased by your al-1040 instructions to figure your tax.
ply if it is higher than your regular tax rate.lowable capital loss deduction for the yearYou can report your capital gain distributions
and your deduction for personal exemp-on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form
Example. You have a net capital gain fromtions.1040, if both of the following are true.
selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate wouldIf your deductions are more than your gross1) None of the Forms 1099–DIV (or substi- be 28%. Because you are single and your taxa-income for the tax year, use your negative taxa-tute statements) you received have an ble income is $25,000, none of your taxableble income in computing the amount in item (2).amount in box 2b, 2c, 2d, or 2e. income will be taxed above the 15% rate. The
Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work-28% rate does not apply.2) You do not have to file Form 1040 for anysheet in the Schedule D (Form 1040) instruc-
other capital gains or any capital losses.tions to determine the part of your capital loss forInvestment interest deducted.If you claim a2002 that you can carry over to 2003. deduction for investment interest, you may haveTotal net gain or loss.To figure your total net
to reduce the amount of your net capital gaingain or loss, combine your net short-term capitalExample. Bob and Gloria sold securities inthat is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-term2002. The sales resulted in a capital loss ofReduce it by the amount of the net capital gaincapital gain or loss ( line 16). Enter the result on$7,000. They had no other capital transactions.you choose to include in investment incomeline 17, Part III of Schedule D. If your losses areTheir taxable income was $26,000. On their jointwhen figuring the limit on your investment inter-more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next. 2002 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-est deduction. This is done on lines 21–23 ofIf both lines 16 and 17 are gains and line 41 ofused part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), Schedule D. For more information about the limitForm 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain can be carried over to 2003. on investment interest, see chapter 3 of Publica-Tax Rates, later. If their capital loss had been $2,000, theirtion 550.
capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.
Capital Losses They would have no carryover. 8% rate. The 10% maximum capital gain rate
is lowered to 8% for “qualified 5-year gain.”Use short-term losses first.When you fig-If your capital losses are more than your capital
ure your capital loss carryover, use yourgains, you can claim a capital loss deduction. Qualified 5-year gain.This is long-termshort-term capital losses first, even if you in-Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040, capital gain from the sale of property that youcurred them after a long-term capital loss. If youenclosed in parentheses. held for more than 5 years.have not reached the limit on the capital loss
Limit on deduction. Your allowable capitaldeduction after using short-term losses, use the18% rate beginning in 2006. Beginning inloss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is thelong-term losses until you reach the limit.2006, the 20% maximum capital gain rate will belesser of:
lowered to 18% for qualified 5-year gain fromDecedent’s capital loss.A capital loss
property with a holding period that begins aftersustained by a decedent during his or her last1) $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file
2000.tax year (or carried over to that year from ana separate return), or
Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 115

Page 118 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.Table 17–1. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
Because she had inherited the stock, her loss is
a long-term loss, regardless of how long she andTHEN your
her father actually held the stock. She enters themaximum capital
loss in column (f) of line 8.IF your net capital gain is from ... gain rate is ...
In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.
Collectibles gain 28% stock for $14,000. She had bought 100 of those
shares in 1991, for $1,000. She had bought 100Gain on qualified small business stock equal to the section more shares in 1993 for $2,200, and an addi-1202 exclusion 28% tional 300 shares in 1996 for $1,500. Her total
basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $9,300Unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
($14,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she
Other gain,1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is enters in column (f) of line 8. Because she held
27% or higher 20% all 500 shares for more than 5 years, the entire
gain is qualified 5-year gain.Other gain,1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.lower than 27% 8%  or 10% 2
for $4,100. This was qualified small business
stock that she had bought in September 1997.1 Other gain means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on qualified small business stock, or
Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 gainunrecaptured section 1250 gain.
2 The rate is 8% only for qualified 5-year gain. which she enters in column (f) of line 8. Because
she held the stock more than 5 years, she has a
$1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She enters that
amount in column (g) as a 28% rate gain and
claims the exclusion on the line below by enter-Collectibles gain or loss.This is gain or loss See the Comprehensive Example, later, for
ing $1,500 as a loss in column (f).from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug, an example of how to figure your tax on Sched-
She received a Form 1099–B (not shown)antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati- ule D using the capital gain rates.
from her broker for each of these transactions.num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-Using Capital Gain Tax Worksheet.If youerage held more than 1 year. Capital loss carryover from 2001.Emilyhave capital gain distributions but do not have to
has a capital loss carryover to 2002 of $800, ofGain on qualified small business stock.If file Schedule D (Form 1040), figure your tax
which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500you realized a gain from qualified small business using the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the
is long-term capital loss. She enters thesestock that you held more than 5 years, you instructions for Form 1040A or Form 1040. For
amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D.generally can exclude one-half of your gain from more information, see Capital gain distributions
She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-income. The taxable part of your gain equal toonly, earlier.
over Worksheet in her 2001 Schedule D instruc-your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain.
tions (not shown), so she could properly reportSee Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock in
her loss carryover for the 2002 tax year withoutchapter 4 of Publication 550.
refiguring it.ComprehensiveUnrecaptured section 1250 gain.Generally,
Tax computation. Because Emily hasthis is any part of your capital gain from selling
Example gains on both lines 16 and 17 of Schedule D andsection 1250 property (real property) that is due
has taxable income, she goes to Part IV ofto depreciation (but not more than your net sec-
Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wagesSchedule D to figure her tax. But because linetion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the
from her job, she has income from stocks and15 of Schedule D is more than zero (due to her28% group. Use the worksheet in the Schedule
other securities. For the 2002 tax year, she hadsection 1202 gain from selling qualified smallD instructions to figure your unrecaptured sec-
the following capital gains and losses, which shebusiness stock), she must use the Schedule Dtion 1250 gain. For more information about sec-
reports on Schedule D. All the Forms 1099 sheTax Worksheet to figure her tax instead. Shetion 1250 property and section 1231 gain, see
received showed net sales prices. Her filled-inmust also complete the Qualified 5-Year Gainchapter 3 of Publication 544.
Schedule D is shown in this chapter. Worksheet (not shown) in her Schedule D in-Using Schedule D. You apply these rules by structions.Capital gains and losses — Schedule D.using Part IV of Schedule D (Form 1040) to After entering the gain from line 17 on line 13Emily sold stock in two different companies thatfigure your tax. Use Part IV if both of the follow- of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofshe held for less than a year. In June, she solding are true. Form 1040 through line 41. She enters the100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she hadamount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of the1) You have a net capital gain. You have abought in February. She had an adjusted basisSchedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out thenet capital gain if both lines 16 and 17 ofof $650 in the stock and sold it for $900, for arest of that worksheet, she figures her tax isSchedule D are gains. (Line 16 is your netgain of $250. In July, she sold 25 shares of$3,827. This is less than the $4,453 tax shelong-term capital gain or loss. Line 17 isComputer Co. stock that she bought in June.would have figured without the capital gain taxyour net long-term capital gain or lossShe had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,500rates.combined with any net short-term capitaland she sold it for $2,000, for a loss of $500. She
gain or loss.) reports these short-term transactions on line 1 inReconciliation of Forms 1099–B. Emily
Part I of Schedule D. makes sure that the total of the amounts re-2) Your taxable income on Form 1040, line Emily had three other stock sales that sheported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-41, is more than zero. reports as long-term transactions on line 8 inule D is not less than the total of the amounts
If you have any collectibles gain, gain onPart II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60shown on the Forms 1099–B she received from
qualified small business stock, or unrecapturedshares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inheritedher broker. For 2002, the total is $23,100.
section 1250 gain, you may have to use thethe Car Co. stock from her father. Its fair market
Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D value at the time of his death was $2,500, which
instructions to figure your tax. See the directions
below line 19 of Schedule D.
Page 116 Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 119 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
Car Co.
60 sh
INHERITED 2-3-02 2,100
20,200
2,500
500
Trucking Co.
100 sh
2-12-02 6-12-02 900 650
Computer Co.
25 sh
6-29-02 7-30-02 2,000 2,500
2,900
300
Furniture Co.
500 sh
VARIOUS 6-27-02 14,000 4,700 9,300
9,900
250
500()
550()
400()
Toy Co.
20 sh
9-20-97 12-15-02 4,100 1,100 3,000 1,500
1,000
500
Section 1202
exclusion 1,500()
*28% rate gain or loss includes all “collectibles gains and losses” (as defined on page D-6 of the instructions) and up to 50% of
the eligible gain on qualified small business stock (see page D-4 of the instructions).
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on Form 1040
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-5 of the
instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-5 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts.
Add lines 1 and 2 in column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684,
6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your
2001 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f).
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.
Add lines 8 and 9 in column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and
long-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-1 of the instructions
15 15
14
16
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter in both columns (f) and (g) the amount, if
any, from line 13 of your 2001 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet ()
Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (g)
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f)
Next: Go to Part III on the back.
16
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2002Cat. No. 11338H
()
4
4
Part I
Part II
7
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(g) 28% rate gain or
(loss)
(see instr. below)
()
*
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-5 of the
instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-5 of
the instructions)
2002
Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 117

Page 120 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3,827
-0-
-0-
9,300
9,350
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2002
Taxable Gain or Deductible Loss
Combine lines 7 and 16 and enter the result. If a loss, go to line 18. If a gain, enter the gain on
Form 1040, line 13, and complete Form 1040 through line 41
17
17
()18
Part III
Page 2
18
Next:
If line 17 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, the smaller of (a) that loss or
(b) ($3,000) (or, if married filing separately, ($1,500)). Then complete Form 1040 through line 39
Tax Computation Using Maximum Capital Gains RatesPart IV
20
Enter your unrecaptured section 1250 gain, if any, from line 17 of the worksheet on page D-7 of the
instructions 
22
23
24
25
Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0-
26
27
28
30
31
34
35
36 Subtract line 35 from line 34
23
24
25
26
27
28
31
30
21
Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 41 20
● If both lines 16 and 17 are gains and Form 1040, line 41, is more than zero, complete
Part IV below.
Subtract line 23 from line 20. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of:
Enter the amount from line 24
Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- and go to line 34
Enter the smaller of line 28 or line 29
Multiply line 30 by 8% (.08)
Enter the smaller of line 20 or line 23
Enter the amount from line 28 (if line 28 is blank, enter -0-)
19
33
34
35
36
37
● The amount on line 20 or
● $46,700 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er);
$27,950 if single;
$37,450 if head of household; or
$23,350 if married filing separately
37 Multiply line 36 by 20% (.20)
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2002
● Otherwise, skip the rest of Schedule D and complete Form 1040.
Next: ● If the loss on line 17 is more than the loss on line 18 or if Form 1040, line 39, is less
than zero, skip Part IV below and complete the Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
on page D-6 of the instructions before completing the rest of Form 1040.
● Otherwise, skip Part IV below and complete the rest of Form 1040.
19
If line 15 or line 19 is more than zero, complete the worksheet on page D-9 of the instructions
to figure the amount to enter on lines 22, 29, and 40 below, and skip all other lines below.
Otherwise, go to line 20. 22
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17 of
Schedule D
If you are deducting investment interest
expense on Form 4952, enter the amount
from Form 4952, line 4e. Otherwise, enter -0-
21
Figure the tax on the amount on line 24. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
/H20854
If line 26 is greater than line 24, go to line 27. Otherwise, skip lines
27 through 33 and go to line 34.
29
29
Enter your qualified 5-year gain, if any, from
line 8 of the worksheet on page D-8
32 Subtract line 30 from line 28 32
33 Multiply line 32 by 10% (.10)
38
39
40
Add lines 25, 31, 33, and 37
Figure the tax on the amount on line 20. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains). Enter the smaller of line 38 or line 39 here
and on Form 1040, line 42
38
39
40
If the amounts on lines 23 and 28 are the same, skip lines 34 through 37 and go to line 38.
Page 118 Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 121 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
30,000
9,350
-0-
9,350
450
450
-0-
450
8,900
21,100
27,950
21,100
20,650
21,100
2,869
6,850
9,300
6,850
548
8,900
6,850
2,050
410
30,000
-0-
-0-
3,827
4,453
3,827
-0-
-0-
Schedule D Tax Worksheet—Line 40 Keep for Y our Records
Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-4.
1.
11.
4.
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 41
● The amount on line 1 or
● $46,700 if married filing jointly or
qualifying widow(er);
$27,950 if single;
$37,450 if head of household; or
$23,350 if married filing separately
/H20854
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17 of Schedule D2. 2.
3. If you are filing Form 4952, enter the amount from Form 4952, line
4e. Otherwise, enter -0-. Also enter this amount on Schedule D,
line 22 3.
Combine lines 7 and 15 of Schedule D. If zero or less, enter -0-5. 5.
6. Enter the smaller of line 5 above or Schedule D, line 15, but not
less than zero 6.
Add lines 6 and 78. 8.
7. Enter the amount from Schedule D, line 19 7.
9.9. Subtract line 8 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0-
10.10. Subtract line 9 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of:
12. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 12.
11.
13. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-13.
Enter the larger of line 12 or line 13 /H1707514. 14.
19.19. Multiply line 18 by 8% (.08)
If lines 11 and 12 are the same, skip lines 16 through 21 and go to line 22. Otherwise, go to line 16.
Subtract line 12 from line 11 /H1707516. 16.
17. Enter your qualified 5-year gain, if any , from line 8 of the worksheet
on page D-8. Also enter this amount on Schedule D,
line 29 17.
Enter the smaller of line 16 above or line 17 above18. 18.
21.21. Multiply line 20 by 10% (.10)
Subtract line 18 from line 1620. 20.
Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 922. 22.
23. Enter the amount from line 16 (if line 16 is blank, enter -0-)23.
Subtract line 23 from line 22 /H1707524. 24.
25.25. Multiply line 24 by 20% (.20)
If line 7 is zero or blank, skip lines 26 through 31 and go to line 32. Otherwise, go to line 26.
26. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 7 26.
27. Add lines 4 and 14 27.
28. Enter the amount from line 1 above 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 27. If zero or less, enter -0-29.
Subtract line 29 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- /H1707530. 30.
31.31. Multiply line 30 by 25% (.25)
If line 6 is zero, skip lines 32 through 34 and go to line 35. Otherwise, go to line 32.
Add lines 14, 16, 24, and 3032. 32.
Subtract line 32 from line 133. 33.
34.34. Multiply line 33 by 28% (.28)
35.35. Add lines 15, 19, 21, 25, 31, and 34
36.36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the T ax T able or T ax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
37.
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36. Also enter
this amount on Schedule D, line 40, and Form 1040, line 42
15. Figure the tax on the amount on line 14. Use the T ax T able or T ax Rate Schedules, whichever applies/H1707515.
Complete this worksheet only if line 15 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete Part IV of Schedule
D to figure your tax. Exception: Do not use Schedule D, Part IV , or this worksheet to figure your tax if line 16 or line 17 of
Schedule D or Form 1040, line 41, is zero or less; instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 42.
If lines 1 and 11 are the same, skip lines 22 through 34 and go to line 35. Otherwise, go to line 22.
Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 119

Page 122 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Four.
The three chapters in this part discuss three of the adjustments to income thatAdjustments to you can deduct in figuring your adjusted gross income. These chapters cover:
• Contributions you make to traditional individual retirement arrangementsIncome (IRAs) — chapter 18,
• Moving expenses you pay — chapter 19, and
• Alimony you pay — chapter 20.
Other adjustments to income are discussed in other parts of this publication
or in other publications and instructions. They are deductions for:
• Educator expenses—instruction for Form 1040 line 23, Form 1040A line
16,
• Interest paid on student loans —Publication 970,
• Tuition and fees deduction—Publication 970,
• Contributions to an Archer MSA— chapter 23,
• Self-employment tax — chapter 24,
• Self-employed health insurance — chapter 23,
• Payments to self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans — Publi-
cation 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business, 
• Penalty on early withdrawal of savings — chapter 8,
• Amortization of the costs of reforestation — chapter 9 of Publication 535,
Business Expenses,
• Contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18) pension plans
— Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income,
• Expenses from the rental of personal property — chapter 13,
• Expenses of fee-basis officials or certain performing artists — chapter 28,
• Certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment benefits
(sub-pay) — chapter 13, 
• Foreign housing deduction — chapter 4 of Publication 54, Tax Guide for
U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad,
• Jury duty pay given to your employer — chapter 13,
• Part of the cost of qualified clean-fuel vehicle property — chapter 12 of
Publication 535, Business Expenses, and
• Contributions by certain chaplains to Internal Revenue Code section
403(b) plans— Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information for
Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Page 120

Page 123 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
whom someone else claims a personal exemp- waive the 60-day requirement where it would be
tion. Also, your adjusted gross income (AGI) against equity or good conscience not to do so.
must be below a certain amount. For more information, see Time limit for mak-18. ing a rollover contribution under Rollovers.For more information, see chapter 38.
Increased Roth IRA contribution limit.IfRollovers of distributions from employer
contributions on your behalf are made only toplans. For distributions after 2001, you can roll
Individual Roth IRAs, your contribution limit for 2002 gen-over both the taxable and nontaxable part of a
erally is the lesser of:distribution from a qualified plan into a traditional
IRA. If you have both deductible and nondeduct-Retirement • $3,000 (up from $2,000), orible contributions in your IRA, you will have to
keep track of your basis so you will be able to• Your taxable compensation.
Arrangements determine the taxable amount once distributions
from the IRA begin. If you are 50 years of age or older in 2002 and
contributions on your behalf are made only toFor more information, see Can I Move Re-
(IRAs) Roth IRAs, your contribution limit for 2002 gen-tirement Plan Assets? under Traditional IRAs.
erally is the lesser of:
Kinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA.
• $3,500 (up from $2,000), orFor distributions after 2001, you can roll over,Important Changes for tax free, a distribution from your traditional IRA• Your taxable compensation.
into a qualified plan, including a deferred com-2002 pensation plan of a state or local governmentHowever, if your modified AGI is above a
(section 457 plan), and a tax-sheltered annuitycertain amount, your contribution limit may beIncreased traditional IRA contribution and(section 403(b) plan). The part of the distributionreduced. For more information, see How Muchdeduction limit.Unless you reached age 50that you can roll over is the part that wouldCan Be Contributed? under Roth IRAs.before 2003, the most that can be contributed tootherwise be taxable (includible in your income).your traditional IRA for 2002 is the smaller of the Contributions to both traditional and RothQualified plans may, but are not required to,following amounts: IRAs for same year.If contributions are madeaccept such rollovers. For more information, see
on your behalf to both a Roth IRA and a tradi-Rollovers under Can I Move Retirement Plan• Your compensation that you must include
tional IRA, your contribution limit for 2002 is theAssets.in income for the year, or
lesser of:
• $3,000 (up from $2,000). Rollovers of deferred compensation plans of
• $3,000 ($3,500 if you are 50 years of agestate and local governments (section 457
or older in 2002) (up from $2,000) minusIf you reached age 50 before 2003, the mostplans) into traditional IRAs.Before 2002,
all contributions (other than employer con-that can be contributed to your traditional IRA foryou could not roll over, tax free, an eligible rol-
tributions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA2002 is the smaller of the following amounts:lover distribution from a governmental deferred
plan) for the year to all IRAs other thancompensation plan into a traditional IRA.• Your compensation that you must include Roth IRAs, orBeginning with distributions after 2001, if youin income for the year, or
participate in an eligible deferred compensation• Your taxable compensation minus all con-• $3,500 (up from $2,000). plan of a state or local government, you may betributions (other than employer contribu-
able to roll over part or all of your account taxtions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan)For more information, see How Much Can Be free into an eligible retirement plan such as afor the year to all IRAs other than RothContributed? under Traditional IRAs. traditional IRA. The most that you can roll over isIRAs.
Besides being able to contribute a largerthe amount that qualifies as an eligible rolloverHowever, if your modified AGI is above a certainamount for 2002, you may be able to deduct adistribution. The rollover may be either direct oramount, your contribution limit may be reduced.larger amount. See How Much Can I Deduct? indirect. For more information, see How Much Can Beunder Traditional IRAs. For more information, see Kinds of rolloversContributed? under Roth IRAs.to a traditional IRA under Rollovers.Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri-
Change in exception to the age 591/2 rule.butions increased.For 2002, if you are cov-Participants born before 1936.If you were Generally, if you are under age 591/2, you mustered by a retirement plan at work, your born before 1936, you may be able to use capitalpay a 10% additional tax on the distribution ofdeduction for contributions to a traditional IRAgain and averaging treatment on certain any assets from your traditional IRA. However, ifwill be reduced (phased out) if your modifiedlump-sum distributions from qualified plans, butyou receive distributions as part of a series ofadjusted gross income (AGI) is between: you will lose the opportunity to use capital gainsubstantially equal payments over your life (oror averaging treatment on distributions from a• $54,000 and $64,000 for a married couple life expectancy), or over the lives (or the joint lifequalified plan if you roll over IRA contributions tofiling a joint return or a qualifying expectancies) of you and your beneficiary, youthat plan. You can retain such treatment if thewidow(er), do not have to pay this additional tax even if yourrollover is from a conduit IRA. For more informa-receive distributions before you reach age 591/2.• $34,000 and $44,000 for a single individ-tion on conduit IRAs, see IRA as a holding ac-If these payments are changed (for any reasonual or head of household, or count (conduit IRA) for rollovers to other eligibleother than death or disability) before the later ofplans under Rollover From Employer’s Plan Into• $–0– and $10,000 for a married individ- the date you reach age 591/2 or 5 years after thean IRA in chapter 1 of Publication 590.ual filing a separate return. first payment, you generally are subject to the
10% additional tax. You must pay the fullFor all filing statuses other than married filingNo rollovers of hardship distributions into
amount of the additional tax that would haveseparately, the upper and lower limits of theIRAs. For distributions made after 2001, no
been due if your payments had not been sub-phaseout range increased by $1,000. See How hardship distribution can be rolled over into an
stantially equal periodic payments. You mustMuch Can I Deduct? under Traditional IRAs. IRA. For more information about what can be
also pay interest. If your series of substantiallyrolled over, see Rollover From Employer’s Plan
Credit for IRA contributions.For tax years equal periodic payments began before 2003,Into an IRA under Can I Move Retirement Plan
beginning after 2001, if you are an eligible indi- you can change your method of figuring yourAssets.
vidual, you may be able to claim a credit for a payment to the required minimum distribution
percentage of your qualified retirement savingsHardship exception to the 60-day rollovermethod at any time without incurring the addi-
contributions, such as contributions to yourrule. Generally, a rollover is tax free only if you tional tax. For distributions beginning in 2002,
traditional or Roth IRA. To be eligible, you must make the rollover contribution by the 60th day and for any series of payments beginning after
be at least 18 years old as of the end of the year, after the day you receive the distribution. Begin- 2002, if you began receiving distributions using
and you cannot be a student or an individual for ning with distributions after 2001, the IRS may either the amortization method or the annuity
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 121

Page 124 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
factor method, you can make a one-time switch ees’ SEP-IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are part
of these plans, see Publication 590.to the required minimum distribution methodImportant Reminders
without incurring the additional tax. For more
information, see Age 591/2 Rule and its excep- Useful ItemsIRA interest.Although interest earned from
You may want to see:tions in chapter 1 of Publication 590. Rules foryour IRA is generally not taxed in the year
figuring your required minimum distribution areearned, it is not tax-exempt interest. Do not
Publicationexplained under Minimum Distributions in chap- report this interest on your tax return as tax-ex-
ter 1 of Publication 590. empt interest. ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)Form 8606. If you make nondeductible contri-
butions to a traditional IRA and you do not fileForm (and Instructions)Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs, with your tax
❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified PlansImportant Changes for return, you may have to pay a $50 penalty.
(including IRAs) and Other
Spousal IRAs. In the case of a married couple Tax-Favored Accounts2003
filing a joint return, up to $3,000 ($3,500 if 50 or
❏ 8606 Nondeductible IRAsolder) can be contributed to IRAs (other thanModified AGI limit for traditional IRAs.For SIMPLE IRAs) on behalf of each spouse, even if2003, if you are covered by a retirement plan atone spouse has little or no compensation. See
work, your deduction for contributions to a tradi-Spousal IRA limit under How Much Can Be
tional IRA will be reduced (phased out) if yourContributed? and under Can I contribute to aTraditional IRAsmodified adjusted gross income (AGI) is be-Roth IRA for my spouse? under  Roth IRAs,
later.tween: In this chapter the original IRA (sometimes
Employer contributions under a SEPcalled an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred to• $60,000 and $70,000 for a married couple plan are not counted when figuring theas a “traditional IRA.” Two advantages of a tradi-filing a joint return or a qualifying limits just discussed. SEP plans aretional IRA are:
CAUTION
!
widow(er), discussed in chapter 3 of Publication 590.
1) You may be able to deduct some or all of• $40,000 and $50,000 for a single individ-
your contributions to it, depending on yourual or head of household, or Spouse covered by employer plan. If you
circumstances, and,are not covered by an employer retirement plan• $–0– and $10,000 for a married individ-and you file a joint return, you may be able to2) Generally, amounts in your IRA, includingual filing a separate return. deduct all of your contributions to a traditionalearnings and gains, are not taxed until
For all filing statuses other than married filingIRA, even if your spouse is covered by a plan.they are distributed.
See How Much Can I Deduct? under Traditionalseparately, the upper and lower limits of the
IRAs.phaseout range increase by $6,000. For more
What Is a Traditional IRA?information, see How Much Can I Deduct? Distributions for higher education expenses.under Traditional IRAs. You can take distributions from your traditionalA traditional IRA is any IRA that is not a Roth IRAIRA or Roth IRA for qualified higher educationor a SIMPLE IRA.Deemed IRAs. For plan years beginning afterexpenses without having to pay the 10% addi-2002, a qualified employer plan (retirementtional tax on early distributions. For more infor-plan) can maintain a separate account or annu- Who Can Set Upmation, see Publication 590.ity under the plan (a deemed IRA) to receive a Traditional IRA?voluntary employee contributions. If the sepa-Distributions for first home.You can take
distributions of up to $10,000 from your tradi-rate account or annuity otherwise meets the You can set up and make contributions to ational or Roth IRA to buy, build, or rebuild a firstrequirements of an IRA, it will only be subject to traditional IRA if:home without having to pay the 10% additionalIRA rules. An employee’s account can be
tax on early distributions. For more information,1) You (or, if you file a joint return, yourtreated as a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA.see Publication 590. spouse) received taxable compensationFor this purpose, a “qualified employer plan” during the year, andRoth IRA. You cannot claim a deduction forincludes:
any contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you2) You were not age 701/2 by the end of the
• A qualified pension, profit-sharing, or stocksatisfy the requirements, all earnings are taxyear.
bonus plan (section 401(a) plan), free and neither your nondeductible contribu-
tions nor any earnings on them are taxable whenWhat is compensation? Compensation in-• A qualified employee annuity plan (sectionyou withdraw them. See Roth IRAs, later. cludes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,403(a) plan),
bonuses, and other amounts you receive for• A tax-sheltered annuity plan (section providing personal services. The IRS treats as
403(b) plan), and compensation any amount properly shown in
box 1 (Wages, tips, other compensation) ofIntroduction• A deferred compensation plan (section
Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement, provided457(b) plan) maintained by a state, a polit-An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is athat amount is reduced by any amount properlyical subdivision of a state, or an agency orpersonal savings plan that offers you tax advan-shown in box 11 (Nonqualified plans). Scholar-instrumentality of a state or political subdi-tages to set aside money for your retirement.ship and fellowship payments are compensationvision of a state. This chapter discusses: for this purpose only if shown in box 1 of Form
W–2. Compensation also includes commis-1) The rules for a traditional IRA (any IRASimplified rules for required minimum distri- sions and taxable alimony and separate mainte-that is not a Roth or SIMPLE IRA), andbutions. There are new rules for determining nance payments.
2) The Roth IRA, which features nondeduct-the amount of a required minimum distribution Self-employment income. If you areible contributions and tax-free distributions.for a year beginning after 2002. The new rules, self-employed (a sole proprietor or a partner),
including new life expectancy tables, have beenSimplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) and compensation is the net earnings from your
incorporated into Publication 590. See When Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employees trade or business (provided your personal serv-
Must I Withdraw IRA Assets? in chapter 1 of(SIMPLEs) are not discussed in this chapter. For ices are a material income-producing factor) re-
Publication 590. more information on these plans and employ- duced by the total of:
Page 122 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 125 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
General limit.The most that can be contrib- IRS, that the contribution is for the current year
1) The deduction for contributions made onuted to your traditional IRA is the smaller of the (the year the sponsor received it).
your behalf to retirement plans, and following amounts:
Filing before a contribution is made.You2) The deduction allowed for one-half of your1) Your compensation (defined earlier) thatcan file your return claiming a traditional IRAself-employment taxes. you must include in income for the year, orcontribution before the contribution is actually
Compensation includes earnings from made. However, the contribution must be made2) $3,000 ($3,500 if you are 50 or older).self-employment even if they are not subject to by the due date of your return, not including
self-employment tax because of your religious This is the most that can be contributed regard-extensions.
beliefs. See Publication 533, Self-Employment less of whether the contributions are to one or
Tax, for more information. more traditional IRAs or whether all or part of the Contributions not required.You do not have
contributions are nondeductible. (See Nonde- to contribute to your traditional IRA for every taxWhat is not compensation? Compensation ductible Contributions, later.) year, even if you can.does not include any of the following items.
Example 1. Betty, who is 34 years old and• Earnings and profits from property, such How Much Can I Deduct?single, earned $24,000 in 2002. Her IRA contri-as rental income, interest income, and div-
butions for 2002 are limited to $3,000.idend income. Generally, you can deduct the lesser of:
• Pension or annuity income. Example 2. John, a college student working• The contributions to your traditional IRA
part time, earned $1,500 in 2002. His IRA contri-for the year, or• Deferred compensation received (com-
butions for 2002 are limited to $1,500, thepensation payments postponed from a • The general limit (or the spousal IRA limit,amount of his compensation.past year). if it applies).
• Income from a partnership for which youSpousal IRA limit.If you file a joint return andHowever, if you or your spouse was covered bydo not provide services that are a materialyour taxable compensation is less than that ofan employer retirement plan, you may not beincome-producing factor. your spouse, the most that can be contributedable to deduct this amount. See Limit if Covered
for the year to your IRA is the smaller of theby Employer Plan, later.• Any amounts you exclude from income,
following amounts:such as foreign earned income and hous-
You may be eligible to claim a credit foring costs. 1) $3,000 ($3,500 if you are 50 or older), or contributions to your traditional IRA.
2) The total compensation includible in the For more information see chapter 38.
TIP
gross income of both you and your spouseWhen and How Can a
for the year, reduced by the following twoTraditional IRA Be Set Up? Trustees’ fees.Trustees’ administrative feesamounts.
that are billed separately and paid in connection
You can set up a traditional IRA at any time. with your traditional IRA are not deductible asa) Your spouse’s contribution for the yearHowever, the time for making contributions for IRA contributions. However, they may be de-to a traditional IRA.any year is limited. See When Can Contributions ductible as a miscellaneous itemized deductionb) Any contribution for the year to a RothBe Made, later. on Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 30.IRA on behalf of your spouse.You can set up different kinds of IRAs with a
variety of organizations. You can set up an IRA Brokers’ commissions. Brokers’ commis-This means that the total combined contribu-at a bank or other financial institution or with a sions are part of your IRA contribution and, astions that can be made for the year to your IRAmutual fund or life insurance company. You can such, are deductible subject to the limits.and your spouse’s IRA can be as much asalso set up an IRA through your stockbroker.
$6,000 ($6,500 if only one of you is 50 or older,Any IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code re- Full deduction.If neither you nor your spouse
or $7,000 if both of you are 50 or older).quirements. was covered for any part of the year by an
employer retirement plan, you can take a deduc-Kinds of traditional IRAs.Your traditional tion for total contributions to one or more tradi-When Can ContributionsIRA can be an individual retirement account or tional IRAs of up to the lesser of:annuity. It can be part of either a simplifiedBe Made?
employee pension (SEP) or an employer or em- 1) $3,000 ($3,500 if you are 50 or older), orployee association trust account. As soon as you set up your traditional IRA,
2) 100% of your compensation.contributions can be made to it through your
chosen sponsor (trustee or other administrator).This limit is reduced by any contributions madeHow Much Can Be Contributions to a traditional IRA must be in theto a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf.Contributed? form of money (cash, check, or money order).
Spousal IRA. In the case of a marriedProperty cannot be contributed.
There are limits and other rules that affect the couple with unequal compensation who file a
amount that can be contributed and the amountContributions must be made by due date. joint return, the deduction for contributions to the
you can deduct. These limits and other rules are Contributions can be made to your traditionaltraditional IRA of the spouse with less compen-
explained below. IRA for a year at any time during the year or by sation is limited to the lesser of:
the due date for filing your return for that year,Community property laws. Except as dis- 1) $3,000 ($3,500 if 50 or older), ornot including extensions. For most people, thiscussed later under Spousal IRA limit, each means that contributions for 2002 must be made2) The total compensation includible in thespouse figures his or her limit separately, usingby April 15, 2003. gross income of both spouses for the yearhis or her own compensation. This is the rule
reduced by the following two amounts.even in states with community property laws.Age 701/2 rule.Contributions cannot be made
to your traditional IRA for the year in which youa) The IRA deduction for the year of theBrokers’ commissions. Brokers’ commis- reach age 701/2 or for any later year. spouse with the greater compensation.sions paid in connection with your traditional IRA
are subject to the contribution limit. Designating year for which contribution is b) Any contributions for the year to a Roth
made. If an amount is contributed to your IRA on behalf of the spouse with moreTrustees’ fees.Trustees’ administrative fees
traditional IRA between January 1 and April 15,compensation.are not subject to the contribution limit.
you should tell the sponsor which year (the cur-
Contributions to your traditional IRAsrent year or the previous year) the contribution is This limit is reduced by any contributions to a
reduce the limit for contributions tofor. If you do not tell the sponsor which year it is 501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse with
Roth IRAs. (See Roth IRAs, later.)CAUTION
!
for, the sponsor can assume, and report to the less compensation.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 123

Page 126 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. If you were divorced or legally sepa- efit plans include pension plans and annuity
1) The plan you participate in is establishedrated (and did not remarry) before the end of the plans.
for its employees by:year, you cannot deduct any contributions to
No vested interest.If you accrue a benefit foryour spouse’s IRA. After a divorce or legal sepa- a) The United States,a plan year, you are covered by that plan even ifration, you can deduct only contributions to your
you have no vested interest in (legal right to) theown IRA and your deductions are subject to the b) A state or political subdivision of a
account or the accrual.rules for single individuals. state, or
Covered by an employer retirement plan.If c) An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)
you or your spouse was covered by an employer above.Situations in Which You Are Not
retirement plan at any time during the year forCoveredwhich contributions were made, your deduction 2) Your accrued retirement benefits at the be-
may be further limited. This is discussed later ginning of the year will not provide moreUnless you are covered under another employer
under Limit If Covered by Employer Plan. Limits than $1,800 per year at retirement.plan, you are not covered by an employer plan if
on the amount you can deduct do not affect theyou are in one of the situations described below.
amount that can be contributed. See Nonde-
Social security or railroad retirement.Cov-ductible Contributions, later. Limit if Covered by Employer Planerage under social security or railroad retire-
ment is not coverage under an employer If either you or your spouse was covered by anretirement plan.Are You Covered by an Employer employer retirement plan, you may be entitled to
Plan? only a partial (reduced) deduction or no deduc-Benefits from a previous employer’s plan.
tion at all, depending on your income and yourIf you receive retirement benefits from a previ-The Form W–2 you receive from your employer filing status.ous employer’s plan, you are not covered by thathas a box used to indicate whether you were
plan. Your deduction begins to decrease (phasecovered for the year. The “Retirement plan” box
out) when your income rises above a certainshould be checked if you were covered. Reservists. If the only reason you participateamount and is eliminated altogether when itReservists and volunteer firefighters shouldin a plan is because you are a member of areaches a higher amount. These amounts varyalso see Situations in Which You Are Not Cov-reserve unit of the armed forces, you may not bedepending on your filing status.ered, later. covered by the plan. You are not covered by theIf you are not certain whether you were cov- To determine if your deduction is subject toplan if both of the following conditions are met.ered by your employer’s retirement plan, you phaseout, you must determine your modified
should ask your employer. adjusted gross income (AGI) and your filing sta-1) The plan you participate in is established
tus. Then use Table 18–1 or 18–2  to determinefor its employees by:Federal judges.For purposes of the IRA de- if the phaseout applies.duction, federal judges are covered by an em-a) The United States,ployer retirement plan.
Social security recipients.Instead of usingb) A state or political subdivision of a
Table 18–1 or 18–2, use the worksheets instate, or
Appendix B of Publication 590 if, for the year, allFor Which Year(s) Are You c) An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)of the following apply.Covered? above.
• You received social security benefits.Special rules apply to determine the tax years2) You did not serve more than 90 days onfor which you are covered by an employer plan. • You received taxable compensation.active duty during the year (not countingThese rules differ depending on whether the duty for training). • Contributions were made to your tradi-plan is a defined contribution plan or a defined tional IRA.benefit plan. Volunteer firefighters.If the only reason you• You or your spouse was covered by anTax year. Your tax year is the annual account-participate in a plan is because you are a volun-employer retirement plan.ing period you use to keep records and reportteer firefighter, you may not be covered by the
income and expenses on your income tax re- Use those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc-plan. You are not covered by the plan if both of
turn. For most people, the tax year is the calen- tion, your nondeductible contribution, and thethe following conditions are met.
dar year.
Table 18–1. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if Covered byDefined contribution plan.Generally, you
Retirement Plan at Workare covered by a defined contribution plan for a
tax year if amounts are contributed or allocated If you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if
to your account for the plan year that ends with your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction.
or within that tax year.
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...A defined contribution plan is a plan that
provides for a separate account for each person less than $34,000 a full deduction.singlecovered by the plan. Types of defined contribu-
tion plans include profit-sharing plans, stock bo- at least $34,000 a partial deduction.ornus plans, and money purchase pension plans. but less than $44,000
head of householdDefined benefit plan.If you are eligible to $44,000 or more no deduction.
participate in your employer’s defined benefit
less than $54,000 a full deduction.married filing jointlyplan for the plan year that ends within your tax
year, you are covered by the plan. This rule at least $54,000 a partial deduction.orapplies even if you: but less than $64,000
• Declined to participate in the plan, qualifying widow(er) $64,000 or more no deduction.
• Did not make a required contribution, or less than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing
separately2• Did not perform the minimum service re- $10,000 or more no deduction.quired to accrue a benefit for the year.
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI).
2If you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this purposeA defined benefit plan is any plan that is not a(therefore, your IRA deduction is determined under the “Single” column).defined contribution plan. Types of defined ben-
Page 124 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 127 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This is your modified AGI.Table 18–2. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if NOT Covered by
Retirement Plan at Work Both contributions for 2002 and distribu-
tions in 2002.If all three of the following oc-If you are not covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine
curred, any IRA distributions you received inif your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction.
2002 may be partly tax free and partly taxable.
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...
1) You received distributions in 2002 fromsingle, any amount a full deduction. one or more traditional IRAs.head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) 2) You made contributions to a traditional IRA
for 2002.married filing jointly or any amount a full deduction.
separately with a spouse who is 3) Some of those contributions may be non-
not covered by a plan at work deductible contributions depending on
whether your IRA deduction for 2002 isless than $150,000 a full deduction.married filing jointly with a reduced.spouse who is covered by a plan at least $150,000 a partial deduction.at work If all three of the above occurred, you mustbut less than $160,000 figure the taxable part of the traditional IRA dis-
$160,000 or more no deduction. tribution before you can figure your modified
AGI. To do this, you can use Worksheet 1–3,less than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing separately with a Figuring the Taxable Part of Your IRA Distribu-spouse who is covered by a plan tion in Publication 590.$10,000 or more no deduction.at work2
If at least one of the above did not occur,
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). figure your modified AGI using Worksheet 18–12You are entitled to the full deduction if you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year.
in this chapter.
taxable portion, if any, of your social security whether you are filing Form 1040 or FormHow to figure your reduced IRA deduction.
benefits. 1040A. If you made contributions to your IRA forYou can figure your reduced IRA deduction for
2002 and received a distribution from your IRAeither Form 1040 or Form 1040A by using the
Deduction phaseout. If you were covered byin 2002, see Publication 590. worksheets in chapter 1 of Publication 590.an employer retirement plan and you did not Also, the instructions for Form 1040 and FormDo not assume that your modified AGIreceive any social security retirement benefits, 1040A include similar worksheets that you mayis the same as your compensation.your IRA deduction may be reduced or elimi- be able to use instead.Your modified AGI may include incomeCAUTION
!
nated depending on your filing status and modi-in addition to your compensation (discussedfied AGI as shown in Table 18–1. earlier), such as interest, dividends, and income
Reporting DeductibleFor 2003, if you are covered by a retire-from IRA distributions.
ment plan at work, your IRA deduction Contributions
will not be reduced (phased out) unlessForm 1040. If you file Form 1040, refigure
TIP
If you file Form 1040, enter your IRA deductionyour modified AGI is between: the amount on page 1 “adjusted gross income”
on line 24 of that form. If you file Form 1040A,line without taking into account any of the follow-• $40,000 and $50,000 for a single individ- enter your IRA deduction on line 17. You cannoting amounts.ual (or head of household), deduct IRA contributions on Form 1040EZ.
• $60,000 and $70,000 for a married couple• IRA deduction.
filing a joint return (or a qualifying Nondeductible• Student loan interest deduction.widow(er)), or
Contributions• Tuition and fees deduction.• $–0– (no increase) and $10,000 for a
married individual filing a separate return.• Foreign earned income exclusion. Although your deduction for IRA contributions
may be reduced or eliminated, contributions canFor all filing statuses other than married filing• Foreign housing exclusion or deduction.
be made to your IRA up to the general limitseparately, the upper and lower limits of the• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-($3,000 ($3,500 if 50 or older) or 100% of com-phaseout range will increase by $6,000. est shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of In-pensation, whichever is less) or the spousal IRA
terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savingslimit (if it applies). The difference between yourIf your spouse is covered.If you are not
Bonds Issued After 1989 (For Filers Withtotal permitted contributions and your IRA de-covered by an employer retirement plan, but
Qualified Higher Education Expenses).duction, if any, is your nondeductible contribu-your spouse is, and you did not receive any
tion.social security benefits, your IRA deduction may• Exclusion of employer-paid adoption ex-
be reduced or eliminated entirely depending onpenses shown on Form 8839, Qualified Example. Mike Jones is 28 years old andyour filing status and modified AGI as shown inAdoption Expenses. single. In 2002, he was covered by a retirementTable 18–2.
This is your modified AGI. plan at work. His salary was $52,312. His modi-
fied AGI was $55,000. Mike made a $3,000 IRAFiling status.Your filing status depends pri-Form 1040A. If you file Form 1040A,marily on your marital status. For this purpose, contribution for 2002. Because he was coveredrefigure the amount on page 1 “adjusted grossyou need to know if your filing status is single or by a retirement plan and his modified AGI wasincome” line without taking into account any ofhead of household, married filing jointly or quali- over $44,000, he cannot deduct his $3,000 IRAthe following amounts.fying widow(er), or married filing separately. If contribution. He must designate this contribution
you need more information on filing status, see as a nondeductible contribution, as explained• IRA deduction.chapter 2. next.
• Student loan interest deduction.Lived apart from spouse.If you did not live
Form 8606. To designate contributions as• Tuition and fees deduction.with your spouse at any time during the year and
nondeductible, you must file Form 8606.you file a separate return, your filing status, for• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-You do not have to designate a contributionthis purpose, is single. est shown on Form 8815. as nondeductible until you file your tax return.
When you file, you can even designate other-• Exclusion of employer-paid adoption ex-Modified adjusted gross income (AGI).How
wise deductible contributions as nondeductible.you figure your modified AGI depends on penses shown on Form 8839.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 125

Page 128 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information, see the discussion ofWorksheet 18–1. Figuring Your Modified AGI
inherited IRAs under Rollover From One IRAUse this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income forInto Another, later.traditional IRA purposes.
1. Enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) shown on line 21, Form Can I Move Retirement
1040A, or line 35, Form 1040 figured without taking into account
Plan Assets?line 17, Form 1040A, or line 24, Form 1040................. 1.
2. Enter any Student loan interest deduction from line 18, Form Traditional IRA rules permit you to transfer, tax
1040A, or line 25, Form 1040.......................... 2. free, assets (money or property) from other re-
tirement plans (including traditional IRAs) to a3. Enter any Tuition and fees deduction from line 19, Form 1040A,
traditional IRA. The rules permit the followingor line 26, Form 1040................................ 3.
kinds of transfers.
4. Enter any Foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from
• Transfers from one trustee to another.line 18, Form 2555–EZ, or line 43, Form 2555............... 4.
• Rollovers.5. Enter any Foreign housing deduction from line 48, Form 2555.... 5.
• Transfers incident to a divorce.6. Enter any Excluded qualified savings bond interest shown on
line 3, Schedule 1, Form 1040A, or line 3, Schedule B,
Form 1040 (from line 14, Form 8815)..................... 6. Transfers to Roth IRAs.Under certain condi-
tions, you can move assets from a traditional7. Enter any Exclusion of employer-paid adoption expenses shown
IRA to a Roth IRA. See Can I Move Amountson line 30, Form 8839............................... 7.
Into a Roth IRA? under Roth IRAs, later.8. Add lines 1 through 7. This is your Modified AGI for traditional
IRA purposes..................................... 8.
Trustee-to-Trustee Transfer
You must file Form 8606 to report nonde- a) Qualified employer plan, A transfer of funds in your traditional IRA from
ductible contributions even if you do not have to one trustee directly to another, either at yourb) Qualified employee annuity (sectionfile a tax return for the year. request or at the trustee’s request, is not a403(a) plan), rollover. Because there is no distribution to you,Failure to report nondeductible contribu- c) Tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b)the transfer is tax free. Because it is not a rol-tions. If you do not report nondeductible con- plan), lover, it is not affected by the 1-year waitingtributions, all of the contributions to your
period required between rollovers, discussedtraditional IRA will be treated as deductible. Alld) Deferred compensation plan of yourlater under Rollover From One IRA Into Another.distributions from your IRA will be taxed unlessstate or local government (section 457For information about direct transfers to IRAsyou can show, with satisfactory evidence, that plan), or from retirement plans other than IRAs, see Pub-nondeductible contributions were made.
lication 590.3) Treat yourself as the beneficiary ratherPenalty for overstatement.If you over-
than treating the IRA as your own.state the amount of nondeductible contributions
on your Form 8606 for any tax year, you mustYou will be considered to have chosen toRollovers
pay a penalty of $100 for each overstatement,treat it as your own if:
unless it was due to reasonable cause. Generally, a rollover is a tax-free distribution to
• Contributions (including rollover contribu-you of cash or other assets from one retirementPenalty for failure to file Form 8606.You tions) are made to the inherited IRA, orplan that you contribute (roll over) to anotherwill have to pay a $50 penalty if you do not file a retirement plan. The contribution to the secondrequired Form 8606, unless you can prove that• You do not take the required minimum dis-retirement plan is called a “rollover contribution.”the failure was due to reasonable cause. tribution for a year as a beneficiary of the
IRA. Note. The amount you roll over tax free isTax on earnings on nondeductible contribu-
generally taxable when the new plan distributesYou will only be considered to have chosen totions. As long as contributions are within the
that amount to you or your beneficiary.treat it as your own if:contribution limits, none of the earnings or gains
on those contributions (deductible or nonde-• You are the sole beneficiary of the IRA,Kinds of rollovers to a traditional IRA.Youductible) will be taxed until they are distributed. can roll over amounts from the following plans• You have an unlimited right to withdrawSee When Can I Withdraw or Use IRA Assets, into a traditional IRA:amounts from it, andlater.
1) A traditional IRA,• The distribution of the required minimumCost basis. You will have a cost basis in your
amount for the account for the calendar2) An employer’s qualified retirement plan forIRA if there are nondeductible contributions.
year of the decedent’s death has been its employees,Your cost basis is the sum of the nondeductible
made.contributions to your IRA minus any withdrawals 3) A deferred compensation plan of a state or
or distributions of nondeductible contributions. local government (section 457 plan), orHowever, if you receive a distribution from
4) A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403 plan).your deceased spouse’s IRA, you can roll thatInherited IRAs distribution over into your own IRA within the
60-day time limit, as long as the distribution isTreatment of rollovers.You cannot deduct aIf you inherit a traditional IRA, that IRA becomes rollover contribution, but you must report thenot a required distribution, even if you are notsubject to special rules. rollover distribution on your tax return as dis-the sole beneficiary of your deceased spouse’sIf you inherit a traditional IRA from your cussed later under Reporting rollovers fromIRA.spouse, you generally have the following IRAs and under Reporting rollovers from em-If you inherit a traditional IRA from anyonechoices. You can: ployer plans.other than your deceased spouse, you cannot
1) Treat it as your own by designating your-treat the inherited IRA as your own. This meansKinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA.self as the account owner. that contributions (including rollover contribu-You may be able to roll over, tax free, a distribu-
tions) cannot be made to the IRA and you can-2) Treat it as your own by rolling it over into tion from your traditional IRA into a qualified
not roll over any amounts out of the inheritedyour traditional IRA, or to the extent it is plan, including the federal Thrift Savings Fund, a
taxable, into a: IRA. deferred compensation plan of a state or local
Page 126 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 129 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
government (section 457 plan), and a tax-shel- 2) It was not initiated by either the custodial 3) Any of a series of substantially equal peri-
institution or the depositor. odic distributions paid at least once a yeartered annuity (section 403(b) plan). The part of
over:the distribution that you can roll over is the part3) It was made because:that would otherwise be taxable (includible in
a) Your lifetime or life expectancy,your income). Qualified plans may, but are nota) The custodial institution is insolvent,
required to, accept such rollovers. and b) The lifetimes or life expectancies of you
and your beneficiary, orb) The receiver is unable to find a buyerTime limit for making a rollover contribution. for the institution. c) A period of 10 years or more.You generally must make the rollover contribu-
tion by the 60th day after the day you receive the See Publication 575, Pension and Annuity In-distribution from your traditional IRA or yourPartial rollovers.If you withdraw assets fromcome, for additional exceptions.employer’s plan. a traditional IRA, you can roll over part of the
withdrawal tax free and keep the rest of it. TheThe IRS may waive the 60-day requirement Reporting rollovers from employer plans.
amount you keep will generally be taxable (ex-where the failure to do so would be against To report a rollover from an employer retirement
cept for the part that is a return of nondeductibleequity or good conscience, such as in the event plan to a traditional IRA, use lines 16a and 16b,
contributions) and may be subject to the 10%of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond Form 1040, or lines 12a and 12b, Form 1040A.
additional tax on early distributions, discussedyour reasonable control. Do not use lines 15a or 15b, Form 1040, or lines
later under What Acts Result in Penalties or11a or 11b, Form 1040A.Extension of rollover period.If an amount Additional Taxes.distributed to you from a traditional IRA or a
Required distributions.Amounts that mustqualified employer retirement plan is a frozen
More Information on Rolloversbe distributed during a particular year under thedeposit at any time during the 60-day period
required distribution rules (discussed later) areallowed for a rollover, special rules extend the For more information on rollovers, get Publica-not eligible for rollover treatment.rollover period. For more information, get Publi- tion 590.cation 590. Inherited IRAs.If you inherit a traditional IRA
from your spouse, you generally can roll it over,
Transfers Incident to Divorceor you can choose to make the inherited IRARollover From One IRA Into your own.
Another If an interest in a traditional IRA is transferred
Not inherited from spouse.If you inherit afrom your spouse or former spouse to you by a
You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of thetraditional IRA from someone other than yourdivorce or separate maintenance decree or a
assets from one traditional IRA if you reinvestspouse, you cannot roll it over or allow it towritten document related to such a decree, the
them within 60 days in the same or anotherreceive a rollover contribution. You must with-interest in the IRA, starting from the date of the
traditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, you draw the IRA assets within a certain period. Fortransfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer is
more information, see Publication 590.cannot deduct the amount that you reinvest in an tax free. For detailed information, see Publica-
IRA. tion 590.Reporting rollovers from IRAs.Report any
rollover from one traditional IRA to the same orWaiting period between rollovers.If you another traditional IRA on lines 15a and 15b,When Can I Withdraw ormake a tax-free rollover of any part of a distribu-Form 1040 or lines 11a and 11b, Form 1040A.tion from a traditional IRA, you cannot, within a Use IRA Assets?Enter the total amount of the distribution on1-year period, make a tax-free rollover of anyline 15a, Form 1040 or line 11a, Form 1040A. IfThere are rules limiting use of your IRA assetslater distribution from that same IRA. You alsothe total amount on line 15a, Form 1040 or lineand distributions from it. Violation of the rulescannot make a tax-free rollover of any amount11a, Form 1040A was rolled over, enter zero ongenerally results in additional taxes in the year ofdistributed, within the same 1-year period, fromline 15b, Form 1040 or line 11b, Form 1040A.violation. See What Acts Result in Penalties orthe IRA into which you made the tax-free rol-Otherwise, enter the taxable portion of the partAdditional Taxes.lover. that was not rolled over on line 15b, Form 1040
The 1-year period begins on the date youor line 11b, Form 1040A. Age 591/2 rule.Generally, if you are under agereceive the IRA distribution, not on the date you 591/2, you must pay a 10% additional tax on theroll it over into an IRA. distribution of any assets (money or other prop-Rollover From Employer’s Plan erty) from your traditional IRA. DistributionsExample. If you have two traditional IRAs,Into an IRA before you are age 591/2 are called early distribu-IRA-1 and IRA-2, and you make a tax-free rol- tions.lover of a distribution from IRA-1 into a newYou can roll over into a traditional IRA all or partThe 10% additional tax applies to the part oftraditional IRA (IRA-3), you can also make aof an eligible rollover distribution you receive the distribution that you have to include in grosstax-free rollover of a distribution from IRA-2 intofrom your (or your deceased spouse’s): income. It is in addition to any regular income taxIRA-3 (or into any other traditional IRA) within 1 on that amount.1) Employer’s qualified pension, profit-shar-year of the distribution from IRA-1. These can
ing or stock bonus plan,both be tax-free rollovers because you have not Exceptions. There are several exceptions
received more than one distribution from either to the age 591/2 rule. Even if you receive a2) Annuity plan,
IRA within 1 year. However, you cannot, within distribution before you are age 591/2, you may
3) Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b)the 1-year period, make a tax-free rollover of any not have to pay the 10% additional tax if you are
plan), ordistribution from IRA-3 into another traditional in one of the following situations.
IRA. 4) Governmental deferred compensation plan• You have unreimbursed medical expenses
(section 457 plan).Exception. There is an exception to the rule that are more than 7.5% of your adjusted
that amounts rolled over tax free into an IRA gross income.A qualified plan is one that meets the require-
cannot be rolled over tax free again within thements of the Internal Revenue Code. • The distributions are not more than the1-year period beginning on the date of the origi- cost of your medical insurance.Eligible rollover distribution.Generally,nal distribution. The exception applies to a distri-
an eligible rollover distribution is any distribution• You are disabled.bution which meets all three of the following
of all or part of the balance to your credit in arequirements. • You are the beneficiary of a deceased IRAqualified retirement plan except:
owner.1) It is made from a failed financial institution1) A required minimum distribution,by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora- • You are receiving distributions in the form
tion (FDIC) as receiver for the institution.2) Hardship distributions, or of an annuity.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 127

Page 130 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The distributions are not more than your tion qualifies as an exception to the age 591/2 Although a conversion of a traditional
rule, it will be subject to this tax. IRA is considered a rollover for Rothqualified higher education expenses.
IRA purposes, it is not an exception toCAUTION
!
• You use the distributions to buy, build, or the general rule for distributions from a tradi-When Must I Withdraw IRArebuild a first home. tional IRA. Conversion distributions are includi-
Assets? (Required ble in your gross income subject to these rules• The distribution is due to an IRS levy of
and the special rules for conversions explainedthe qualified plan. Distributions) in chapter 2 of Publication 590.Most of these exceptions are explained in Publi-
You cannot keep funds in your traditional IRAcation 590. As this publication was being preparedindefinitely. Eventually they must  be distributed.
for print, Congress was consideringIf there are no distributions, or if the distributions
legislation that would allow tax-freeNote. Distributions that are timely and prop- CAUTION
!
are not large enough, you may have to pay a
distributions from IRAs for charitable purposes.erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, are not50% excise tax on the amount not distributed as
For more information about this and other impor-subject to either regular income tax or the 10%required. See Excess Accumulations (Insuffi-
tant tax changes, see Publication 553, High-additional tax. Certain withdrawals of excesscient Distributions), later. The requirements for
lights of 2002 Tax Changes.contributions after the due date of your returndistributing IRA funds differ depending on
are also tax free and therefore not subject to thewhether you are the IRA owner or the benefi-
10% additional tax. (See Excess contributions Ordinary income. Distributions from tradi-ciary of a decedent’s IRA.
tional IRAs that you include in income are taxedwithdrawn after due date of return, later.) This
Required distributions not eligible for rol-as ordinary income.also applies to transfers incident to divorce, as
lover. Amounts that must be distributed (re-discussed earlier. No special treatment.In figuring your tax,quired distributions) during a particular year are
you cannot use the 10-year tax option or capitalnot eligible for rollover treatment.Contributions returned before the due date. gain treatment that applies to lump-sum distribu-If you made IRA contributions in 2002, you canIRA owners. If you are the owner of a tradi-tions from qualified employer plans.withdraw them tax free by the due date of yourtional IRA, you must start receiving distributionsreturn. If you have an extension of time to filefrom your IRA by April 1 of the year following theyour return, you can withdraw them tax free byyear in which you reach age 701/2. April 1 of theDistributions Fully or Partlythe extended due date. You can do this if, foryear following the year in which you reach ageTaxableeach contribution you withdraw, both of the fol-701/2 is referred to as the required beginninglowing conditions apply. date. Distributions from your traditional IRA may be
fully or partly taxable, depending on whether• You did not take a deduction for the contri-Distributions by the required beginning date.your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu-bution. You must receive at least a minimum amount fortions.• You also withdraw any interest or othereach year starting with the year you reach age
income earned on the contribution. You701/2 (your 701/2 year). If you do not (or did not)Fully taxable.If only deductible contributions
can take into account any loss on the con-receive that minimum amount in your 701/2 year, were made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, if
tribution while it was in the IRA when cal-then you must receive distributions for your 701/2 you have more than one), you have no basis in
culating the amount that must be year by April 1 of the next year. If an IRA owner your IRA. Because you have no basis in your
withdrawn. If there was a loss, the netdies after reaching age 701/2, but before April 1 of IRA, any distributions are fully taxable when
income earned on the contribution may be the next year, no minimum distribution is re- received. See Reporting taxable distributions on
quired because death occurred before the re-your return, later.a negative amount.
quired beginning date. Partly taxable.If you made nondeductible
Even if you begin receiving distribu-contributions to any of your traditional IRAs, youNote. If the trustee of your IRA is unable to tions before you attain age 701/2, you have a cost basis (investment in the contract)calculate the amount you must withdraw, get must begin calculating and receivingequal to the amount of those contributions.CAUTION
!
IRS Notice 2000–39 or section 1.408–4(c) ofrequired minimum distributions by your requiredThese nondeductible contributions are not taxedthe proposed regulations. These explain thebeginning date. when they are distributed to you. They are aIRS-approved methods of calculating the return of your investment in your IRA.amount you must withdraw. This proposed regu-Distributions after the required beginningOnly the part of the distribution that repre-lation is published in 2002–33 Internal Revenue date. The required minimum distribution forsents nondeductible contributions (your cost ba-Bulletin at page 383. This notice and proposedany year after your 701/2 year must be made bysis) is tax free. If nondeductible contributionsregulation can be found in many libraries andDecember 31 of that later year. have been made, distributions consist partly ofIRS offices. nondeductible contributions (basis) and partly ofBeneficiaries.If you are the beneficiary of aYou must include in income any earnings on deductible contributions, earnings, and gains (ifdecedent’s traditional IRA, the requirements forthe contributions you withdraw. Include the there are any). Until all of your basis has beendistributions from that IRA depend on whetherearnings in income for the year in which you distributed, each distribution is partly nontaxabledistributions that satisfy the minimum distribu-made the contributions, not in the year in which and partly taxable.tions requirement have begun.you withdraw them.
Form 8606. You must complete Form 8606Generally, except for any part of a with-More information. For more information, in-and attach it to your return if you receive adrawal that is a return of nondeductiblecluding how to figure your minimum requireddistribution from a traditional IRA and have evercontributions (basis), any withdrawal ofdistribution each year and how to figure yourCAUTION
!
made nondeductible contributions to any of youryour contributions after the due date (or ex-required distribution if you are a beneficiary of atraditional IRAs. Using the form, you will figuretended due date) of your return will be treated asdecedent’s IRA, see Publication 590. the nontaxable distributions for 2002 and youra taxable distribution. Another exception is the total IRA basis for 2002 and earlier years.return of an excess contribution as discussedAre Distributions Taxable?under What Acts Result in Penalties or Addi- Note. If you are required to file Form 8606,tional Taxes, later. In general, distributions from a traditional IRAbut you are not required to file an income tax
are taxable in the year you receive them.return, you still must file Form 8606. Send it toEarly distributions tax.The 10% addi- the IRS at the time and place you would other-tional tax on distributions made before youExceptions. Exceptions to this general rulewise file an income tax return.reach age 591/2 does not apply to these tax-freeare rollovers and tax-free withdrawals of contri-
withdrawals of your contributions. However, thebutions, discussed earlier, and the return of non-Distributions reported on Form 1099–R.If
distribution of interest or other income must bedeductible contributions, discussed later under you receive a distribution from your traditional
reported on Form 5329 and, unless the distribu-Distributions Fully or Partly Taxable. IRA, you will receive Form 1099–R, Distribu-
Page 128 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 131 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement orEffect on an IRA account.Generally, if you or tax. You must pay the 6% tax each year on
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-your beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans-excess amounts that remain in your traditional
tracts, etc., or a similar statement. IRA distribu- action in connection with your traditional IRAIRA at the end of your tax year. The tax cannot
tions are shown in boxes 1 and 2 of Form account at any time during the year, the accountbe more than 6% of the value of your IRA as of
1099–R. A number or letter code in box 7 tells stops being an IRA as of the first day of thatthe end of your tax year.
you what type of distribution you received from year.
Excess contributions withdrawn by due dateyour IRA. Effect on you or your beneficiary.If your of return.You will not have to pay the 6% tax ifWithholding. Federal income tax is withheldaccount stops being an IRA because you or youryou withdraw an excess contribution made dur-from distributions from traditional IRAs unlessbeneficiary engaged in a prohibited transaction,ing a tax year and you also withdraw interest oryou choose not to have tax withheld. See chap-the account is treated as distributing all its as-other income earned on the excess contribution.ter 5. sets to you at their fair market values on the firstYou must complete your withdrawal by the dateday of the year. If the total of those values isIRA distributions delivered outside the your tax return for that year is due, includingmore than your basis in the IRA, you will have aUnited States.In general, if you are a U.S. extensions.taxable gain that is includible in your income. Forcitizen or resident alien and your home address How to treat withdrawn contributions.Doinformation on figuring your gain and reporting itis outside the United States or its possessions, not include in your gross income an excessin income, see Are Distributions Taxable, ear-you cannot choose exemption from withholding contribution that you withdraw from your tradi-lier. The distribution may be subject to additionalon distributions from your traditional IRA. tional IRA before your tax return is due if bothtaxes or penalties.
Reporting taxable distributions on your re- the following conditions are met.Taxes on prohibited transactions.If some-turn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ-
one other than the owner or beneficiary of a1) No deduction was allowed for the excessing early distributions, on line 15b, Form 1040
traditional IRA engages in a prohibited transac-contribution.(no entry is required on line 15a), or line 11b,
tion, that person may be liable for certain taxes.Form 1040A. If only part of the distribution is 2) You withdraw the interest or other incomeIn general, there is a 15% tax on the amount oftaxable, enter the total amount on line 15a, Form earned on the excess contribution.the prohibited transaction and a 100% additional1040, or line 11a, Form 1040A, and the taxable
tax if the transaction is not corrected. You can take into account any loss on the contri-part on line 15b, Form 1040, or line 11b, Form
bution while it was in the IRA when calculating1040A. You cannot report distributions on FormMore information. For more information onthe amount that must be withdrawn. If there was1040EZ. prohibited transactions, get Publication 590.a loss, the net income earned on the contribution
may be a negative amount.What Acts Result in
Investment in Collectibles How to treat withdrawn interest or otherPenalties or Additional income. You must include in your gross in-
If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, theTaxes? come the interest or other income that was
amount invested is considered distributed to youearned on the excess contribution. Report it on
in the year invested. You may have to pay theThe tax advantages of using traditional IRAs for your return for the year in which the excess
10% additional tax on early distributions, dis-retirement savings can be offset by additional contribution was made. Your withdrawal of inter-cussed later.taxes and penalties if you do not follow the rules. est or other income may be subject to an addi-
For example, there are additions to the regular tional 10% tax on early distributions, discussedCollectibles.These include:tax for using your IRA funds in prohibited trans- later.
actions. There are also additional taxes for the• Art works,
following activities. Excess contributions withdrawn after due• Rugs,
date of return.In general, you must include all• Investing in collectibles. • Antiques, distributions (withdrawals) from your traditional
• Making excess contributions. IRA in your gross income. However, if the follow-• Metals,
ing conditions are met, you can withdraw excess• Taking early distributions. • Gems, contributions from your IRA and not include the
• Allowing excess amounts to accumulate amount withdrawn in your gross income.• Stamps,(failing to take required distributions).
• Coins, 1) Total contributions (other than rollover
There are penalties for overstating the contributions) for 2002 to your IRA were• Alcoholic beverages, andamount of nondeductible contributions and for not more than $3,000 ($3,500 if 50 or
failure to file a Form 8606, if required. • Certain other tangible personal property.older).
2) You did not take a deduction for the ex-Exception. Your IRA can invest in one, cess contribution being withdrawn.one-half, one-quarter, or one-tenth ounce U.S.Prohibited Transactions
gold coins, or one-ounce silver coins minted byThe withdrawal can take place at any time, even
Generally, a prohibited transaction is any im-the Treasury Department. It can also invest inafter the due date, including extensions, for filing
proper use of your traditional IRA by you, yourcertain platinum coins and certain gold, silver,your tax return for the year.
beneficiary, or any disqualified person. palladium, and platinum bullion.
Disqualified persons include your fiduciary
and members of your family (spouse, ancestor,
lineal descendent, and any spouse of a lineal
Excess Contributions Excess contribution deducted in an earlierdescendent). year. If you deducted an excess contribution inGenerally, an excess contribution is the amountThe following are examples of prohibited an earlier year for which the total contributionscontributed to your traditional IRA(s) for the yeartransactions with a traditional IRA. were $2,000 or less, you can still remove thethat is more than the smaller of: excess from your traditional IRA and not include• Borrowing money from it.
it in your gross income. To do this, file Form• Your taxable compensation for the year, or• Selling property to it. 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax• $3,000 ($3,500 if 50 or older). Return, for that year and do not deduct the• Receiving unreasonable compensation for
excess contribution on the amended return.managing it.
Generally, you can file an amended return withinTax on excess contributions.In general, if• Using it as security for a loan. 3 years after you filed your return, or 2 yearsthe excess contributions for a year are not with-
from the time the tax was paid, whichever is• Buying property for personal use (present drawn by the date your return for the year is due
later.or future) with IRA funds. (including extensions), you are subject to a 6%
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 129

Page 132 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Excess due to incorrect rollover information.regular income tax resulting from including the include your address on page 1 and your signa-
If an excess contribution in your traditional IRA is distribution in income. ture and date on page 2. Enclose, but do not
the result of a rollover and the excess occurred attach, a check or money order payable to the
Nondeductible contributions.The tax onbecause the information the plan was required United States Treasury for the tax you owe, as
early distributions does not apply to the part of ato give you was incorrect, you can withdraw the shown on Form 5329. Write your social security
distribution that represents a return of your non-excess contribution. The limits mentioned above number and “2002 Form 5329” on your check or
deductible contributions (basis).are increased by the amount of the excess that money order.
is due to the incorrect information. You will haveMore information. For more information onto amend your return for the year in which the Form 5329 not required.You do not have toearly distributions, see Publication 590.excess occurred to correct the reporting of the use Form 5329 if either of the following situa-
rollover amounts in that year. Do not include in tions exist.
your gross income the part of the excess contri-
Excess Accumulationsbution caused by the incorrect information. • Distribution code 1 (early distribution) is(Insufficient Distributions) correctly shown in box 7 of Form 1099–R.
If you do not owe any other additional taxYou cannot keep amounts in your traditional IRAEarly Distributions on a distribution, multiply the taxable partindefinitely. Generally, you must begin receivingof the early distribution by 10% and enterdistributions by April 1 of the year following theYou must include early distributions of taxable the result on line 58 of Form 1040. Writeyear in which you reach age 701/2 (your 701/2amounts from your traditional IRA in your gross “No” to the left of line 58 to indicate thatyear). The required minimum distribution for anyincome. Early distributions are also subject to an you do not have to file Form 5329. How-year after your 701/2 year must be made byadditional 10% tax. See the discussion of Form ever, if you owe this tax and also owe anyDecember 31 of that later year.5329 under Reporting Additional Taxes, later, to other additional tax on a distribution, do
figure and report the tax. not enter this 10% additional tax directlyTax on excess. If distributions are less than
on your Form 1040. You must file Formthe required minimum distribution for the year,
Early distributions defined.Early distribu- 5329 to report your additional taxes.you may have to pay a 50% excise tax for that
tions are amounts distributed from your tradi-year on the amount not distributed as required.• If you rolled over part of all of a distributiontional IRA account or annuity before you are age from a qualified retirement plan, the partRequest to excuse the tax.If the excess ac-591/2. rolled over is not subject to the tax oncumulation is due to reasonable error, and youExceptions. In certain situations, you may early distributions.have taken, or are taking, steps to remedy thenot have to pay the 10% additional tax even ifinsufficient distribution, you can request that theamounts are distributed from your IRA beforetax be excused.you are age 591/2. These situations are listedIf you believe you qualify for this relief, do thebelow. following.
Roth IRAs• You have unreimbursed medical expenses1) File Form 5329 with your Form 1040.that are more than 7.5% of your adjusted Regardless of your age, you may be able to2) Pay any tax you owe on excess accumula-gross income. establish and make nondeductible contributionstions. to a retirement plan called a Roth IRA.• The distributions are not more than the
3) Attach a letter of explanation.cost of your medical insurance.
Contributions not reported.You do not re-If the IRS approves your request, it will re-• You are disabled. port Roth IRA contributions on your return.fund the excess accumulations tax you paid.• You are the beneficiary of a deceased IRA
owner. Exemption from tax. If you are unable to What Is a Roth IRA?make required distributions because you have a• You are receiving distributions in the formtraditional IRA invested in a contract issued byA Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that,of an annuity. an insurance company that is in state insurerexcept as explained in this chapter, is subject to• The distributions are not more than yourdelinquency proceedings, the 50% excise taxthe rules that apply to a traditional IRA (definedqualified higher education expenses. does not apply if the conditions and require-below). It can be either an account or an annuity.ments of Revenue Procedure 92–10 are satis-• You use the distributions to buy, build, or Individual retirement accounts and annuities arefied.rebuild a first home. described in Publication 590.
To be a Roth IRA, the account or annuityMore information. For more information on• The distribution is due to an IRS levy of
must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is setexcess accumulations, see Publication 590.the qualified plan.
up. Neither a SEP-IRA nor a SIMPLE IRA canMost of these exceptions are explained in Publi- be designated as a Roth IRA.cation 590. Reporting Additional Taxes Unlike a traditional IRA, you cannot deduct
contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfyGenerally, you must use Form 5329 to report theNote. Distributions that are timely and prop- the requirements, qualified distributions (dis-tax on excess contributions, early distributions,erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, are not cussed later) are tax free. Contributions can beand excess accumulations.subject to either regular income tax or the 10% made to your Roth IRA after you reach age 701/2
additional tax. Certain withdrawals of excess and you can leave amounts in your Roth IRA asFiling Form 1040.If you file Form 1040, com-contributions are also tax free and not subject to long as you live.plete Form 5329 and attach it to your Formthe 10% additional tax (as explained earlier1040. Enter the total amount of IRA tax due onunder Excess contributions withdrawn by due Traditional IRA.A traditional IRA is any IRAline 58, Form 1040.date of return and Excess contributions with- that is not a Roth IRA or SIMPLE IRA.drawn after due date of return). This also appliesNote. If you have to file an individual incometo transfers incident to divorce, as discussedtax return and Form 5329, you must use FormWhen Can a Roth IRA Beunder Can I Move Retirement Plan Assets, ear- 1040.lier. Set Up?
Not filing Form 1040.If you do not have to file
Additional 10% tax. The additional tax on a Form 1040 but do have to pay one of the IRA You can set up a Roth IRA at any time. How-
early distributions is 10% of the amount of the taxes mentioned earlier, file the completed Form ever, the time for making contributions for any
early distribution that you must include in your 5329 with the IRS at the time and place you year is limited. See When Can I Make Contribu-
gross income. This tax is in addition to any would have filed your Form 1040. Be sure totions, later under Can I Contribute to a Roth IRA.
Page 130 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 133 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can use Worksheet 18–2 to figure your your limit would be if contributions were madeCan I Contribute to a Rothmodified AGI. only to Roth IRAs, but then reduced by all contri-
IRA? butions (other than employer contributions
under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to
Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA if all IRAs other than Roth IRAs.How Much Can Be Contributed?
you have taxable compensation (defined later) This means that your contribution limit is the
and your modified AGI (defined later) is lessThe contribution limit for Roth IRAs depends onlesser of:
than: whether contributions are made only to Roth
• $3,000 ($3,500 if you are 50 or older) mi-IRAs or to both traditional IRAs and Roth IRAs.• $160,000 for married filing jointly, or quali- nus all contributions (other than employer
fying widow(er), Roth IRAs only. If contributions are made contributions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA
only to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit gener- plan) for the year to all IRAs other than• $10,000 for married filing separately and
ally is the lesser of: Roth IRAs, oryou lived with your spouse at any time
during the year, and • $3,000 ($3,500 if you are 50 or older), or• Your taxable compensation minus all con-
tributions (other than employer contribu-• $110,000 for single, head of household, or• Your taxable compensation. tions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan)married filing separately and you did not
However, If your modified AGI is above a certainfor the year to all IRAs other than Rothlive with your spouse at any time during
amount, your contribution limit may be reduced,IRAs.the year.
as explained later under Contribution limit re-However, if your modified AGI is above a certainduced. amount, your contribution limit may be reduced,You may be eligible to claim a credit for
as explained later under Contribution limit re-contributions to your Roth IRA. ForRoth IRAs and traditional IRAs.If contribu-duced.more information, see chapter 38.
TIP
tions are made to both Roth IRAs and traditional
IRAs established for your benefit, your contribu- Simplified employee pensions (SEPs) are dis-
tion limit for Roth IRAs generally is the same as cussed in chapter 3 of Publication 590. SavingsIs there an age limit for contributions?Con-
tributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard-
Worksheet 18–2. Modified Adjusted Gross Income for Roth IRAless of your age.
Purposes
Can I contribute to a Roth IRA for my Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for
Roth IRA purposes.spouse? You can contribute to a Roth IRA for
your spouse provided the contributions satisfy
1. Enter your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line 35 orthe spousal IRA limit (discussed in How Much Form 1040A, line 21).............................. 1.Can Be Contributed? under Traditional IRAs)
and your modified AGI is less than: 2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRA
(other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA................... 2.• $160,000 for married filing jointly,
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1........................... 3.• $10,000 for married filing separately and
you lived with your spouse at any time 4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction (Form 1040, line 24 or
during the year, and Form 1040A, line 17).............................. 4.
• $110,000 for married filing separately and5. Enter any student loan interest deduction (Form 1040,
line 25 or Form 1040A, line 18)....................... 5.you did not live with your spouse at any
time during the year. 6. Enter any tuition and fees deduction (Form 1040, line 26 or
Form 1040A, line 19).............................. 6.
Compensation. Compensation includes 7. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusionwages, salaries, tips, professional fees, bo-(Form 2555, line 43 or Form 2555–EZ, line 18)............ 7.nuses, and other amounts received for providing
8. Enter any foreign housing deduction (Form 2555, line 48)...... 8.personal services. It also includes commissions,
self-employment income, and taxable alimony9. Enter any exclusion of bond interest (Form 8815, line 14)...... 9.and separate maintenance payments.
10. Enter any exclusion of employer-paid adoption expenses
(Form 8839, line 30)............................... 10.Modified AGI. Your modified AGI for Roth IRA
purposes is your adjusted gross income (AGI)11. Add the amounts on lines 3 through 10.................. 11.
as shown on your return modified as follows.
12. Enter:
• $160,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)1) Subtract any income resulting from the
• $10,000 if married filing separately and you lived with yourconversion of an IRA (other than a Roth
spouse at any time during the yearIRA) to a Roth IRA (conversion income).
• $110,000 for all others 12.
2) Add  the following deductions and exclu-
Next. Is the amount on line 11 more than the amount on linesions:
12?
Yes. See the Note below.a) Traditional IRA deduction,
No. The amount on line 11 is your modified adjusted grossb) Student loan interest deduction, income  for Roth IRA purposes.
c) Tuition and fees deduction, Note. If the amount on line 11 is more than the amount on line 12 and you have other
income or loss items, such as social security income or passive activity losses, that ared) Foreign earned income exclusion,
subject to AGI-based phaseouts, you can refigure your AGI solely for the purpose of
e) Foreign housing exclusion or deduc- figuring your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. Refigure your AGI without taking into
tion, account any income from conversions. (If you receive social security benefits, use
Worksheet 1 in Appendix B of Publication 590 to refigure your AGI.) Then go to list item 2)f) Exclusion of qualified savings bond in-above under Modified AGI or line 4 above in Worksheet 18–2 to refigure your modifiedterest shown on Form 8815, and AGI. If you do not have other income or loss items subject to AGI-based phaseouts, your
modified adjusted gross income for Roth IRA purposes is the amount on line 11.g) Exclusion of employer-paid adoption
expenses shown on Form 8839.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 131

Page 134 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
incentive match plans for employees (SIMPLEs)Table 18–3. Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution
are discussed in chapter 4 of Publication 590. This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by the
amount of your modified adjusted gross income (modified AGI).Contribution limit reduced.If your modified
AGI is above a certain amount, your contributionIF you have taxablelimit is gradually reduced. Use Table 18–3 to compensation and your AND your modifieddetermine if this reduction applies to you.filing status is... AGI is... THEN...
Figuring the reduction.If the amount you less than $150,000 you can contribute up to $3,000married filing jointly, orcan contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, see ($3,500 if age 50 or older).qualifying widow(er)Publication 590 for how to figure the reduction.
at least $150,000 the amount you can contribute is
but less than $160,000 reduced as explained under
Contribution limit reduced.When Can I Make Contributions?
$160,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.You can make contributions to a Roth IRA for a
year at any time during the year or by the due zero (-0-) you can contribute up to $3,000married filing separately
date of your return for that year (not including ($3,500 if age 50 or older).and you lived with your
extensions). spouse at any time duringmore than zero (-0-) the amount you can contribute isthe yearYou can make contributions for 2002 but less than $10,000 reduced as explained under
by the due date (not including exten- Contribution limit reduced.
sions) for filing your 2002 tax return.
TIP
$10,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.This means that most people can make contri-
butions for 2002 by April 15, 2003. less than $95,000 you can contribute up to $3,000single,
($3,500 if age 50 or older).head of household, or
married filing separatelyat least $95,000 the amount you can contribute isand you did not live withWhat If I Contribute Too Much? but less than $110,000 reduced as explained underyour spouse at any time Contribution limit reduced.during the yearA 6% excise tax applies to any excess contri-
bution to a Roth IRA. $110,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
Excess contributions.These are the contri-
butions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equalbutions made to one IRA as having been made withdrawal from the traditional IRA, both of thethe total of: following requirements are met.directly to a different IRA. You can roll amounts
over from one Roth IRA to another Roth IRA.1) Amounts contributed for the tax year to 1) Your modified AGI (explained earlier) isyour Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop- not more than $100,000.erly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRA
Conversions 2) You are not a married individual filing aor properly converted from a traditional
separate return.IRA, as described later) that are more thanYou can convert a traditional IRA or a SIMPLEyour contribution limit for the year, plusIRA to a Roth IRA. The conversion is treated as
Note. If you did not live with your spouse at2) Any excess contributions for the precedinga rollover, regardless of the conversion method
any time during the year and you file a separateyear, reduced by the total of: used. Most of the rules for rollovers, described
return, your filing status, for this purpose, isunder Rollover From One IRA Into Anothera) Any distributions out of your Roth IRAs single.under Traditional IRAs, earlier, apply to thesefor the year, plus rollovers. However, the 1-year waiting periodRequired distributions. Amounts that
does not apply.b) Your contribution limit for the year mi- must be distributed from your traditional IRA for
nus your contributions to all your IRAs a particular year (including the calendar year in
Conversion methods. You can convertfor the year. which you reach age 701/2) under the required
amounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA indistribution rules (discussed under Traditional
any of the following three ways. IRAs, earlier) cannot be converted.Withdrawal of excess contributions.For
purposes of determining excess contributions, Inherited IRAs.If you inherited a traditional1) Rollover. You can receive a distributionany contribution that is withdrawn on or before IRA from someone other than your spouse, youfrom a traditional IRA and roll it over (con-the due date (including extensions) for filing your cannot convert it to a Roth IRA.tribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 daystax return for the year is treated as an amountafter the distribution. Income. You must include in your gross in-not contributed. This treatment applies only if
come distributions from a traditional IRA that2) Trustee-to-trustee transfer. You can di-any earnings on the contributions are also with-
you would have to include in income if you hadrect the trustee of the traditional IRA todrawn and are reported as income earned and
not converted them into a Roth IRA. You do nottransfer an amount from the traditional IRAreceivable in the year the contribution was
include in gross income any part of a distributionto the trustee of the Roth IRA.made.
from a traditional IRA that is a return of your
3) Same trustee transfer. If the trustee ofbasis, as discussed earlier under TraditionalApplying excess contributions.If contribu-
the traditional IRA also maintains the RothIRAs.tions to your Roth IRA for a year were more than
IRA, you can direct the trustee to transferIf you must include any amount in your grossthe limit, you can apply the excess contribution
an amount from the traditional IRA to theincome, you may have to increase your with-in one year to a later year if the contributions for
Roth IRA. holding or make estimated tax payments. Seethat later year are less than the maximum al-
chapter 5.lowed for that year. Same trustee. Conversions made with the
same trustee can be made by redesignating theConverting from a SIMPLE IRA. Generally,Can I Move Amounts Into atraditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open-you can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRA
ing a new account or issuing a new contract.to a Roth IRA under the same rules explainedRoth IRA?
earlier under Converting from any traditional
Converting from any traditional IRA.YouYou may be able to convert amounts from either IRA.
can convert amounts from a traditional IRA intoa traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth  However, you cannot convert any amount
a Roth IRA if, for the tax year you make theIRA. You may be able to recharacterize contri- distributed from the SIMPLE IRA during the
Page 132 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 135 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2-year period beginning on the date you first tensions) for your tax return for the year during free into another Roth IRA. You may have to
participated in any SIMPLE IRA plan maintained include part of other distributions in your income.which the contribution was made, you can elect
by your employer. See Ordering rules for distributions, later.to treat the contribution as having been originally
made to the second IRA instead of to the firstMore information.For more detailed informa- What are qualified distributions?A qualifiedIRA. It will be treated as having been made totion on conversions, see Publication 590. distribution is any payment or distribution fromthe second IRA on the same date that it was
your Roth IRA that meets the following require-actually made to the first IRA.
ments.Rollover From a Roth IRA Required notifications.To recharacterize
a contribution, you must notify both the trustee of1) It is made after the 5-year period begin-You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of thethe first IRA (the one to which the contributionning with the first taxable year for which aassets from one Roth IRA if you contribute themwas actually made) and the trustee of the sec-contribution was made to a Roth IRA setwithin 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of theond IRA that you have elected to treat, for fed-up for your benefit, andrules for rollovers explained under Rollover eral tax purposes, the contribution as havingFrom One IRA Into Another under Traditional 2) The payment or distribution is:been made to the second IRA rather than theIRAs, earlier, apply to these rollovers. first. You must make the notifications by the datea) Made on or after the date you reach
of the transfer. Only one notification is required ifage 591/2,
both IRAs are maintained by the same trustee.Failed Conversions b) Made because you are disabled,The notification(s) must include all of the follow-
ing information. c) Made to a beneficiary or to your estateIf, when you converted amounts from a tradi-
after your death, ortional IRA or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth IRA, you• The type and amount of the contribution toexpected to have modified AGI of less than d) To pay certain qualified first-timethe first IRA that is to be recharacterized.$100,000 and a filing status other than married homebuyer amounts discussed in Pub-• The date on which the contribution wasfiling separately, but events changed these lication 590.facts, you have made a failed conversion. made to the first IRA and the year for
which it was made.Adverse consequences. If the converted
Additional tax on distributions of conversionamount (contribution) is not recharacterized (ex-• A direction to the trustee of the first IRA to
contributions within 5-year period.If, withinplained later), the contribution will be treated astransfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer the
the 5-year period starting with the year in whicha regular contribution to the Roth IRA and sub-amount of the contribution and any net
you made a conversion contribution of anject to the following tax consequences. income allocable to the contribution to the
amount from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA, youtrustee of the second IRA. If there was a1) A 6% excise tax per year will apply to any take a distribution from a Roth IRA of an amountloss while the contribution was in the firstexcess contribution not withdrawn from the attributable to the portion of the conversion con-IRA, the net income that must be trans-Roth IRA. tribution that you had to include in income, youferred may be a negative amount. generally must pay the 10% additional tax on2) The distributions from the traditional IRA• The name of the trustee of the first IRAearly distributions. (See Ordering rules for distri-must be included in your gross income. and the name of the trustee of the secondbutions, later, to determine the amount, if any, of
IRA.3) The 10% additional tax on early distribu- the distribution that is attributable to the conver-
tions may apply to any distribution. sion contribution.) The 5-year period is sepa-• Any additional information needed to rately determined for each conversionmake the transfer.How to avoid. You must move the amount contribution.
converted (including all earnings from the date
of conversion) into a traditional IRA by the due Additional tax on other early distributions.Note. If the trustee of your first IRA is unabledate (including extensions) for your tax return for The taxable part of other distributions from yourto calculate the amount of net income you mustthe year during which you made the conversion Roth IRA(s) that are not qualified distributions istransfer, get IRS Notice 2000–39 or sectionto the Roth IRA. You do not have to include this subject to the additional tax on early distribu-1.408A-5, A-2(c) of the proposed regulations.distribution (withdrawal) in income. See tions. See Publication 590 for more information.These explain the IRS-approved method of cal-Recharacterizations, next, for more information.culating the amount you must transfer. This pro-Ordering rules for distributions.If you re-
posed regulation is published in 2002–33 ceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that is
Internal Revenue Bulletin at page 383. not a qualified distribution, part of it may beRecharacterizations
taxable. There is a set order in which contribu-
Reporting a recharacterization.If you electYou may be able to treat a contribution made to tions (including conversion contributions) and
to recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as aone type of IRA as having been made to a earnings are considered to be distributed from
contribution to another IRA, you must report thedifferent type of IRA. This is called recharacter- your Roth IRA. Regular contributions are distrib-
izing the contribution. More detailed information recharacterization on your tax return as directeduted first. See Publication 590 for more informa-
is in Publication 590. by Form 8606 and its instructions. You musttion.
treat the contribution as having been made toNo deduction allowed. No deduction is al- Must I withdraw or use Roth IRA assets?the second IRA.lowed for the contribution to the first IRA and any You are not required to take distributions fromnet income transferred with the recharacterized your Roth IRA at any age. The minimum distri-contribution is treated as earned in the secondAre Distributions From Mybution rules that apply to traditional IRAs do notIRA. apply to Roth IRAs while the owner is alive.Roth IRA Taxable?
How to recharacterize a contribution.To However, after the death of a Roth IRA owner,
You do not include in your gross income quali-recharacterize a contribution, you generally certain of the minimum distribution rules that
fied distributions or distributions that are amust have the contribution transferred from the apply to traditional IRAs also apply to Roth IRAs.
return of your regular contributions from yourfirst IRA (the one to which it was made) to the
More information.For more detailed informa-Roth IRA(s). You also do not include distribu-second IRA in a trustee-to-trustee transfer. If the
tion on Roth IRAs, see Publication 590.tions from your Roth IRA that you roll over taxtransfer is made by the due date (including ex-
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 133

Page 136 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 8822 Change of Address such as a summer beach cottage. Your former
home means your home before you left for your
new job location. Your new home means your
19. home within the area of your new job location.
Who Can Deduct Distance TestMoving Moving Expenses Your move will meet the distance test if your new
main job location is at least 50 miles fartherYou can deduct your moving expenses if yourExpenses from your former home than your old main jobmove is closely related to the start of work. Youlocation was from your former home. For exam-also must meet the distance test and the timeple, if your old main job location was 3 milestest. These two tests are discussed later. Afterfrom your former home, your new main job loca-Important Change you have read the distance and time test rules,tion must be at least 53 miles from that formeryou may want to use Figure 19–B to help you home.decide if your move qualifies.Standard mileage rate.The standard mile- The distance between a job location andage rate for moving expenses has been in- your home is the shortest of the more commonlycreased to 13 cents a mile. See Travel by car Related to Start of Work traveled routes between them. The distance testunder Deductible Moving Expenses. considers only the location of your former home.
Your move must be closely related, both in timeIt does not take into account the location of your
and in place, to the start of work at your new jobnew home. See Figure 19–A.
location.
Important Reminder Example. You moved to a new home lessClosely related in time.You can generally than 50 miles from your former home becauseconsider moving expenses incurred within 1you changed main job locations. Your old mainChange of address. If you change your mail-year from the date you first reported to work atjob location was 3 miles from your former home.ing address, be sure to notify the IRS usingthe new location as closely related in time to theYour new main job location is 60 miles from thatForm 8822, Change of Address. Mail it to thestart of work. It is not necessary that you arrangehome. Because your new main job location is 57Internal Revenue Service Center for your oldto work before moving to a new location, as longmiles farther from your former home than theaddress. Addresses for the Service Centers areas you actually do go to work. distance from your former home to your old mainon the back of the form. If you do not move within 1 year of the datejob location, you meet the distance test.you begin work, you ordinarily cannot deduct the
expenses unless you can show that circum-First job or return to full-time work.If you go
stances existed that prevented the move withinto work full time for the first time, your place of
that time. work must be at least 50 miles from your formerIntroduction
home to meet the distance test.This chapter explains the deduction of certainExample. Your family moved more than a If you go back to full-time work after a sub-expenses of moving to a new home because year after you started work at a new location.stantial period of part-time work or unemploy-you changed job locations or started a new job.You delayed the move for 18 months to allowment, your place of work must also be at least 50This includes the following topics. your child to complete high school. You canmiles from your former home.
deduct your moving expenses.• Who can deduct moving expenses. Exception for Armed Forces. If you are in
Closely related in place.You can generally• What moving expenses are deductible. the Armed Forces and you moved because of a
consider your move closely related in place topermanent change of station, you do not have to• What moving expenses are not deductible.the start of work if the distance from your newmeet the distance test. See Members of the
home to the new job location is not more than• How to report moving expenses. Armed Forces, later.
the distance from your former home to the newMain job location.Your main job location isjob location. A move that does not meet thisYou may qualify for the moving expense de- usually the place where you spend most of yourrequirement may qualify if you can show that:duction whether you are self-employed or an working time. If there is no one place where youemployee. However, you must meet the require- spend most of your working time, your main job1) You are required to live at your new homements explained under Who Can Deduct Mov- location is the place where your work is cen-as a condition of your employment, oring Expenses. tered, such as where you report for work or are2) You will spend less time or money com-Moves to locations outside the United otherwise required to “base” your work.muting from your new home to your newStates. This chapter does not discuss moves Union members. If you work for several em-job location.outside the United States. If you are a United ployers on a short-term basis and you get workStates citizen or resident alien who moved under a union hall system (such as a construc-Retirees or survivors.You may be able tooutside the United States or its possessions tion or building trades worker), your main jobdeduct the expenses of moving to the Unitedbecause of your job or business, see Publication location is the union hall.States or its possessions even if the move is not521, Moving Expenses, for special rules thatrelated to the start of work at a new job location.apply to your move. More than one job.If you have more than oneYou must have worked outside the United job at any time, your main job location dependsStates or be a survivor of someone who did. Seeon the facts in each case. The more importantUseful Items Retirees or Survivors Who Move to the Unitedfactors to be considered are:You may want to see: States, later.
• The total time you spend at each place,Home defined. Your home means your mainPublication
• The amount of work you do at each place,home (residence). It can be a house, apartment,
❏ 521 Moving Expenses andcondominium, houseboat, house trailer, or simi-
lar dwelling. It does not include other homes• How much money you earn at each place.Form (and Instructions) owned or kept up by you or members of your
family. It also does not include a seasonal home,❏ 3903 Moving Expenses
Page 134 Chapter 19 Moving Expenses

Page 137 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 19–A. Illustration of Distance Test
Your new main job location is at
least 50 miles farther from your
former residence than your old
main job location was.
DISTANCE TEST IS MET
Your new main job location is
not at least 50 miles farther from
your former residence than your
old main job location was.
DISTANCE TEST IS NOT MET
New
main job
location
New
main job
location
Old
main job
location
Former
residence
58
miles38
miles
3
miles
Seasonal work. If your work is seasonal, location. For purposes of this test, the followingTime Test three rules apply.you are considered to be working full time during
the off-season only if your work contract orTo deduct your moving expenses, you also must 1) You count any full-time work you do eitheragreement covers an off-season period and thatmeet one of the following two time tests. as an employee or as a self-employed per-period is less than 6 months. For example, ason.1) The time test for employees. school teacher on a 12-month contract who
teaches on a full-time basis for more than 62) You do not have to work for the same2) The time test for self-employed persons.months is considered to have worked full timeemployer or be self-employed in the same
See Table 19–1 for a summary of these tests. trade or business for the 78 weeks.for the entire 12 months.
3) You must work within the same generalTime test for employees.If you are an em-
commuting area for all 78 weeks.Time test for self-employed persons.If youployee, you must work full time for at least 39
are self-employed, you must work full time for atweeks during the first 12 months after you If you were both an employee and self-em-least 39 weeks during the first 12 monthsarrive in the general area of your new job loca- ployed, see Table 19–1 for the requirements.AND for a total of at least 78 weeks during thetion. Full-time employment depends on what is
first 24 months after you arrive in your new jobusual for your type of work in your area.
For purposes of this test, the following four
rules apply. Table 19–1. Satisfying the Time Test for Employees
and Self-Employed Persons1) You count only your full-time work as an
employee, not any work you do as a
self-employed person.
IF you are... THEN you satisfy the time test by
meeting...2) You do not have to work for the same
employer for all 39 weeks.
An employee The 39–week test for employees.3) You do not have to work 39 weeks in a
row. Self-employed and an employee but The 78–week test for self-employed
4) You must work full time within the sameunable to satisfy the 39–week test for persons.
general commuting area for all 39 weeks.employees
Temporary absence from work. You are Both self-employed and an employee at The 78–week test for aconsidered to have worked full time during anythe same time self-employed person or theweek you are temporarily absent from work be- 39–week test for an employee basedcause of illness, strikes, lockouts, layoffs, natu- on your principal place of work.ral disasters, or similar causes. You are also
considered to have worked full time during any
Self-employed The 78–week test for self-employedweek you are absent from work for leave or
persons.vacation provided for in your work contract or
agreement.
Chapter 19 Moving Expenses Page 135

Page 138 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 19–B. Qualifying Moves Within the United States (Non-Military)
1
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
1
Military persons should see Members of the Armed Forces for special rules that apply to them.
Was your move closely related to a
new or changed job location?
2
Is your new main job location at
least 50 miles farther from your
FORMER HOME than your old
main job location was?
Are you an employee? Are you self-employed?
Did you or will you work full time as an
employee for at least 39 weeks in the
first 12 months after you arrived in the
new area?
3, 4
YOUR MOVE DOES QUALIFY.
You may be able to deduct your
moving expenses.
Did you or will you work full time as an
employee or a self-employed person
for at least 78 weeks in the first 24
months (which includes 39 weeks in
the first 12 months) after you arrived
in the new area?
YOUR
MOVE
DOES NOT
QUALIFY
/H17075
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
2
Your move must be closely related to the start of work at your new job location. See Related to Start of Work.
3
If you deduct expenses and do not meet this test later, you must either file an amended tax return or report your moving expens e deduction as other
income. See Time test not yet met.
4
If you become self-employed during the first 12 months, answer YES if your combined time as a full-time employee and self-emplo yed person equals or will
equal at least 78 weeks in the first 24 months (including 39 weeks in the first twelve months) after you arrived in the new are a.
Start Here
Self-employment. You are self-employed if moving expenses but do not meet the time test 3) You are the survivor of a person whose
you work as the sole owner of an unincorporated in 2003, or 2004, you must either: main job location at the time of death was
business or as a partner in a partnership carry- outside the United States. See Retirees or
ing on a business. You are not considered 1) Report your moving expense deduction as Survivors Who Move to the United States,
self-employed if you are semiretired, are a other income on your Form 1040 for the later.
part-time student, or work only a few hours each year you cannot meet the test, or4) Your job at the new location ends becauseweek. 2) Amend your 2002 return. of death or disability.
Full-time work.You can count only those Use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual 5) You are transferred for your employer’sweeks during which you work full time as a weekIncome Tax Return, to amend your return. benefit or laid off for a reason other thanof work. Whether you work full time during any willful misconduct. For this exception, youIf you do not deduct your moving expensesweek depends on what is usual for your type of must have obtained full-time employmenton your 2002 return and you later meet the timework in your area. and you must have expected to meet thetest, you can file an amended return for 2002 toFor more information, see Time test for test at the time you started the job.take the deduction.self-employed persons in Publication 521.
Joint return.If you are married and file a joint
Exceptions to the Time Testreturn and both you and your spouse work full Members of the Armed Forces
time, either of you can satisfy the full-time workYou do not have to meet the time test if one ofIf you are a member of the Armed Forces ontest. However, you cannot combine the weeksthe following applies. active duty and you move because of a perma-your spouse worked with the weeks you worked
nent change of station, you do not have to meetto satisfy that test. 1) You are in the Armed Forces and you the distance and time tests, discussed earlier.
moved because of a permanent change ofYou can deduct your unreimbursed moving ex-Time test not yet met.You can deduct your station. See Members of the Armed penses.moving expenses on your 2002 tax return even ifForces, later.you have not yet met the time test by the date A permanent change of station includes:
your 2002 return is due. You can do this if you 2) You moved to the United States because
expect to meet the 39-week test in 2003, or the you retired. See Retirees or Survivors Who • A move from your home to your first post
78-week test in 2003 or 2004. If you deduct Move to the United States, later. of active duty,
Page 136 Chapter 19 Moving Expenses

Page 139 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A move from one permanent post of duty time of death was outside the United States, you 2) The standard mileage rate of 13 cents a
to another, and can deduct moving expenses if the following fivemile.
requirements are met.• A move from your last post of duty to your Whether you use actual expenses or the stan-
home or to a nearer point in the United dard mileage rate to figure your expenses, you1) The move is to a home in the UnitedStates. The move must occur within 1 year can deduct parking fees and tolls you paid inStates.of ending your active duty or within the moving. You cannot deduct any part of general
2)  The move begins within 6 months afterperiod allowed under the Joint Travel Reg- repairs, general maintenance, insurance, or de-the decedent’s death. (When a move be-ulations. preciation for your car.gins is described later.)
3) The move is from the decedent’s formerMember of household. You can deduct mov-Spouse and dependents. If a member of the
home.Armed Forces dies, is imprisoned, or deserts, a ing expenses you pay for yourself and members
permanent change of station for the spouse or of your household. A member of your household4) The decedent’s former home was outsidedependent includes a move to: is anyone who has both your former and newthe United States. home as his or her home. It does not include a• The place of enlistment, 5) The decedent’s former home was also tenant or employee, unless that person is your
your home.• The member’s, spouse’s, or dependent’s dependent.
home of record, or
Location of move. There are different rules• A nearer point in the United States. When a move begins. A move begins when
for moving within or to the United States than forone of the following events occurs.
moving outside the United States. This chapterIf the military moves you and your spouse and
only discusses moves within or to the United1) You contract for your household goodsdependents to or from separate locations, the
and personal effects to be moved to your States. The rules for moves outside the Unitedmoves are treated as a single move to your new
home in the United States, but only if themain job location. States can be found in Publication 521.
move is completed within a reasonable
More information. For more information on time. Household Goods andmoving expenses for members of the Armed 2) Your household goods and personal ef-Forces, and instructions for completing Form Personal Effectsfects are packed and on the way to your3903, see Members of the Armed Forces in home in the United States. You can deduct the cost of packing, crating, andPublication 521.
transporting your household goods and per-3) You leave your former home to travel to
sonal effects and those of the members of youryour new home in the United States.
Retirees or Survivors Who Move to household from your former home to your new
home. If you use your own car to move yourthe United States
things, see Travel by car, earlier. You can in-
If you are a retiree who was working abroad or a clude the cost of storing and insuring household
survivor of a decedent who was working abroadDeductible Moving goods and personal effects within any period of
and you move to the United States or one of its 30 consecutive days after the day your things
possessions, you do not have to meet the time Expenses are moved from your former home and beforetest, discussed earlier. However, you must meet they are delivered to your new home.the requirements discussed below under Retir- If you meet the requirements discussed earlierYou can deduct any costs of connecting orees who were working abroad or Survivors of under Who Can Deduct Moving Expenses, you disconnecting utilities required because you aredecedents who were working abroad. can deduct the reasonable expenses of: moving your household goods, appliances, or
United States defined.For this section of personal effects.1) Moving your household goods and per-the chapter, the term “United States” includes You can deduct the cost of shipping your carsonal effects (including in-transit orthe possessions of the United States. and household pets to your new home.foreign-move storage expenses), and
You can deduct the cost of moving yourRetirees who were working abroad. You 2) Traveling (including lodging but not meals)household goods and personal effects from acan deduct moving expenses for a move to a to your new home. place other than your former home. Your deduc-new home in the United States when you perma-
tion is limited to the amount it would have cost tonently retire. However, both your former main You cannot deduct any expenses formove them from your former home.job location and your former home must have meals.
been outside the United States. You cannot deduct the cost of moving
CAUTION
!
furniture you buy on the way to yourPermanently retired.You are considered
new home.permanently retired when you cease gainful
CAUTION
!
Reasonable expenses. You can deduct onlyfull-time employment or self-employment. If, atthose expenses that are reasonable for the cir-the time you retire, you intend your retirement tocumstances of your move. For example, thebe permanent, you will be considered retired Travel Expensescost of traveling from your former home to yourthough you later return to work. Your intention tonew one should be by the shortest, most directYou can deduct the cost of transportation andretire permanently may be determined by: route available by conventional transportation.lodging for yourself and members of your house-
If, during your trip to your new home, you stop1) Your age and health, hold while traveling from your former home toover, or make side trips for sightseeing, theyour new home. This includes expenses for the2) The customary retirement age for peopleadditional expenses for your stopover or sideday you arrive.who do similar work, trips are not deductible as moving expenses.You can include any lodging expenses you3) Whether you receive retirement payments had in the area of your former home within oneTravel by car. If you use your car to takefrom a pension or retirement fund, and day after you could no longer live in your formeryourself, members of your household, or your4) The length of time before you return to home because your furniture had been moved.personal effects to your new home, you canfull-time work. You can deduct expenses for only one trip tofigure your expenses by deducting either:
your new home for yourself and members of
your household. However, all of you do not have1) Your actual expenses, such as gas andSurvivors of decedents who were working
to travel together or at the same time. If you useoil for your car, if you keep an accurateabroad. If you are the spouse or the depen-
your own car, see Travel by car, earlier.dent of a person whose main job location at the record of each expense, or
Chapter 19 Moving Expenses Page 137

Page 140 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sidered away from home on business. Gener- expenses. In 2001, you paid for moving your
ally, your work at a single location is consideredfurniture. You deducted these expenses inNondeductible temporary if it is realistically expected to last2001. In January 2002, you paid for travel to the
(and does in fact last) for 1 year or less. Seenew city. You can deduct these additional ex-Expenses Temporary Assignment or Job in chapter 28 forpenses in 2002.
information on deducting your expenses.You cannot deduct the following items as mov-
Reimbursed expenses. If you are reim-ing expenses.
bursed for your expenses, you may be able to• Any part of the purchase price of your new deduct your allowable expenses either in thehome. year you incurred them or in the year you paidHow To Report
them. If you use the cash method of accounting,• Car tags.
you can choose to deduct the expenses in theThe following discussions explain how to report• Driver’s license. year you are reimbursed even though you paidyour moving expenses and any reimbursements
• Expenses of buying or selling a home. the expenses in a different year.or allowances you received for your move.
If you are reimbursed for your expenses in a• Expenses of getting or breaking a lease.Form 3903. Use Form 3903 to report your year after you paid the expenses, you may want
• Home improvements to help sell your moving expenses. to delay taking the deduction until the year you
home. receive the reimbursement. If you do not chooseWhere to deduct. Deduct your moving ex- to delay your deduction until the year you are• Loss on the sale of your home. penses on line 28 of Form 1040. The amount ofreimbursed, you must include the reimburse-moving expenses you can deduct is shown on• Losses from disposing of memberships in ment in your income.line 5 of Form 3903.clubs.
Choosing when to deduct. If you use theYou cannot deduct moving expenses• Meal expenses. cash method of accounting, which is used byon Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A. most individuals, you can choose to deduct• Mortgage penalties. CAUTION
!
moving expenses in the year your employer• Pre-move househunting expenses. reimburses you if:
• Real estate taxes. Reimbursements. If you received a reim-
1) You paid the expenses in a year beforebursement for your moving expenses, how you• Refitting of carpets and draperies. the year of reimbursement, orreport this amount and your expenses depends
• Security deposits (including any given upon whether the reimbursement was paid to you2) You paid the expenses in the year immedi-due to the move). under an accountable plan or a nonaccountableately after the year of reimbursement but
plan. by the due date, including extensions, for• Storage charges except those incurred inFor more information on reimbursements, filing your return for the reimbursementtransit and for foreign moves. see Publication 521. year.• Temporary living expenses.
How to make the choice.You can chooseWhen To Deduct Expenses
to deduct moving expenses in the year you re-No double deduction. You cannot take a
ceived reimbursement by taking the deductionmoving expense deduction and a business ex-If you were not reimbursed, deduct your allowa-
on your return, or amended return, for that year.pense deduction for the same expenses. Youble moving expenses either in the year you in-
must decide if your expenses are deductible ascurred them or in the year you paid them. You cannot deduct any moving ex-moving expenses or as business expenses. For penses for which you received a reim-example, expenses you have for travel, meals,Example. In December 2001, your em- bursement that was not included inCAUTION
!
and lodging while temporarily working at a place ployer transferred you to another city in theyour income. (Reimbursements are discussedaway from your regular place of work may be United States, where you still work. You arein Publication 521.)deductible as business expenses if you are con- single and were not reimbursed for your moving
Page 138 Chapter 19 Moving Expenses

Page 141 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
itemize deductions, you can claim all of the realUseful Items
estate taxes and none of the home insurance.You may want to see:
Other payments to a third party.If you20. Publication made other third-party payments, see Publica-
tion 504 to see whether any part of the payments❏ 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals
qualifies as alimony.
Alimony
General Rules InstrumentsIntroduction
The following rules apply to alimony regardlessThis chapter discusses the rules that apply if you Executed After 1984of when the divorce or separation instrumentpay or receive alimony. It covers the following
was executed.topics: The following rules for alimony apply to pay-
ments under divorce or separation instruments• What payments are alimony, Payments not alimony. Not all payments executed after 1984.under a divorce or separation instrument are• What payments are not alimony, such asalimony. Alimony does not include any of theException for instruments executed beforechild support, following. 1985. There are two situations where the rules
• How to deduct alimony you paid, for instruments executed after 1984 apply to
1) Child support. instruments executed before 1985.• How to report alimony income you re-
2) Noncash property settlements.ceived, and 1) A divorce or separation instrument exe-
3) Payments that are your spouse’s part of cuted before 1985 and then modified after• Whether you must recapture the tax bene-
community income. (See Community 1984 to specify that the after-1984 rulesfits of alimony. Recapture means adding
Property in Publication 504.) will apply.back in your income all or part of a deduc-
tion you took in a prior year. 4) Payments to keep up the payer’s property.2) A temporary divorce or separation instru-
ment executed before 1985 and incorpo-5) Use of property.Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or rated into, or adopted by, a final decreeformer spouse under a divorce or separation executed after 1984 that:instrument. It does not include voluntary pay-Payments to a third party.Cash payments
ments that are not made under a divorce or a) Changes the amount or period of pay-(including checks and money orders) to a third
separation instrument. ment, orparty on behalf of your spouse under the terms
Alimony is deductible by the payer and mustof your divorce or separation instrument may beb) Adds or deletes any contingency orbe included in the spouse’s or former spouse’salimony if they otherwise qualify. These includecondition.income. Although this chapter is generally writ-payments for your spouse’s medical expenses,
ten for the payer of the alimony, the recipient canhousing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition,For the rules for alimony payments underuse the information to determine whether anetc. The payments are treated as received bypre-1985 instruments not meeting these excep-amount received is alimony. your spouse and then paid to the third party.tions, see Instruments Executed Before 1985 inTo be alimony, a payment must meet certain Publication 504.Life insurance premiums.Alimony includesrequirements. Different requirements apply to
premiums you must pay under your divorce orpayments under instruments executed after Example 1. In November 1984, you andseparation instrument for insurance on your life1984 and to payments under instruments exe- your former spouse executed a written separa-to the extent your spouse owns the policy.cuted before 1985. This chapter discusses the tion agreement. In February 1985, a decree ofrules for payments under instruments executed divorce was substituted for the written separa-Payments for jointly-owned home. If yourafter 1984. For the rules for payments under tion agreement. The decree of divorce did notdivorce or separation instrument states that youpre-1985 instruments, see Publication 504, Di- change the terms for the alimony you pay yourmust pay expenses for a home owned by youvorced or Separated Individuals. former spouse. The decree of divorce is treatedand your spouse or former spouse, some of yourUse Table 20–1 in this chapter as a guide to as executed before 1985. Alimony paymentspayments may be alimony.determine whether certain payments are con- under this decree are not subject to the rules forsidered alimony. Mortgage payments. If you must pay all thepayments under instruments executed after
mortgage payments (principal and interest) on a1984.Definitions.The following definitions applyjointly-owned home, and they otherwise qualify,
throughout this chapter. you can deduct one-half of the total payments asExample 2. Assume the same facts as in
alimony. If you itemize deductions and the homeSpouse or former spouse. Unless other- Example 1 except that the decree of divorce
is a qualified home, you can claim half of thewise stated in the following discussions about changed the amount of the alimony. In this ex-
interest in figuring your deductible interest. Youralimony, the term “spouse” includes former ample, the decree of divorce is not treated as
spouse must report one-half of the payments asspouse. executed before 1985. The alimony payments
alimony received. If your spouse itemizes de-are subject to the rules for payments under in-Divorce or separation instrument.The ductions and the home is a qualified home, he orstruments executed after 1984.term “divorce or separation instrument” means: she can claim one-half of the interest on the
Alimony requirements.A payment to or for amortgage in figuring deductible interest.1) A decree of divorce or separate mainte- spouse under a divorce or separation instrument
Taxes and insurance. If you must pay allnance or a written instrument incident to is alimony if the spouses do not file a joint return
the real estate taxes or insurance on a homethat decree, with each other and all the following require-
held as tenants in common, you can deduct ments are met. 2) A written separation agreement, or one-half of these payments as alimony. Your
3) A decree or any type of court order requir- spouse must report one-half of these payments1) The payment is in cash.
ing a spouse to make payments for the as alimony received. If you and your spouse2) The instrument does not designate thesupport or maintenance of the other itemize deductions, you can each claim one-halfpayment as not alimony.spouse. This includes a temporary decree, of the real estate taxes and none of the home
an interlocutory (not final) decree, and a insurance. 3) The spouses are not members of the
decree of alimony pendente lite (while If your home is held as tenants by the en- same household at the time the payments
awaiting action on the final decree ortirety or joint tenants, none of your payments are made. This requirement applies only if
agreement). for taxes or insurance are alimony. But if you the spouses are legally separated under a
Chapter 20 Alimony Page 139

Page 142 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your divorce decree states that the paymentsTable 20–1. Alimony Requirements (Instruments executed after 1984)
will end upon your former spouse’s death. You
must also pay your former spouse or your formerPayments ARE alimony if all of the Payments are NOT alimony if any of the spouse’s estate $20,000 in cash each year forfollowing are true: following are true: 10 years. The death of your spouse would not
Payments are required by a divorce or Payment is designated as child support. terminate these payments under state law.
separation instrument. The $10,000 annual payments are alimony.
But because the $20,000 annual payments willPayer and recipient spouse do not file a joint Payment is a noncash property settlement.not end upon your former spouse’s death, theyreturn.
are not alimony.
Payment is in cash (including checks or Payments are spouse’s part of community
Substitute payments. If you must makemoney orders). income.
any payments in cash or property after your
Payment is not designated in the instrument Payments are to keep up the payer’s spouse’s death as a substitute for continuing
as not alimony. property. otherwise qualifying payments, the otherwise
qualifying payments are not alimony. To theSpouses legally separated under a decree of Payments are not required by a divorce or
extent that your payments begin, accelerate, ordivorce or separate maintenance are not separation instrument.
increase because of the death of your spouse,members of the same household.
otherwise qualifying payments you made mayPayments are not required after death of the be treated as payments that were not alimony.recipient spouse. Whether or not such payments will be treated as
not alimony depends on all the facts and circum-Payment is not designated as child support.
stances.
These payments are deductible by the payer These payments are neither deductible by the
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, youand includible in income by the recipient. payer nor includible in income by the
must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually.recipient.
The payments will stop at the end of 6 years or
upon your former spouse’s death, if earlier.
Your former spouse has custody of your mi-decree of divorce or separate mainte- cludable from your spouse’s income. For this
nor children. The decree provides that if anynance. purpose, any instrument (written statement)
child is still a minor at your spouse’s death, yousigned by both of you that makes this designa-4) There is no liability to make any payment must pay $10,000 annually to a trust until thetion and that refers to a previous written separa-(in cash or property) after the death of the youngest child reaches the age of majority. Thetion agreement is treated as a written separationrecipient spouse. trust income and corpus (principal) are to beagreement. If you are subject to temporary sup-
used for your children’s benefit.5) The payment is not treated as child sup-port orders, the designation must be made in the
port. original or a later temporary support order.These facts indicate that the payments to be
Your spouse can exclude the payments frommade after your former spouse’s death are aEach of these requirements is discussed next.income only if he or she attaches a copy of thesubstitute for $10,000 of the $30,000 annual
instrument designating them as not alimony topayments. $10,000 of each of the $30,000 an-Payment must be in cash. Only cash pay-
his or her return. The copy must be attachednual payments is not alimony.ments, including checks and money orders,
each year the designation applies.qualify as alimony. The following do not qualify
Example 2. Under your divorce decree, youas alimony.
Spouses cannot be members of the same must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually.• Transfers of services or property (includ-household. Payments to your spouse whileThe payments will stop at the end of 15 years oring a debt instrument of a third party or anyou are members of the same household are notupon your former spouse’s death, if earlier. Theannuity contract). alimony if you are legally separated under adecree provides that if your former spouse dies
decree of divorce or separate maintenance. Abefore the end of the 15-year period, you must• Execution of a debt instrument by the
home you formerly shared is considered onepay the estate the difference between $450,000payer.
household, even if you physically separate your-($30,000 × 15) and the total amount paid up to• The use of property. selves in the home. that time. For example, if your spouse dies at the
You are not treated as members of the sameend of the tenth year, you must pay the estatePayments to a third party.Cash payments household if one of you is preparing to leave the$150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000).to a third party under the terms of your divorce orhousehold and does leave no later than 1 monthThese facts indicate that the lump-sum pay-separation instrument can qualify as a cash pay-after the date of the payment. ment to be made after your former spouse’sment to your spouse. See Payments to a third death is a substitute for the full amount of theException. If you are not legally separatedparty under General Rules, earlier. $30,000 annual payments. None of the annualunder a decree of divorce or separate mainte-Also, cash payments made to a third party at payments are alimony. The result would be thenance, a payment under a written separationthe written request of your spouse qualify as same if the payment required at death were toagreement, support decree, or other court orderalimony if all the following requirements are met. be discounted by an appropriate interest factormay qualify as alimony even if you are members
to account for the prepayment.1) The payments are in lieu of payments ofof the same household when the payment is
alimony directly to your spouse. made. Child support.A payment that is specifically
2) The written request states that both designated as child support or treated as specifi-Liability for payments after death of recipientspouses intend the payments to be treated cally designated as child support under yourspouse. If you must continue to make pay-as alimony. divorce or separation instrument is not alimony.ments for any period after your spouse’s death,
The designated amount or part may vary from3) You receive the written request from yournone of the payments made before or after the
time to time. Child support payments are neitherspouse before you file your return for thedeath are alimony.
deductible by the payer nor taxable to the payee.year you made the payments. The divorce or separation instrument does
not have to expressly state that the paymentsSpecifically designated as child support.
Payments designated as not alimony.You cease upon the death of your spouse if, forA payment will be treated as specifically desig-
and your spouse can designate that otherwiseexample, the liability for continued paymentsnated as child support to the extent that the
qualifying payments are not alimony. You do thiswould end under state law. payment is reduced either:
by including a provision in your divorce or sepa-
ration instrument that states the payments areExample. You must pay your former 1) On the happening of a contingency relat-
not deductible as alimony by you and are ex- spouse $10,000 in cash each year for 10 years. ing to your child, or
Page 140 Chapter 20 Alimony

Page 143 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) At a time that can be clearly associated must file Form 1040. You cannot use Form The reasons for a reduction or termination of
with the contingency. 1040A or Form 1040EZ. alimony payments that can require a recapture
Enter the amount of alimony you paid on line include:A payment may be treated as specifically desig-33a of Form 1040. In the space provided on linenated as child support even if other separate • A change in your divorce or separation33b, enter your spouse’s social security number.payments are specifically designated as child instrument,If you paid alimony to more than one person,support. • A failure to make timely payments,enter the social security number of one of the
Contingency relating to your child.A recipients. Show the social security number and• A reduction in your ability to provide sup-contingency relates to your child if it depends onamount paid to each other recipient on an at-port, orany event relating to that child. It does not mattertached statement. Enter your total payments on
• A reduction in your spouse’s supportwhether the event is certain or likely to occur.line 33a.
needs.Events relating to your child include the child’s:If you do not provide your spouse’s
• Becoming employed, social security number, you may have
When to apply the recapture rule.You areto pay a $50 penalty and your deduc-CAUTION
!
• Dying, subject to the recapture rule in the third year iftion may be disallowed.
• Leaving the household, the alimony you pay in the third year decreases
by more than $15,000 from the second year or• Leaving school, the alimony you pay in the second and third
• Marrying, or years decreases significantly from the alimony
How To Report you pay in the first year.• Reaching a specified age or income level. When you figure a decrease in alimony, do
Alimony Received not include the following amounts.Clearly associated with a contingency.
Payments are presumed to be reduced at a time 1) Payments made under a temporary sup-Report alimony you received on line 11 of Formclearly associated with the happening of a con- port order.1040. You cannot use Form 1040A or Formtingency relating to your child only in the follow-1040EZ. 2) Payments required over a period of ating situations.
least 3 calendar years of a fixed part ofYou must give the person who paid the
1) The payments are to be reduced not more your income from a business or property,alimony your social security number. If
than 6 months before or after the date the or from compensation for employment oryou do not, you may have to pay a $50CAUTION
!
child will reach 18, 21, or local age of ma- self-employment.penalty.
jority. 3) Payments that decrease because of the
2) The payments are to be reduced on two or death of either spouse or the remarriage of
more occasions that occur not more than 1 the spouse receiving the payments.
year before or after a different one of yourRecapture Rulechildren reaches a certain age from 18 to Figuring the recapture.For a blank work-
24. This certain age must be the same for sheet for you to use to figure recaptured ali-If your alimony payments decrease or terminateeach child, but need not be a whole num- mony, see Worksheet A in Publication 504.during the first 3 calendar years, you may beber of years. Including the recapture in income.If yousubject to the recapture rule. If you are subject to
In all other situations, reductions in payments must include a recapture amount in income,this rule, you have to include in income in the
are not treated as clearly associated with the show it on Form 1040, line 11 (“Alimony re-third year part of the alimony payments you
happening of a contingency relating to your ceived”). Cross out “received” and print “recap-previously deducted. Your spouse can deduct in
child. ture.” On the dotted line next to the amount,the third year part of the alimony payments he or
Either you or the IRS can overcome the pre- enter your spouse’s last name and social secur-she previously included in income.
sumption in the two situations above. This is ity number.The 3-year period starts with the first calen-
done by showing that the time at which thedar year you make a payment qualifying asDeducting the recapture.If you can deduct apayments are to be reduced was determinedalimony under a decree of divorce or separaterecapture amount, show it on Form 1040, lineindependently of any contingencies relating tomaintenance or a written separation agreement.33a (“Alimony paid”). Cross out “paid” and printyour children. For example, if you can show thatDo not include any time in which payments were“recapture.” In the space provided, enter yourthe period of alimony payments is customary inbeing made under temporary support orders.spouse’s social security number.the local jurisdiction, such as a period equal toThe second and third years are the next 2 calen-
one-half of the duration of the marriage, you candar years, whether or not payments are made
treat the amount as alimony. during those years.
How To Deduct
Alimony Paid
You can deduct alimony you paid, whether or
not you itemize deductions on your return. You
Chapter 20 Alimony Page 141

Page 144 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Five.
After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to subtractStandard the deductions used to figure taxable income. You can subtract either the
standard deduction or itemized deductions. Itemized deductions are deduc-Deduction and tions for certain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 1040). The ten
chapters in this part discuss the standard deduction, each itemized deduction,
Itemized and the limit on some of your itemized deductions if your adjusted gross
income exceeds certain amounts. See chapter 21 for the factors to consider
when deciding whether to subtract the standard deduction or itemized deduc-
Deductions
tions.
You benefit from the standard deduc-Higher Standard Deduction for Age
tion if your standard deduction is more(65 or Older)than the total of your allowable item-
TIP
21. ized deductions. If you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled
to a higher standard deduction if you are age 65
Persons not eligible for the standard or older at the end of the year. You are consid-
deduction. Your standard deduction is zero ered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday.
and you should itemize any deductions youTherefore, you can take a higher standard de-Standard
have if: duction for 2002 if your 65th birthday was on or
before January 1, 2003.1) You are married and filing a separate re-Deduction Use Table 21–2 to figure the standard de-turn, and your spouse itemizes deductions,
duction amount.2) You are filing a tax return for a short tax
year because of a change in your annual
Important Changes accounting period, or Higher Standard Deduction for
3) You are a nonresident or dual-status alienBlindnessIncrease in standard deduction.The stan- during the year. You are considered adard deduction for taxpayers who do not itemize If you are blind on the last day of the year anddual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-deductions on Schedule A of Form 1040 is you do not itemize deductions, you are entitleddent and resident alien during the year.higher in 2002 than it was in 2001. The amount to a higher standard deduction as shown inNote. If you are a nonresident alien whodepends on your filing status. 2002 Standard is married to a U.S. citizen or resident at theTable 21–2. You qualify for this benefit if you
Deduction Tables are shown at the end of this end of the year, you can choose to beare totally or partly blind.
chapter. treated as a U.S. resident. (See Publication
519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.) If you makeItemized deductions.The amount you can Partly blind.If you are partly blind, you mustthis choice, you can take the standard de-deduct for itemized deductions is limited if your get a certified statement from an eye doctor orduction. adjusted gross income is more than $137,300 registered optometrist that:
($68,650 if you are married filing separately). If an exemption for you can be claimed
See chapter 22 for more information. 1) You cannot see better than 20/200 in theon another person’s return (such as
better eye with glasses or contact lenses,your parents’ return), your standardCAUTION
!
ordeduction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-
tion for Dependents, later. 2) Your field of vision is not more than 20
degrees.Introduction
If your eye condition will never improve be-This chapter discusses:
yond these limits, the statement should include
• How to figure the amount of your standard this fact. You must keep the statement in yourStandard Deduction
deduction, records.
Amount If your vision can be corrected beyond these• The standard deduction for dependents,
limits only by contact lenses that you can wearand
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,• Who should itemize deductions. The standard deduction amount depends on you can take the higher standard deduction for
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older orblindness if you otherwise qualify.Most taxpayers have a choice of either takingblind, and whether an exemption can be claimeda standard deduction or itemizing their deduc-for you by another taxpayer. Generally, the stan-
tions. The standard deduction is a dollar amountdard deduction amounts are adjusted each yearSpouse 65 or Older or Blind
that reduces the amount of income on which youfor inflation. The standard deduction amounts
are taxed. You can take the higher standard deduction iffor most taxpayers for 2002 are shown in Table
your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:21–1.The standard deduction is a benefit that elim-
inates the need for many taxpayers to itemizeDecedent’s final return.The amount of the 1) You file a joint return, oractual deductions, such as medical expenses,standard deduction for a decedent’s final return
charitable contributions, and taxes, on Schedule 2) You file a separate return and can claimis the same as it would have been had the
A of Form 1040. The standard deduction is an exemption for your spouse becausedecedent continued to live. However, if the de-
higher for taxpayers who are 65 or older or blind. your spouse had no gross income and ancedent was not 65 or older at the time of death,
If you have a choice, you should use the method exemption for your spouse could not bethe higher standard deduction for age cannot be
that gives you the lower tax. claimed by another taxpayer.claimed.
Page 142 Chapter 21 Standard Deduction

Page 145 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot claim the higher standardreturn. He has interest income of $780 andSchedule A (Form 1040), line 28, for more infor-
deduction for an individual other thanwages of $150. He has no itemized deductions.mation on figuring the correct amount of your
yourself and your spouse. Michael uses Table 21–3 to find his standarditemized deductions.CAUTION
!
deduction. He enters $150 (his earned income)
When to itemize. You may benefit fromon line 1, $400 ($150 plus $250) on line 3, $750
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form(the larger of $400 and $750) on line 5, andExamples 1040) if you:$4,700 on line 6. The amount of his standard
deduction, on line 7a, is $750 (the smaller ofThe following examples illustrate how to deter- 1) Do not qualify for the standard deduction,$750 and $4,700).mine your standard deduction using Tables or the amount you can claim is limited,21–1 and 21–2 .
Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col-2) Had large uninsured medical and dental
lege student, is claimed on his parents’ 2002 taxExample 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are expenses during the year,
return. Joe is married and files a separate return.filing a joint return for 2002. Neither is blind. 3) Paid interest and taxes on your home,His wife does not itemize deductions on herThey decide not to itemize their deductions.
separate return.They use Table 21–1. Their standard deduction 4) Had large unreimbursed employee busi-
is $7,850. Joe has $1,500 in interest income and ness expenses or other miscellaneous de-
wages of $3,800. He has no itemized deduc- ductions,
Example 2. Assume the same facts as intions. Joe finds his standard deduction by using5) Had large uninsured casualty or theftExample 1, except that Larry is blind at the endTable 21–3. He enters his earned income, losses,of 2002. Larry and Donna use Table 21–2. Their $3,800, on line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 and
standard deduction is $8,750. 6) Made large contributions to qualified chari-enters $4,050 on line 3. On line 5 he enters
ties, or$4,050, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Since Joe isExample 3. Bill and Terry are filing a jointmarried filing a separate return, he enters7) Have total itemized deductions that arereturn for 2002. Both are over age 65. Neither is$3,925 on line 6. On line 7a he enters $3,925 asmore than the standard deduction to whichblind. If they do not itemize deductions, they usehis standard deduction because it is smalleryou otherwise are entitled.Table 21–2. Their standard deduction is than $4,050, the amount on line 5.$9,650. These deductions are explained in chapters
23–30.Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimed
If you decide to itemize your deductions,on her parents’ 2002 tax return. She is 18 years
complete Schedule A and attach it to your Formold and blind. She has interest income of $1,300
Standard Deduction 1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, lineand wages of $2,900. She has no itemized de-
28, on Form 1040, line 38.ductions. Amy uses Table 21–3 to find her stan-for Dependents dard deduction. She enters her wages of $2,900
Itemizing for state tax or other purposes.Ifon line 1. She adds lines 1 and 2 and entersThe standard deduction for an individual for you choose to itemize even though your item-$3,150 on line 3. On line 5 she enters $3,150,whom an exemption can be claimed on another ized deductions are less than the amount of yourthe larger of lines 3 and 4. Since she is single,person’s tax return is generally limited to theAmy enters $4,700 on line 6. She enters $3,150 standard deduction, write “IE” (itemized elected)greater of: on line 7a. This is the smaller of the amounts onnext to line 38 (Form 1040).
lines 5 and 6. Because she checked one box in1) $750, or
the top part of the worksheet, she enters $1,150Changing your mind. If you do not itemize2) The individual’s earned income for theon line 7b. She then adds the amounts on linesyour deductions and later find that you shouldyear plus $250 (but not more than the reg-7a and 7b and enters her standard deduction ofhave itemized — or if you itemize your deduc-ular standard deduction amount, generally$4,300 on line 7c. tions and later find you should not have — you$4,700). can change your return by filing Form 1040X,
However, if the individual is 65 or older or Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.
blind, the standard deduction may be higher. See Amended Returns and Claims for Refund in
If an exemption for you (or your spouse if you chapter 1 for more information on amended re-Who Should Itemizeare filing jointly) can be claimed on someone turns.
else’s return, use Table 21–3 to determine yourYou should itemize deductions if your total de-Married persons who filed separate re-standard deduction. ductions are more than the standard deductionturns. You can change methods of taking de-Earned income defined.Earned income is amount. Also, you should itemize if you do notductions only if you and your spouse both makesalaries, wages, tips, professional fees, andqualify for the standard deduction, as discussedthe same changes. Both of you must file a con-other amounts received as pay for work youearlier under Persons not eligible for the stan-sent to assessment for any additional tax eitheractually perform. dard deduction. one may owe as a result of the change.For purposes of the standard deduction, You should first figure your itemized deduc-You and your spouse can use the methodearned income also includes any part of ations and compare that amount to your standardthat gives you the lower total tax, even thoughscholarship or fellowship grant that you must deduction to make sure you are using the one of you may pay more tax than you wouldinclude in your gross income. See Scholarship method that gives you the greater benefit.have paid by using the other method. You bothand Fellowship Grants in chapter 13 for more
must use the same method of claiming deduc-You may be subject to a limit on someinformation on what qualifies as a scholarship or
tions. If one itemizes deductions, the otherof your itemized deductions if your ad-fellowship grant.
should itemize because he or she will not qualifyjusted gross income (AGI) is more thanCAUTION
!
for the standard deduction. (See Persons not$137,300 ($68,650 if you are married filing sep-Example 1. Michael is single. His parents
eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.)arately). See chapter 22 and the instructions forclaim an exemption for him on their 2002 tax
Chapter 21 Standard Deduction Page 143

Page 146 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 21–1. Standard Deduction Chart for Most
People*
IF your Filing Status is ...
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,700
7,850
3,925
6,900
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table 21–2 or 21–3 instead.
Table 21–2. Standard Deduction Chart for People
Age 65 or Older or Blind*
IF your
Filing Status is ...
THEN your
Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,850
7,000
8,750
9,650
10,550
11,450
4,825
5,725
6,625
7,525
8,050
9,200
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table 21–3 instead.
AND the Number
in the Box
Above is ...
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if
claiming spouse’s
exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table 21–3. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if
claiming spouse’s
exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
2. Additional amount 2.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,700
● Married filing separate return, enter
$3,925
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child, enter
$7,850
● Head of household, enter $6,900
7. Standard deduction.
7a.
Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,150 ($900 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2002.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$250
2002 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien,
you cannot take the standard deduction even if you were 65
or older or blind.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
4. Minimum amount 4. $750
Page 144 Chapter 21 Standard Deduction

Page 147 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the allowance of any itemized deduction. These• Taxes—line 9. other limits include charitable contribution limits
• Interest—lines 10, 11, and 12. (chapter 26), the limit on certain meals and en-22. tertainment (chapter 28), and the 2%-of-• Gifts to charity—line 18.
adjusted-gross-income limit on certain miscella-
• Job expenses and most other miscellane-neous deductions (chapter 30).
ous deductions—line 26.Limit on
• Other miscellaneous deductions—line 27,Itemized Deductions Worksheet.After youexcluding gambling and casualty or thefthave completed Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized losses. through line 27, you can use the Itemized De-
ductions Worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-Deductions tions for Schedule A to figure your limit. Enter
the result on line 28 of Schedule A. Keep the
worksheet for your records.Which ItemizedIntroduction You should compare the amount of
Deductions your standard deduction to the amountThis chapter discusses the overall limit on item-
of your itemized deductions after ap-ized deductions. The topics include:
TIP
Are Not Limited? plying the limit. Use the greater amount when• Who is subject to the limit, completing line 38 of your Form 1040. See chap-The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-• Which itemized deductions are limited, ter 21 for information on how to figure yourtions are not subject to the overall limit on item-and standard deduction.ized deductions. However, they are still subject
• How to figure the limit. to other applicable limits.
Example• Medical and dental expenses—line 4.
Useful Items • Investment interest expense—line 13. For tax year 2002, Bill and Terry Willow are filingYou may want to see: a joint return on Form 1040. Their adjusted• Casualty and theft losses from personal
gross income is $259,600. Their Schedule Ause property—line 19.Form (and Instructions)
itemized deductions are as follows:• Casualty and theft losses from❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized income-producing property—line 27.Deductions Taxes—line 9.............. $ 17,900
• Gambling losses—line 27.
Interest—lines 10, 11, and 12 . . . 45,000
Investment interest expense
—line 13 ................. 41,000Are You Subject How Do You Figure
Gifts to charity—line 18....... 21,000to the Limit? the Limit?
Job expenses—line 26........ 17,240You are subject to the limit on certain itemizedIf your itemized deductions are subject to thedeductions if your adjusted gross income (AGI) Total .................. $142,140limit, the total of all your itemized deductions isis more than $137,300 ($68,650 if you are mar-reduced by the smaller of:ried filing separately). Your AGI is the amount on
line 36 of your Form 1040. 1) 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-This limit does not apply to estates or trusts. The Willows’ investment interest expenseceeds $137,300 ($68,650 if married filing
deduction ($41,000 from line 13 of Schedule A)separately), or
is not subject to the overall limit on itemized2) 80% of your itemized deductions that aredeductions.affected by the limit. See Which ItemizedWhich Itemized The Willows use the Itemized DeductionsDeductions Are Limited, earlier.
Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions forBefore you figure the overall limit on itemizedDeductions Schedule A to figure their overall limit. Theirdeductions, you must first complete lines 1completed worksheet is shown as Table 22–1.through 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040), includ-Are Limited?
Of their $142,140 total itemized deductions,ing any appropriate forms (such as Form 2106,
the Willows can deduct only $138,471Form 4684, etc.).The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-
($142,140 − $3,669). They enter $138,471 ontions are subject to the overall limit on itemized The overall limit on itemized deductions is
Schedule A, line 28.deductions. figured after you have applied any other limit on
Chapter 22 Limit on Itemized Deductions Page 145

Page 148 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 22-1. Itemized Deductions Worksheet (Keep for Your Records)
1. Add the amounts on Schedule A, lines 4, 9, 14, 18, 19, 26, and 27
2. Add the amounts on Schedule A, lines 4, 13, and 19, plus any gambling and casualty or theft losses
included on line 27
3. Is the amount on line 2 less than the amount on line 1?
4. Multiply line 3 above by 80% (.80)
5. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 36
6. Enter: $137,300 if single, married filing jointly , head of household, or
qualifying widow(er); $68,650 if married filing separately
7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the amount on line 5?
8. Multiply line 7 above by 3% (.03)
9. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 8
10. Total itemized deductions. Subtract line 9 from line 1. Enter the result here and on Schedule A,
line 28
Be sure your total gambling and casualty or theft losses are clearly identified on the dotted
lines next to line 27.
1.
2.
3.
9.
10.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
No. Y our deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above on Schedule A,
line 28.
Ye s .Subtract line 2 from line 1
No. Y our deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1
above on Schedule A, line 28.
Ye s .Subtract line 6 from line 5
STOP
STOP
142,140
41,000
101,140
80,912
259,600
137,300
122,300
3,669
3,669
138,471
/H12011
/H12011
Page 146 Chapter 22 Limit on Itemized Deductions

Page 149 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Your adjusted gross income is
$20,000, 7.5% of which is $1,500. You paidWhat Is the Definitionmedical expenses of $800. You cannot deduct
23. any of your medical expenses because they areof Medical Care? not more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross in-
come.Medical care means amounts paid for the diag-
nosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or preventionSeparate returns.If you and your spouse liveMedical and of disease, and for treatments affecting any partin a noncommunity property state and file sepa-
or function of the body. The medical care ex-rate returns, each of you can include only the
penses must be primarily to alleviate or preventmedical expenses each actually paid. Any medi-Dental Expenses a physical or mental defect or illness. cal expenses paid out of a joint checking ac-
Medical care expenses include the premi-count in which you and your spouse have the
ums you pay for insurance that covers the ex-same interest are considered to have been paid
penses of medical care, and the amounts youequally by each of you, unless you can showImportant Changes
pay for transportation to get medical care. Medi-otherwise.
cal care expenses also include limited amountsStandard mileage rate.The standard mile- Community property states. If you andpaid for any qualified long-term care insuranceyour spouse live in a community property stateage rate allowed for out-of-pocket expenses forcontract. and file separate returns, any medical expensesyour car when you use your car for medical
paid out of community funds are divided equally.reasons is now 13 cents a mile. See Transporta-
Each of you should include half the expenses. Iftion under What Expenses Are Deductible. medical expenses are paid out of the separate
funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paidWhat Expenses CanSelf-employed health insurance deduction
the medical expenses can include them. If yourate increase.For 2002, the rate increased
live in a community property state, are married,You Include This Year?from 60% to 70%.
and file a separate return, see Publication 555,
Community Property.You can include only the medical and dentalObesity as a disease. The cost of partici-
expenses you paid this year, regardless of whenpation in a weight-loss program as a treatment
the services were provided. If you pay medicalfor the disease of obesity is an amount paid for
expenses by check, the day you mail or delivermedical care. However, the cost of purchasing
the check generally is the date of payment. IfWhose Medicalreduced-calorie diet foods is not a medical ex-you use a “pay-by-phone” or “on-line” account topense if these foods substitute for food youpay your medical expenses, the date reportedExpenseswould normally consume to satisfy your nutri-on the statement of the financial institutiontional requirements. showing when payment was made is the date ofCan You Include?payment. You can include medical expensesNew health insurance credit.There is a new you charge to your credit card in the year theYou can include medical expenses you pay forcredit for health insurance premiums paid bycharge is made. It does not matter when youyourself and for the individuals discussed in thiscertain workers who are displaced by foreignactually pay the amount charged. section.trade or who are receiving a pension from the
Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation. ForWhen do you include a decedent’s medical Spouse. You can include medical expenses
more information, see Health Insurance Creditexpenses? Medical expenses for a decedentyou paid for your spouse. To claim these ex-
in chapter 38. that are paid from his or her estate are treated as penses, you must have been married either at
paid at the time the medical services were pro-the time your spouse received the medical serv-
vided if they are paid within the 1-year periodices or at the time you paid the medical ex-
beginning with the day after the date of death.penses.
See Decedent under Whose Medical Expenses
Introduction Can You Include, later, for an exception. Example 1. Mary received medical treat-
ment before she married Bill. Bill paid for theMedical expenses paid before death by theThis chapter will help you determine:
treatment after they married. Bill can includedecedent are included in figuring any deduction
• The definition of medical care, these expenses in figuring his medical expensefor medical and dental expenses on the
deduction even if Bill and Mary file separatedecedent’s final income tax return. This includes• What expenses you can include this year, returns.expenses for the decedent’s spouse and depen-
• How much of the expenses you can de- If Mary had paid the expenses before shedents as well as for the decedent.
duct, and Bill married, Bill could not include Mary’s
expenses in his separate return. Mary would• Whose medical expenses you can include, include the amounts she paid during the year in
• What medical expenses are deductible, her separate return. If they filed a joint return, theHow Much of the medical expenses both paid during the year• How you treat reimbursements, and would be used to figure their medical expenseExpenses Can You• How to report the deduction on your tax deduction.
return. Deduct? Example 2. This year, John paid medical
expenses for his wife Louise, who died last year.You can deduct only the amount of your medicalUseful Items John married Belle this year and they file a jointand dental expenses that is more than 7.5% of return. Because John was married to LouiseYou may want to see: your adjusted gross income (line 35, Formwhen she incurred the medical expenses, he1040). can include those expenses in figuring his medi-Publication In this chapter, the term “7.5% limit” is usedcal deduction for this year.
to refer to 7.5% of your adjusted gross income.❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses
The phrase “subject to the 7.5% limit” is alsoDependent. You can include medical ex-
used. This phrase means that you must subtractpenses you paid for your dependent. To claimForm (and Instructions)
7.5% (.075) of your adjusted gross income fromthese expenses, the person must have been
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized your medical expenses to figure your medicalyour dependent either at the time the medical
Deductions expense deduction. services were provided or at the time you paid
Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 147

Page 150 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the expenses. A person generally qualifies as when he was your dependent. You can includeChild of divorced or separated parents.If
your dependent for purposes of the medical ex- the $800 in figuring your medical expense de-either parent can claim a child as a dependent
pense deduction if: duction for 2002. You cannot include thisunder the rules for divorced or separated par-
amount on your 2001 tax return. ents, each parent can include the medical ex-1) That person lived with you for the entire penses he or she pays for the child even if anAdopted child. You can include medical ex-year as a member of your household or is exemption for the child is claimed by the otherpenses that you paid for a child before adoption,related to you, parent.if the child qualified as your dependent when the2) That person was a U.S. citizen or resident,medical services were provided or when theor a resident of Canada or Mexico, for Support claimed under a multiple supportexpenses were paid. If you pay back an adop-some part of the calendar year in which agreement. A multiple support agreement istion agency or other persons for medical ex-your tax year began, and used when two or more people provide morepenses they paid under an agreement with you,
than half of a person’s support, but no one aloneyou are treated as having paid those expenses3) You provided over half of that person’s to-
provides more than half. If you are considered toprovided you clearly substantiate that the pay-tal support for the calendar year.
have provided more than half of a person’s sup-ment is directly attributable to the medical careYou can include the medical expenses ofof the child. But if you pay back medical ex-port under such an agreement, you can includeany person who is your dependent even if youpenses incurred and paid before adoption nego-medical expenses you pay for that person, evencannot claim an exemption for him or her ontiations began, you cannot include them asif you cannot claim the person as a dependent.your return. medical expenses. Any medical expenses paid by others who
joined you in the agreement cannot be includedExample. In 2001 your son was your de- You may be able to take a credit or
as medical expenses by anyone. However, youpendent. In 2002 he no longer qualified as your exclusion for other expenses related to
can include the entire unreimbursed amount youdependent. However, you paid $800 in 2002 for adoption. See Publication 968, Tax
TIP
paid for medical expenses.medical expenses your son incurred in 2001 Benefits for Adoption, for more information.
Table 23–1. Medical and Dental Expenses Checklist
You can include: You cannot include:
• Birth control pills prescribed• Oxygen equipment and • Archer MSAs (see Publication• Funeral, burial, or
by your doctor oxygen 969) cremation expenses
• Capital expenses for • Part of life-care fee paid to• Bottled water • Illegal operation or
equipment or retirement home designated treatment • Cost of nutritional
improvements to your for medical care supplements, vitamins, herbal• Life insurance or income
home needed for medical • Prescription medicines supplements, “natural protection policies, or
care (see Publication 502) (prescribed by a doctor) medicines,” etc., unless you policies providing payment
• Cost of certain fertility and insulin can only obtain them legally for loss of life, limb, sight,
enhancement procedures with a physician’s prescription etc.• Psychiatric care at a
(see Publication 502) specially equipped medical • Diaper service • Maternity clothes
• Cost and care of guide center (includes meals and • Expenses for your general • Medical insurance
dogs or other animals lodging) health (even if following your included in a car insurance
aiding the blind, deaf, and• Social Security tax, doctor’s advice) such as— policy covering all persons
disabled Medicare tax, FUTA, and —Health club dues injured in or by your car
• Cost of lead-based paint state employment tax for —Household help (even if • Medicine you buy without
removal (see Publication worker providing medical recommended by a doctor) a prescription
502) care (see Wages for —Social activities, such as• Nursing care for a healthy
nursing services, below) dancing or swimming lessons• Cost of vasectomy baby
—Trip for general health• Special items (artificial• Expenses of an organ • Surgery for purelyimprovementlimbs, false teeth,donor cosmetic reasons (see
eye-glasses, contact• Eye surgery—to promote Publication 502)
lenses, hearing aids,the correct function of the • Toothpaste, toiletries,crutches, wheelchair, etc.)eye cosmetics, etc.
• Special school or home for• Hospital services fees (lab
mentally or physicallywork, therapy, nursing
disabled persons (seeservices, surgery, etc.)
Publication 502)• Legal abortion
• Stop-smoking programs• Legal operation to prevent
• Transportation for neededhaving children
medical care• Long-term care contracts,
• Treatment at a drug orqualified (see Publication
alcohol center (includes502)
meals and lodging provided• Meals and lodging provided by the center)by a hospital during
• Wages for nursing servicesmedical treatment
(see Publication 502)• Medical and hospital
insurance premiums
• Medical services fees (from
doctors, dentists, surgeons,
specialists, and other
medical practitioners)
Page 148 Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 151 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You and your three brothers each• Replacement of lost or damaged contact 2) Payable for at least 10 years, or until you
lenses, reach age 65 (but not for less than 5provide one-fourth of your mother’s total sup-
years).port. Under a multiple support agreement, you• Membership in an association that givesclaim your mother as a dependent. You paid allcooperative or so-called “free-choice”of her medical expenses. Your brothers repaid Unused sick leave used to pay premiums.medical service, or group hospitalizationyou for three-fourths of these expenses. In figur- You must include in gross income cash pay-and clinical care, oring your medical expense deduction, you can ments you receive at the time of retirement for
• Qualified long-term care insurance con-include only one-fourth of your mother’s medical unused sick leave. You must also include in
tracts (subject to additional limitations).expenses. Your brothers cannot include any gross income the value of unused sick leave
See Qualified Long-term Care Insurancepart of the expenses. However, if you and your that, at your option, your employer applies to the
Contracts in Publication 502.brothers share the nonmedical support items cost of your continuing participation in your
and you separately pay all of your mother’s employer’s health plan after you retire. You can
If you have a policy that provides more thanmedical expenses, you can include the amount include this cost of continuing participation in the
one kind of payment, you can include the premi-you paid for her medical expenses in your medi- health plan as a medical expense.
ums for the medical care part of the policy if thecal expenses. If you participate in a health plan where your
charge for the medical part is reasonable. Theemployer automatically applies the value of un-
cost of the medical part must be separatelyused sick leave to the cost of your continuingDecedent stated in the insurance contract or given to youparticipation in the health plan (and you do not
in a separate statement. have the option to receive cash), do not includeThe survivor or personal representative of a the value of the unused sick leave in grossdecedent can choose to treat certain expensesEmployer-sponsored health insurance plan.income. You cannot include this cost of continu-paid by the decedent’s estate for the decedent’sDo not include in your medical and dental ex-ing participation in that health plan as a medicalmedical care as paid by the decedent at the timepenses on Schedule A (Form 1040) any insur-expense.the medical services were provided. The ex-ance premiums paid by an employer-sponsored
penses must be paid within the 1-year periodhealth insurance plan unless the premiums are
beginning with the day after the date of death. Ifincluded in box 1 of your Form W–2. Also, doHealth Insurance Costs foryou are the survivor or personal representativenot include on Schedule A (Form 1040) any
Self-Employed Personsmaking this choice, you must attach a statementother medical and dental expenses paid by the
to the decedent’s Form 1040 (or the decedent’splan unless the amount paid is included in box 1If you were self-employed and had a net profitamended return, Form 1040X) saying that theof your Form W–2. for the year, you may be able to deduct, as anexpenses have not been and will not be claimed adjustment to income, up to 70% of the amountExample. You are a federal employee par-on the estate tax return. paid for health insurance on behalf of yourself,ticipating in the Federal Employee Health Bene-Qualified medical expenses paid your spouse, and dependents. If you itemizefits (FEHB) program. Your share of the FEHBbefore death by the decedent are not your deductions, include the remaining premi-premium is paid with pre-tax dollars. Becausedeductible if paid with a tax-free distri- ums with all other medical care expenses onCAUTION
!
you are an employee whose insurance premi-bution from any Medicare+Choice MSA or Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to the 7.5%ums are paid with money that is never includedArcher MSA. limit. See chapter 7 of Publication 535, Businessin your gross income, you cannot deduct theExpenses, for more information.premiums paid with that money.Amended returns and claims for refund are
discussed in chapter 1. Flexible spending arrangement. Contri- Meals and Lodgingbutions made by your employer to provide cov-What if you pay medical expenses of a de-erage for qualified long-term care servicesYou can include in medical expenses the cost ofceased spouse or dependent? If you paid under a flexible spending or similar arrangementmeals and lodging at a hospital or similar institu-medical expenses for your deceased spouse ormust be included in your income. This amounttion if your main reason for being there is todependent, include them as medical expenseswill be reported as wages in box 1 of your Formreceive medical care. See Nursing home, later.on your Form 1040 in the year paid, whetherW–2. You may be able to include in medical ex-they are paid before or after the decedent’s
penses the cost of lodging not provided in aMedicare A. If you are covered under socialdeath. The expenses can be included if the hospital or similar institution. You can includesecurity (or if you are a government employeeperson was your spouse or dependent either at the cost of such lodging while away from home ifwho paid Medicare tax), you are enrolled inthe time the medical services were provided or you meet all of the following requirements.Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare Aat the time you paid the expenses.
is not a medical expense. If you are not covered1) The lodging is primarily for and essential tounder social security (or were not a governmentmedical care.employee who paid Medicare tax), you can vol-
2) The medical care is provided by a doctoruntarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation theWhat Medical in a licensed hospital or in a medical carepremiums paid for Medicare A can be included
facility related to, or the equivalent of, aas a medical expense on your tax return.Expenses Are licensed hospital.
Medicare B. Medicare B is a supplemental
3) The lodging is not lavish or extravagantDeductible? medical insurance. Premiums you pay for Medi-
under the circumstances.care B are a medical expense. If you applied for
Use Table 23–1 in this chapter as a guide toit at age 65 or after you became disabled, you4) There is no significant element of personal
determine which medical and dental expensescan deduct the monthly premiums you paid. Ifpleasure, recreation, or vacation in the
you can include on Schedule A (Form 1040).you were over age 65 or disabled when you firsttravel away from home.
See Publication 502 for information about otherenrolled, check the information you received
The amount you include in medical expenses forexpenses you can include. from the Social Security Administration to find
lodging cannot be more than $50 for each nightout your premium.
for each person. You can include lodging for a
Insurance Premiums person traveling with the person receiving thePrepaid insurance premiums. Premiums
medical care. For example, if a parent is travel-you pay before you are age 65 for insurance forYou can include in medical expenses insurance ing with a sick child, up to $100 per night can bemedical care for yourself, your spouse, or yourpremiums you pay for policies that cover medi- included as a medical expense for lodging.dependents after you reach age 65 are medicalcal care. Policies can provide payment for: Meals are not included.care expenses in the year paid if they are:
• Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays, etc.,1) Payable in equal yearly installments, orNursing home. You can include in medical
• Prescription drugs, more often, and expenses the cost of medical care in a nursing
Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 149

Page 152 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home or home for the aged for yourself, your the $414 is more than the $255 he figured using other sources during the year. This includes
spouse, or your dependents. This includes the actual expenses. payments from Medicare.
cost of meals and lodging in the home if the main Generally, you do not reduce medical ex-
reason for being there is to get medical care. penses by payments you receive for:
Disabled DependentDo not include the cost of meals and lodging
• Permanent loss or use of a member orCare Expensesif the reason for being in the home is personal.
function of the body (loss of limb, sight,You can, however, include in medical expenses
Some disabled dependent care expenses may hearing, etc.) or disfigurement that isthe part of the cost that is for medical or nursing
qualify as medical expenses or as work-relatedbased on the nature of the injury withoutcare.
expenses for purposes of taking a credit forregard to the amount of time lost from
dependent care. (See chapter 33.) You can work,
Transportation choose to apply them either way as long as you• Loss of earnings, ordo not use the same expenses to claim both aYou can include in medical expenses amountscredit and a medical expense deduction. • Damages for personal injury or sickness.paid for transportation primarily for, and essen-
tial to, medical care. You do not have a medical deduction if youImpairment-Related are reimbursed for all of your medical expensesYou can include: Work Expenses for the year.
• Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or ambu-(Business or Medical) Excess reimbursement. If you are reim-lance service,
bursed more than your medical expenses, youIf you are disabled and have expenses which• Transportation expenses of a parent who may have to include the excess in income. Youare necessary for you to be able to workmust go with a child who needs medical may want to use Figure 23–A to help you decide(impairment-related work expenses), you cancare, if any of your reimbursement will be taxabletake a business deduction for these expenses,income.• Transportation expenses of a nurse orrather than a medical deduction. You are dis-
other person who can give injections,abled if you have: Premiums paid by you. If you pay the en-
medications, or other treatment required tire premium for your medical insurance or all of• A physical or mental disability (for exam-by a patient who is traveling to get medical the costs of a plan similar to medical insurance,ple, blindness or deafness) that function-care and is unable to travel alone, and you generally do not include an excess reim-ally limits your being employed, or bursement in your gross income.• Transportation expenses for regular visits
• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-to see a mentally ill dependent, if these Premiums paid by you and your employer.ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatvisits are recommended as a part of treat- If both you and your employer contribute to yoursubstantially limits one or more of yourment. medical insurance plan and your employer’smajor life activities, such as performingcontributions are not included in your gross in-manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-come, you must include in your gross incomeYou cannot include: ing, learning, or working. the part of an excess reimbursement that is from
• Transportation expenses to and from work your employer’s contribution.You can deduct impairment-related expenseseven if your condition requires an unusual You can figure the percentage of the excessas business expenses if they are:means of transportation, or reimbursement you must include in gross in-
• Necessary for you to do your work satis-come using the following formula.• Transportation expenses if, for nonmedical
factorily,reasons only, you choose to travel to an-
Percent ofother city, such as a resort area, for an Amount paid• For goods or services not required or excessoperation or other medical care prescribed by employerused, other than incidentally, in your per- = reimbursementby your doctor. Total annualsonal activities, and that iscost of policy taxable• Not specifically covered under other in-
Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket come tax laws.
expenses for your car, such as gas and oil, when Example. You are covered by your
you use your car for medical reasons. You can- employer’s medical insurance policy. The an-
Example. You are blind. You must use anot include depreciation, insurance, general re- nual premium is $2,000. Your employer pays
reader to do your work. You use the reader bothpair, or maintenance expenses. $600 of that amount and the balance of $1,400
during your regular working hours at your placeis taken out of your wages. The part of anyIf you do not want to use your actual ex-of work and outside your regular working hoursexcess reimbursement you receive under thepenses, you can use a standard rate of 13 cents away from your place of work. The reader’spolicy that is from your employer’s contributionsa mile for use of your car for medical reasons.services are only for your work. You can deductis figured as follows:You can also include the cost of parking fees your expenses for the reader as business ex-and tolls. You can add these fees and tolls topenses. $600your medical expenses whether you use actual = 30%$2,000expenses or use the standard mileage rate.
You must include in your gross income 30%
Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for (.30) of any excess reimbursement you receivedHow Do You Treatmedical reasons during the year. He spent $200 for medical expenses under the policy.
for gas, $5 for oil, and $50 for tolls and parking.
Premiums paid by your employer.If yourReimbursements?He wants to figure the amount he can include in
employer or your former employer pays the totalmedical expenses both ways to see which gives
cost of your medical insurance plan and yourYou can deduct as medical expenses only thosehim the greater deduction.
employer’s contributions are not included in youramounts paid during the taxable year for whichHe figures the actual expenses first. He adds
income, you must report all of your excess reim-you received no insurance or other reimburse-the $200 for gas, the $5 for oil, and the $50 for
bursement as other income.ment.tolls and parking for a total of $255.
He then figures the standard mileage More than one policy.If you are covered
amount. He multiplies the 2,800 miles by 13 under more than one policy, the costs of whichInsurance Reimbursement
cents a mile for a total of $364. He then adds the are paid by both you and your employer, you
$50 tolls and parking for a total of $414.You must reduce your total medical expenses must first divide the medical expense among the
Bill includes the $414 of car expenses with for the year by all reimbursements for medical policies to figure the excess reimbursement
his other medical expenses for the year because expenses that you receive from insurance or from each policy. Then divide the policy costs to
Page 150 Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 153 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
figure the part of any excess reimbursement that because it is less than 7.5% of your adjusted deduction, you must report the deduction on
is from your employer’s contribution. gross income. If, in a later year, you are reim- your tax return.
bursed for any of the $500 in medical expenses,
Example. You are covered by your you do not include that amount in your grossWhat Tax Form Do Youemployer’s health insurance policy. The annualincome.
Use?premium is $1,200. Your employer pays $300,Settlement of damage suit.If you receive anand the balance of $900 is deducted from youramount in settlement of a personal injury suit,You figure your medical expense deduction onwages. You also paid the entire premium ($250)the part that is for medical expenses deducted inlines 1–4 of Schedule A, Form 1040. You can-for a personal health insurance policy. an earlier year is included in income in the laternot claim medical expenses on Form 1040A orDuring the year, you paid medical expensesyear if your medical deduction in the earlier yearForm 1040EZ. If you need more information onof $3,600. In the same year, you were reim-reduced your income tax in that year. See Reim- itemized deductions or you are not sure if youbursed $2,400 under your employer’s policy andbursement in a later year, earlier. can itemize, see chapters 21 and 22.$1,600 under your personal policy. Enter the amount you paid for medical andFuture medical expenses. If you receiveYou figure the part of any excess reimburse- dental care on line 1, Schedule A (Form 1040).an amount in settlement of a damage suit forment you receive that is from your employer’s This should be your expenses that were notpersonal injuries that is properly allocable orcontribution as follows: reimbursed by insurance or any other sources.determined to be for future medical expenses,
You can deduct only the amount of youryou must reduce any medical expenses forStep 1. medical and dental expenses that is more thanthese injuries until the amount you received has
7.5% of your adjusted gross income shown onReimbursement from employer’s policy $2,400been completely used.
line 35, Form 1040. For an example, see theReimbursement from your policy.... 1,600
partial Schedule A at the end of this chapter.Total reimbursement........... $4,000
Amount of medical expenses from your
How Do You Report thepolicy [($1,600 ÷ $4,000) × $3,600 total
medical expenses].............. $1,440
Deduction on Your TaxAmount of medical expenses from your
employer’s policy [($2,400 ÷ $4,000) ×
Return?$3,600 total medical expenses]..... 2,160
Total medical expenses......... $3,600
Once you have determined which medical careExcess reimbursement from your expenses you can include when figuring youremployer’s policy ($2,400 − $2,160) $240
Step 2.
Because both you and your employer
contributed to the cost of this policy, you must
divide the cost to determine the excess
reimbursement from your employer’s
contribution.
Employer’s contribution in relation to
the annual cost of the policy
($300 ÷ $1,200)................ 2 5 %
Amount to report as other income on
line 21, Form 1040(25% × $240).... $60
Reimbursement in a later year.If you are
reimbursed in a later year for medical expenses
you deducted in an earlier year, you must report
the reimbursement as income up to the amount
you previously deducted as medical expenses.
However, do not report as income the reim-
bursement you received up to the amount of
your medical deductions that did not reduce
your tax for the earlier year. For more informa-
tion about the recovery of an amount that you
claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier
year, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries in
chapter 13.
Medical expenses not deducted.If you did
not deduct a medical expense in the year you
paid it because your medical expenses were not
more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income,
or because you did not itemize deductions, do
not include in income the reimbursement for this
expense that you receive in a later year. How-
ever, if the reimbursement is more than the
expense, see Excess reimbursement, earlier.
Example. Last year, you had medical ex-
penses of $500. You cannot deduct the $500
Figure 23–A. Is Your Excess Medical Reimbursement Taxable?
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this chapter.
Was any part of your
premiums paid by
your employer?
Were your employer’s
contributions to your
premiums included in
your income?
Did you pay any part
of the premiums?
NONE of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 151

Page 154 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill and Helen Jones 000 00 0000
3,434
2,475
959
33,000
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A and B (Form 1040).
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and 
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-2)1
22
3Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 36
(99)
2002
Page 152 Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 155 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time What To Deduct
Homeowners
Your deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti-
24. mated tax payments, or other tax payments asForm (and Instructions)
follows.❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized
Deductions Withheld taxes. Deduct state and local in-
come taxes withheld from your salary in the yearTaxes ❏ Schedule E (Form 1040)Supplemental they are withheld. For 2002, these taxes will beIncome and Loss shown in boxes 17 and 19 of your Form W–2.
❏ Form 1116 Foreign Tax Credit You may also have state or local income tax
Important Reminder withheld on Form W–2G (box 14), Form
1099–MISC (box 16), or Form 1099–R (boxes
10 and 13).Limit on itemized deductions.If your ad-
justed gross income is more than $137,300 Estimated tax payments. Deduct estimated($68,650 if you are married filing separately), theTests To Deduct tax payments you made during the year under aoverall amount of your itemized deductions may pay-as-you-go plan of a state or local govern-be limited. See chapter 22 for more informationAny Tax ment. However, you must have a reasonableabout this limit. basis for making the estimated tax payments.The following two tests must be met for any taxAny estimated state or local tax payments youto be deductible by you. make that are not reasonably determined in
good faith at the time of payment are not deduct-1) The tax must be imposed on you.Introduction ible. For example, you made an estimated state
income tax payment. However, the estimate of2) The tax must be paid during your tax year.This chapter discusses which taxes you can your state tax liability shows that you will get adeduct if you itemize deductions on Schedule A refund of the full amount of your estimated pay-(Form 1040). It also explains which taxes you ment. You had no reasonable basis to believeThe tax must be imposed on you.Generally,can deduct on other schedules or forms and you had any additional liability for state incomeyou can deduct only taxes that are imposed onwhich taxes you cannot deduct. taxes and you cannot deduct the estimated taxyou.This chapter covers: payment.Generally, you can deduct property taxes• Income taxes (state, local, and foreign),only if you are the property owner. If your spouseRefund applied to taxes.Deduct any part of
owns property and pays real estate taxes on it,• Real estate taxes (state, local, and for- a refund of prior-year state or local income taxes
the taxes are deductible on your spouse’s sepa-eign), that you chose to have credited to your 2002
rate return or on your joint return. estimated state or local income taxes.• Personal property taxes (state and local), Do not reduce your deduction by either ofand the following items.The tax must be paid during your tax year.• Taxes and fees you cannot deduct. • Any state or local income tax refund (orIf you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deduct
credit) you expect to receive for 2002.only those taxes actually paid during your taxUse Table 24–1 as a guide to determine year. If you pay your taxes by check, the day youwhich taxes you can deduct. • Any refund of (or credit for) prior year statemail or deliver the check is generally the date ofand local income taxes you actually re-At the end of the chapter is a section thatpayment. If you use a pay-by-phone account, ceived in 2002.explains which form you use to deduct the differ-the date reported on the statement of the finan-ent types of taxes. However, part or all of this refund (or credit) maycial institution showing when payment was
be taxable. See Refund (or credit) of state ormade is the date of payment. If you contest a taxBusiness taxes. You can deduct certain local income taxes, later.liability and are a cash basis taxpayer, you cantaxes only if they are ordinary and necessary
deduct the tax only in the year it is actually paid.expenses of your trade or business or of produc- Separate federal returns.If you and youring income. For information on these taxes, seeIf you use an accrual method of accounting,spouse file separate state, local, and federalPublication 535, Business Expenses. see Publication 538, Accounting Periods and income tax returns, you each can deduct on yourMethods, for more information. federal return only the amount of your own stateState or local taxes.These are taxes im- and local income tax.posed by the 50 states, U.S. possessions, or
any of their political subdivisions (such as a Joint state and local returns.If you and
county or city), or by the District of Columbia. your spouse file joint state and local returns and
Income Taxes separate federal returns, each of you can deductIndian tribal government.An Indian tribal on your separate federal return part of the stategovernment that is recognized by the SecretaryThis section discusses the deductibility of stateand local income taxes. You can deduct only theof the Treasury as performing substantial gov-and local income taxes (including employeeamount of the total taxes that is proportionate toernment functions will be treated as a state forcontributions to state benefit funds) and foreignyour gross income compared to the combinedthis purpose. Income taxes, real estate taxes,income taxes. gross income of you and your spouse. However,and personal property taxes imposed by that you cannot deduct more than the amount youIndian tribal government (or by any of its subdivi- actually paid during the year. You can avoid thisState and Local Incomesions that are treated as political subdivisions of calculation if you and your spouse are jointly anda state) are deductible. Taxes individually liable for the full amount of the state
and local income taxes. If so, you and yourForeign taxes.These are taxes imposed by aYou can deduct state and local income taxes.spouse can deduct on your separate federalforeign country or any of its political subdivi- returns the amount you each actually paid.sions.
Exception.  You cannot deduct state and localJoint federal return.If you file a joint federalincome taxes you pay on income that is exemptreturn, you can deduct the total of the state andUseful Items from federal income tax, unless the exempt in-local income taxes both of you paid.You may want to see: come is interest income. For example, you can-
not deduct the part of a state’s income tax that isContributions to state benefit funds.As anPublication on a cost-of-living allowance that is exempt fromemployee, you can deduct mandatory contribu-
federal income tax.❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals tions to state benefit funds that provide protec-
Chapter 24 Taxes Page 153

Page 156 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tion against loss of wages. Mandatory payments the taxing authority. For more information about home, bought on May 3, was $732. Dennis and
made to the following state benefit funds are taxes and charges that are not deductible, seeBeth are considered to have paid a proportion-
deductible as state income taxes on line 5 ofReal Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct,ate share of the real estate taxes on the old
Schedule A (Form 1040). later. home even though they did not actually pay
them to the taxing authority. On the other hand,• California Nonoccupational Disability Ben-Tenant-shareholders in a cooperative hous-they can claim only a proportionate share of theefit Fund. ing corporation.Generally, you can deducttaxes they paid on their new property evenyour share of the real estate taxes the corpora-• New Jersey Nonoccupational Disability though they paid the entire amount.tion paid or incurred on the property. The corpo-Benefit Fund. Dennis and Beth owned their old home dur-ration should provide you with a statement
ing the real property tax year for 126 days (Janu-• New Jersey Unemployment Compensa- showing you your share of the taxes. For more
tion Fund. ary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). Theyinformation, see Special Rules for Cooperatives
figure their deduction for taxes on their old homein Publication 530.• New York Nonoccupational Disability Ben- as follows.efit Fund. Buyers and sellers of real estate.If you
bought or sold real estate during the year, the• Rhode Island Temporary Disability Benefit Taxes On Old Home
real estate taxes must be divided between theFund.
1. Enter the total real estate taxes forbuyer and the seller.• Washington State Supplemental the real property tax year..... $620The buyer and the seller must divide the realWorkmen’s Compensation Fund. estate taxes according to the number of days in2. Enter the number of days in the
the real property tax year (the period to which real property tax year that you
Employee contributions to private orthe tax imposed relates) that each owned theowned the property......... 1 2 6
voluntary disability plans are not de-property. The seller is treated as paying the3. Divide line 2 by 365......... .345ductible. taxes up to, but not including, the date of sale.CAUTION
!
The buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin-4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is
ning with the date of sale. This applies regard-your deduction. Enter it on line 6Refund (or credit) of state or local income of Schedule A (Form 1040).... $214less of the lien dates under local law. Generally,taxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for) Since the buyers of their old home paid all of thethis information is included on the settlementstate or local income taxes in a year after the taxes, Dennis and Beth also include the $214 instatement provided at the closing.year in which you paid them, you may have to the selling price of the old home. (The buyersIf you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes untilinclude the refund in income on line 10 of Form add the $214 to their cost of the home.)they are paid because you use the cash method1040 in the year you receive it. This includes Dennis and Beth owned their new home dur-of accounting, and the buyer of your property isrefunds resulting from taxes that were ing the real property tax year for 243 days (Maypersonally liable for the tax, you are consid-overwithheld, applied from a prior year return, 3 to December 31, including their date ofered to have paid your part of the tax at thenot figured correctly, or figured again because of purchase). They figure their deduction for taxestime of the sale. This lets you deduct the part ofan amended return. If you did not itemize your on their new home as follows.the tax to the date of sale even though you diddeductions in the previous year, do not includenot actually pay it. However, you must also in-the refund in income. If you deducted the taxes Taxes On New Home clude the amount of that tax in the selling price ofin the previous year, include all or part of thethe property. The buyer must include the samerefund on line 10, Form 1040, in the year you 1. Enter the total real estate taxes foramount in his or her cost of the property.receive the refund. For a discussion of how the real property tax year..... $732You figure your deduction for taxes on eachmuch to include, see Recoveries in chapter 13.property bought or sold during the real property2. Enter the number of days in the
tax year as follows. real property tax year that you
owned the property......... 2 4 3
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for 3. Divide line 2 by 365......... .666the real property tax year.....Foreign Income Taxes 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is2. Enter the number of days in the your deduction. Enter it on line 6Generally, you can take either a deduction or areal property tax year that you of Schedule A (Form 1040).... $488credit for income taxes imposed on you by a owned the property.........
foreign country or a U.S. possession. However, Since Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes on3. Divide line 2 by 365......... .you cannot take a deduction or credit for foreign the new home, they add $244 ($732 paid less4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isincome taxes paid on income that is exempt $488 deduction) to their cost of the new home.your deduction. Enter it on line 6from U.S. tax under the foreign earned income (The sellers add this $244 to their selling priceof Schedule A (Form 1040)....exclusion or the foreign housing exclusion. For and deduct the $244 as a real estate tax.)information on these exclusions, get PublicationNote. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property youDennis and Beth’s real estate tax deductionbought or sold during the real property tax year.54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident for their old and new homes is the sum of $214Aliens Abroad. For information on the foreign tax
and $488, or $702. They will enter this amountDelinquent taxes.Do not divide delinquentcredit, get Publication 514.
on line 6 of Schedule A (Form 1040).taxes between the buyer and seller if the taxes
are for any real property tax year before the one
Example 2. George and Helen Brownin which the property is sold. Even if the buyer
bought a new home on May 3, 2002. Their realagrees to pay the delinquent taxes, the buyerReal Estate Taxes property tax year for the new home is the calen-cannot deduct them. The buyer must add them
dar year. Real estate taxes for 2001 were as-to the cost of the property. The seller can deductDeductible real estate taxes are any state, local, sessed in their state on January 1, 2002. Thethese taxes paid by the buyer. However, theor foreign taxes on real property levied for theseller must include them in the selling price.taxes became due on May 31, 2002, and Octo-general public welfare. The taxes must be based ber 31, 2002.on the assessed value of the real property andExamples. The following examples illus-
The Browns agreed to pay all taxes due aftermust be charged uniformly against all propertytrate how real estate taxes are divided between
the date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 2001under the jurisdiction of the taxing authority.buyer and seller.
were $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 2002,Deductible real estate taxes generally do not
and $340 on October 31, 2002. These taxesinclude taxes charged for local benefits and im-Example 1. Dennis and Beth White’s real
were for the 2001 real property tax year. Theprovements that increase the value of the prop- property tax year for both their old home and
Browns cannot deduct them since they did noterty. They also do not include itemized charges their new home is the calendar year, with pay-
own the property until 2002. Instead, they mustfor services (such as trash collection) to specific ment due August 1. The tax on their old home,
add $680 to the cost of their new home.property or people, even if the charge is paid to sold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their new
Page 154 Chapter 24 Taxes

Page 157 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 24–1.  Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
You Can Deduct You Cannot Deduct
Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes.
Foreign income taxes. Employee contributions to private or voluntary
Employee contributions to state funds listed disability plans.
under Contributions to state benefit funds.
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Taxes for local benefits (with exceptions).
Foreign real estate taxes. Trash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions).
Tenant’s share of real estate taxes paid by Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
cooperative housing corporation. Homeowners association charges.
Personal Property State and local personal property taxes.
Taxes
Other Taxes Taxes that are expenses of your trade or business Many taxes, such as state and local sales taxes and
or of producing income. federal excise taxes (see Taxes and Fees You
One-half of self-employment tax paid. Cannot Deduct).
Taxes on property producing rent or royalty
income.
Occupational taxes.
Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or Fees and charges that are not expenses of your trade
business or of producing income. or business or of producing income, such as fees for
driver’s licenses or charges for water bills (see Taxes
and Fees You Cannot Deduct).
In January 2003, the Browns receive their For a real estate transaction that involves a include the refund or rebate in income in the
home, any real estate tax the seller paid in year you receive it. However, you only need to2002 property tax statement for $752, which
advance but that is the liability of the buyer include the amount of the deduction that re-they will pay in 2003. The Browns owned their
appears in box 5 of Form 1099–S. The buyer duced your tax in the earlier year. For morenew home during the 2002 real property tax year
deducts this amount as a real estate tax, and the information, see Recoveries in chapter 13.for 243 days (May 3 to December 31). They will
seller reduces his or her real estate tax deduc-figure their 2003 deduction for taxes as follows. If you did not itemize deductions in thetion (or includes it in income) by the same year you paid the tax, do not report theamount. See Refund (or rebate), later.1. Enter the total real estate taxes for refund as income.
TIP
the real property tax year..... $752 Taxes placed in escrow. If your monthly
2. Enter the number of days in the mortgage payment includes an amount placed
real property tax year that you in escrow (put in the care of a third party) for realReal Estate-Related Itemsowned the property......... 2 4 3 estate taxes, you may not be able to deduct theYou Cannot Deducttotal amount placed in escrow. You can deduct3. Divide line 2 by 365......... .666
only the real estate tax that the third party actu-Payments for the following items generally are4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is ally paid to the taxing authority. If the third partynot deductible as real estate taxes.your deduction. Claim it on line 6 does not notify you of the amount of real estateof Schedule A (Form 1040).... $501 • Taxes for local benefits.tax that was paid for you, contact the third party
or the taxing authority to find the proper amountThe remaining $251 ($752 paid less $501 • Itemized charges for services (such asto show on your return.deduction) of taxes paid in 2003, along with the trash and garbage pickup fees).
$680 paid in 2002, is added to the cost of theirTenants by the entirety.If you and your • Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).new home. spouse held property as tenants by the entirety
Because the taxes up to the date of sale are • Rent increases due to higher real estateand you file separate returns, each of you can
considered paid by the seller on the date of sale, taxes.deduct only the taxes each of you paid on the
the seller is entitled to a 2002 tax deduction ofproperty. • Homeowners’ association charges.$931. This is the sum of the $680 for 2001 and
Divorced individuals.If your divorce or sepa-the $251 for the 122 days the seller owned the
ration agreement states that you must pay theTaxes for local benefits.Deductible real es-home in 2002. The seller must also include the
real estate taxes for a home owned by you andtate taxes generally do not include taxes$931 in the selling price when he or she figures
your spouse, part of your payments may becharged for local benefits and improvementsthe gain or loss on the sale. The seller shoulddeductible as alimony and part as real estatethat increase the value of your property. Thesecontact the Browns in January 2003 to find outtaxes. See Taxes and insurance, in chapter 20,include assessments for streets, sidewalks,how much real estate tax is due for 2002.for more information. water mains, sewer lines, public parking facili-
Form 1099–S. For certain sales or ex- ties, and similar improvements. You should in-Minister’s and military personnel housing al-changes of real estate, the person responsible crease the basis of your property by the amountlowances. If you are a minister or a member offor closing the sale (generally the settlement of the assessment.the uniformed services and receive a housingagent) prepares Form 1099–S, Proceeds From Local benefit taxes are deductible only if theyallowance that you can exclude from income,Real Estate Transactions, to report certain infor- are for maintenance, repair, or interest chargesyou still can deduct all of the real estate taxesmation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop- related to those benefits. If only a part of theyou pay on your home.erty. Box 2 of the form is for the gross proceeds taxes is for maintenance, repair, or interest, you
of the sale and should include the portion of the must be able to show the amount of that part toRefund (or rebate).If you receive a refund or
seller’s real estate tax liability that the buyer will claim the deduction. If you cannot determinerebate in 2002 of real estate taxes you paid in
pay after the date of sale. The buyer includes what part of the tax is for maintenance, repair, or2002, you must reduce your deduction by the
these taxes in the cost basis of the property, and interest, none of it is deductible.amount refunded to you. If you receive a refund
the seller both deducts this amount as a tax paidor rebate in 2002 of real estate taxes you de- Taxes for local benefits may be included in
and includes it in the sales price of the property.ducted in an earlier year, you generally must your real estate tax bill. If your taxing authority
Chapter 24 Taxes Page 155

Page 158 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(or mortgage lender) does not furnish you a copy • Federal income taxes. This includes
of your real estate tax bill, ask for it. You should taxes withheld from your pay.
Personal Propertyuse the rules above to determine if the local • Fines. You cannot deduct penalties for vi-benefit tax is deductible. olation of any law, including forfeiture ofTaxes
Itemized charges for services. An itemized related collateral deposits.
charge for services to specific property or peo-Personal property tax is deductible if it is a state• Gift taxes.ple is not a tax, even if the charge is paid to theor local tax that is: • License fees. You cannot deduct licensetaxing authority. For example, you cannot de-
fees for personal purposes (such as mar-duct the charge as a real estate tax if it is:1) Charged on personal property, riage, driver’s, and dog license fees).• A unit fee for the delivery of a service2) Based only on the value of the personal • Social security. This includes social se-(such as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000property, and curity, Medicare, or railroad retirementgallons of water you use),
taxes withheld from your pay.3) Charged on a yearly basis, even if it is• A periodic charge for a residential servicecollected more than once a year, or less• Social security and other employment(such as a $20 per month or $240 annual
than once a year. taxes for household workers. You gen-fee charged to each homeowner for trash
erally cannot deduct the social security orcollection), or A tax that meets the above requirements can
other employment taxes you pay on thebe considered charged on personal property• A flat fee charged for a single service pro- wages of a household worker. However,even if it is for the exercise of a privilege. Forvided by your government (such as a $30 you may be able to include them in medi-example, a yearly tax based on value qualifiescharge for mowing your lawn because it cal or child care expenses. For more infor-was allowed to grow higher than permittedas a personal property tax even if it is called amation, see chapters 23 and 33.under your local ordinance). registration fee and is for the privilege of regis-
tering motor vehicles or using them on the high-Many taxes and fees other than those listed
ways. above are also nondeductible, unless they areYou must look at your real estate tax
ordinary and necessary expenses of a businessbill to determine if any nondeductible
Example. Your state charges a yearly mo-or income producing activity. For other nonde-itemized charges, such as those justCAUTION
!
tor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 50ductible items, see Real Estate-Related Itemslisted, are included in the bill. If your taxing
cents per hundredweight. You paid $32 basedYou Cannot Deduct, earlier.authority (or mortgage lender) does not furnish
you a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it.on the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 lbs.) of
your car. You can deduct $15 (1% × $1,500) as
Exception. Service charges used to main-a personal property tax, since it is based on the
tain or improve services (such as trash collec-value. The remaining $17 ($.50 × 34), based onWhere To Deducttion or police and fire protection) are deductiblethe weight, is not deductible.as real estate taxes if: You deduct taxes on the following schedules.
1) The fees or charges are imposed at a like State and local income taxes.These taxes
rate against all property in the taxing juris- are deducted on line 5 of Schedule A (Form
diction, 1040), even if your only source of income is fromTaxes and Fees
business, rents, or royalties.2) The funds collected are not earmarked; in-
You Cannot Deductstead, they are commingled with general Foreign income taxes. Generally, incomerevenue funds, and taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. pos-Many federal, state, and local government taxessession can be claimed as an itemized deduc-3) Funds used to maintain or improve serv-are not deductible because they do not fall withintion on line 8 of Schedule A (Form 1040), or as aices are not limited to or determined by thethe categories discussed earlier. Other taxescredit against your U.S. income tax on line 45 ofamount of these fees or charges collected.
and fees, such as federal income taxes, are notForm 1040. To claim the credit, you may have to
deductible because the tax law specifically pro-complete and attach Form 1116. For more infor-Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).Transfer
hibits a deduction for them. mation, see chapter 38 or the instructions fortaxes and similar taxes and charges on the sale
Form 1040 or get Publication 514.of a personal home are not deductible. If theyTaxes and fees that are generally not de-
are paid by the seller, they are expenses of theductible include the following items. Real estate taxes and personal propertysale and reduce the amount realized on the sale. taxes. These taxes are deducted on lines 6If paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost• Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes-and 7 of Schedule A (Form 1040), unless theybasis of the property. sion taxes. These taxes are generally notare paid on property used in your business indeductible. However, you can deduct theRent increase due to higher real estate taxes. which case they are deducted on Schedule C or
estate tax attributable to income in respectIf your landlord increases your rent in the form of Schedule F (Form 1040). Taxes on property that
of a decedent if you, as a beneficiary,a tax surcharge because of increased real es- produces rent or royalty income are deducted on
tate taxes, you cannot deduct the increase asmust include that income in your grossSchedule E (Form 1040).
taxes. income. In that case, deduct the estate tax
Self-employment tax. Deduct one-half ofas a miscellaneous deduction that is notHomeowners’ association charges. These your self-employment tax on line 29, Form 1040.subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-charges are not deductible because they are
come limit. For more information, seeimposed by the homeowners’ association, Other taxes. All other deductible taxes are
chapter 4.rather than the state or local government. deducted on line 8 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
Page 156 Chapter 24 Taxes

Page 159 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You must be legally liable for the loan.Late payment charge on mortgage payment.
You cannot deduct payments you make You can deduct as home mortgage interest a
for someone else if you are not legally late payment charge if it was not for a specific
25. liable to make them. Both you and the service performed in connection with your mort-
lender must intend that the loan be repaid. gage loan.
In addition, there must be a true
Mortgage prepayment penalty.If you pay offdebtor-creditor relationship between you
Interest your home mortgage early, you may have to payand the lender.
a penalty. You can deduct that penalty as home
• The mortgage must be a secured debt onmortgage interest provided the penalty is not forExpense a qualified home. (Generally, your mort-a specific service performed or cost incurred in
gage is a secured debt if you put yourconnection with your mortgage loan.
home up as collateral to protect the inter-
Sale of home. If you sell your home, you canests of the lender. The term “qualifiedImportant Reminders deduct your home mortgage interest (subject tohome” means your main home or second
any limits that apply) paid up to, but not includ-home. For details, see Publication 936.)Personal interest.Personal interest is not de- ing, the date of sale.ductible. Examples of personal interest include
interest on a loan to purchase an automobile for Example. John and Peggy Harris sold theirAmount Deductiblepersonal use and credit card and installment home on May 7. Through April 30, they madeinterest incurred for personal expenses. But youIn most cases, you will be able to deduct all ofhome mortgage interest payments of $1,220.may be able to deduct interest you pay on ayour home mortgage interest. Whether you canThe settlement sheet for the sale of the homequalified student loan. For details, see Publica-deduct all of it depends on the date you took outshowed $50 interest for the 6-day period in Maytion 970, Tax Benefits for Education. the mortgage, the amount of the mortgage, andup to, but not including, the date of sale. Their
your use of its proceeds. mortgage interest deduction is $1,270 ($1,220 +Limit on itemized deductions.Certain item- $50).ized deductions (including home mortgage inter-Fully deductible interest.If all of your mort-est) are limited if your adjusted gross income is Prepaid interest.If you pay interest in ad-gages fit into one or more of the following threemore than $137,300 ($68,650 if you are married vance for a period that goes beyond the end ofcategories at all times during the year, you canfiling a separate return). For more information, the tax year, you must spread this interest overdeduct all of the interest on those mortgages. (Ifsee chapter 22. the tax years to which it applies. You can deductany one mortgage fits into more than one cate-
in each year only the interest that qualifies asgory, add the debt that fits in each category to
home mortgage interest for that year. However,your other debt in the same category.)
see Points, later.The three categories are:
Introduction Mortgage interest credit.You may be able to1) Mortgages you took out on or before Octo-This chapter discusses interest. Interest is the claim a mortgage interest credit if you wereber 13, 1987 (called grandfathered debt).amount you pay for the use of borrowed money. issued a mortgage credit certificate (MCC) by a
The types of interest you can deduct as item- state or local government. Figure the credit on2) Mortgages you took out after October 13,
ized deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) are: Form 8396, Mortgage Interest Credit. If you take1987, to buy, build, or improve your home
this credit, you must reduce your mortgage inter-(called home acquisition debt), but only if• Home mortgage interest, including certain est deduction by the amount of the credit.throughout 2002 these mortgages plus anypoints, and For more information on the credit, see chap-grandfathered debt totaled $1 million or
• Investment interest. ter 38.less ($500,000 or less if married filing sep-
arately).This chapter explains these deductions. It also Ministers’ and military housing allowance.
explains where to deduct other types of interest3) Mortgages you took out after October 13,If you are a minister or a member of the uni-
and lists some types of interest you cannot de-1987, other than to buy, build, or improveformed services and receive a housing allow-
duct. your home (called home equity debt), but ance that is not taxable, you can still deduct your
only if throughout 2002 these mortgageshome mortgage interest.Use Table 25–1 to find out where to get moretotaled $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less ifinformation on various types of interest, includ- Mortgage assistance payments.If you qual-married filing separately) and totaled noing investment interest. ify for mortgage assistance payments undermore than the fair market value of your
section 235 of the National Housing Act, part orhome reduced by (1) and (2).Useful Items all of the interest on your mortgage may be paid
The dollar limits for the second and thirdYou may want to see: for you. You cannot deduct the interest that is
categories apply to the combined mortgages onpaid for you.
your main home and second home.Publication No other effect on taxes.Do not includeSee Part II of Publication 936 for more de-❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction these mortgage assistance payments in yourtailed definitions of grandfathered, home acqui-income. Also, do not use these payments tosition, and home equity debt. reduce other deductions, such as real estateYou can use Figure 25–A to check whether taxes.your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
Divorced or separated individuals.If a di-Home Mortgage
Limits on deduction.You cannot fully deductvorce or separation agreement requires you or
interest on a mortgage that does not fit into anyyour spouse or former spouse to pay homeInterest
of the three categories listed above. If this ap-mortgage interest on a home owned by both of
plies to you, see Part II of Publication 936 toyou, the payment of interest may be alimony.Generally, home mortgage interest is any inter-
figure the amount of interest you can deduct.See the discussion of Payments forest you pay on a loan secured by your home
jointly-owned home in chapter 20.(main home or a second home). The loan may
be a mortgage to buy your home, a second Redeemable ground rent. If you make an-Special Situationsmortgage, a line of credit, or a home equity loan. nual or periodic rental payments on a redeem-You can deduct home mortgage interest onlyThis section describes certain items that can be able ground rent, you can deduct them asif you meet all the following conditions.included as home mortgage interest and others mortgage interest.
• You must file Form 1040 and itemize de- that cannot. It also describes certain special Payments made to end the lease and to buy
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). situations that may affect your deduction. the lessor’s entire interest in the land are not
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 157

Page 160 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 25–A. Is My Home Mortgage Interest Fully Deductible?
Were your total mortgage balances $100,000 or less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at all
times during the year?
Start Here
No
/H17075
Were all of your home mortgages taken out on or
before 10-13-87?
Were all of your home mortgages taken out after
10-13-87 used to buy, build, or improve the main
home secured by that main home mortgage or
used to buy, build, or improve the second home
secured by that second home mortgage, or both?
Were the mortgage balances $1,000,000 or less
($500,000 or less if married filing separately) at 
all times during the year?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
Yes
(Instructions: Include balances of ALL mortgages secured by your main home and second home.
Yes
/H17073
Yes
/H17076
/H17076
Your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
You do not need Publication 936.
Go to Part II of Publication 936 to determine the
limits on your deductible home mortgage interest.
Were your grandfathered debt plus home
acquisition debt balances $1,000,000 or less
3
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)
at all times during the year?
Were your home equity debt balances $100,000 or
less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at
all times during the year?
2
If all mortgages on your main or second home exceed the home’s fair market value, a lower limit may apply. See Home equity debt limit under Home Equity
Debt in Part II of Publication 936.
3
Amounts over the $1,000,000 limit ($500,000 if married filing separately) qualify as home equity debt if they are not more than  the total home equity debt
limit. See Publication 936 for more information about grandfathered debt, home acquisition debt, and home equity debt.
Do you meet the conditions to deduct home
1
mortgage interest?
/H17074
Yes
You cannot deduct the interest payments as home
mortgage interest.
4/H17075
No
1
You must itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) and be legally liable for the loan. The loan must be a secured debt on a qualified home. See Home
Mortgage Interest.
4
See Table 25-1 for where to deduct other types of interest payments.
Page 158 Chapter 25 Interest Expense

Page 161 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ground rents. You cannot deduct them. For 4) You use the cash method of accounting. mortgage. For information about the tax treat-
more information, see Publication 936. This means you report income in the year ment of these amounts and other settlement
you receive it and deduct expenses in the fees and closing costs, get Publication 530, TaxNonredeemable ground rent. Payments year you pay them. (If you want more in-Information for First-Time Homeowners.on a nonredeemable ground rent are not mort-formation about this method, see Account-gage interest. You can deduct them as rent if Points paid by the seller.The term “points”ing Methods in chapter 1.)they are a business expense or if they are for includes loan placement fees that the seller
rental property. 5) The points were not paid in place of pays to the lender to arrange financing for the
amounts that ordinarily are stated sepa-buyer.Rental payments. If you live in a house beforerately on the settlement statement, such
final settlement on the purchase, any payments Treatment by seller.The seller cannot de-as appraisal fees, inspection fees, title
you make for that period are rent and not inter- duct these fees as interest. But they are a sellingfees, attorney fees, and property taxes.
est. This is true even if the settlement papers call expense that reduces the amount realized by
6) The funds you provided at or before clos-them interest. You cannot deduct these pay- the seller. See chapter 16 for information on the
ing, plus any points the seller paid, were atments as home mortgage interest. sale of your home.
least as much as the points charged. The
Treatment by buyer. The buyer reducesfunds you provided do not have to haveMortgage proceeds invested in tax-exempt
the basis of the home by the amount of thebeen applied to the points. They can in-securities.You cannot deduct the home mort-
seller-paid points and treats the points as if he orclude a down payment, an escrow deposit,gage interest on grandfathered debt or home
she had paid them. If all the tests under theearnest money, and other funds you paidequity debt if you used the proceeds of the
Exception, earlier, are met, the buyer can de-at or before closing for any purpose. Youmortgage to buy securities or certificates that
duct the points in the year paid. If any of thosecannot have borrowed these funds fromproduce tax-free income. Grandfathered debt
tests is not met, the buyer deducts the pointsyour lender or mortgage broker.and home equity debt are defined earlier under
over the life of the loan.Amount Deductible. 7) You use your loan to buy or build your For information about basis, see chapter 14.
main home.Refunds of interest.If you receive a refund of
Funds provided are less than points.If youinterest in the same tax year you paid it, you8) The points were computed as a percent-meet all the tests in the Exception, earlier, ex-must reduce your interest expense by the age of the principal amount of the mort-cept that the funds you provided were less thanamount refunded to you. If you receive a refundgage. the points charged to you (test 6), you can de-of interest you deducted in an earlier year, you
9) The amount is clearly shown on the settle-duct the points in the year paid, up to the amountgenerally must include the refund in income in
ment statement (such as the Uniform Set-of funds you provided. In addition, you can de-the year you receive it. However, you need to
tlement Statement, Form HUD-1) as pointsduct any points paid by the seller.include it only up to the amount of the deduction
charged for the mortgage. The points maythat reduced your tax in the earlier year. This is
be shown as paid from either your funds orExample 1. When you took out a $100,000true whether the interest overcharge was re-
the seller’s. mortgage loan to buy your home in December,funded to you or was used to reduce the out-
you were charged one point ($1,000). You meetstanding principal on your mortgage.
all the tests for deducting points in the year paid,If you received a refund of interest you over-Note. If you meet all of these tests, you canexcept the only funds you provided were a $750paid in an earlier year, you generally will receivechoose to either fully deduct the points in thedown payment. Of the $1,000 charged fora Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement,year paid, or deduct them over the life of thepoints, you can deduct $750 in the year paid.showing the refund in box 3. For informationloan. You spread the remaining $250 over the life ofabout Form 1098, see Mortgage Interest State-
Home improvement loan. You can also the mortgage.ment, later.
fully deduct in the year paid points paid on a loanFor more information on how to treat refunds
to improve your main home, if tests (1) throughExample 2. The facts are the same as inof interest deducted in earlier years, see Recov-
(6) are met. Example 1, except that the person who sold youeries in chapter 13.
your home also paid one point ($1,000) to helpSecond home.  The Exception does you get your mortgage. In the year paid, you cannot apply to points you pay on loansPoints deduct $1,750 ($750 of the amount you weresecured by your second home. YouCAUTION
!
charged plus the $1,000 paid by the seller). Youcan deduct these points only over the life of theThe term “points” is used to describe certain spread the remaining $250 over the life of theloan.charges paid, or treated as paid, by a borrower mortgage. You must reduce the basis of yourto obtain a home mortgage. Points may also be home by the $1,000 paid by the seller.Exception does not apply.If you do notcalled loan origination fees, maximum loan
qualify under the exception, or choose not tocharges, loan discount, or discount points. Excess points. If you meet all the tests in thededuct the full amount of points in the year paid,A borrower is treated as paying any points Exception, earlier, except that the points paidsee Points in chapter 5 of Publication 535, Busi-that a home seller pays for the borrower’s mort- were more than are generally paid in your areaness Expenses, for the rules on when and howgage. See Points paid by the seller, later. (test 3), you deduct in the year paid only themuch you can deduct. However, if the pointspoints that are generally charged. You mustGeneral rule. You generally cannot deductrelate to refinancing a home mortgage, see Refi- spread any additional points over the life of thethe full amount of points in the year paid. Be-nancing, later. mortgage.cause they are prepaid interest, you generally
must deduct them over the life (term) of theAmounts charged for services. Amounts Mortgage ending early.If you spread your
mortgage. charged by the lender for specific services con-deduction for points over the life of the mort-
nected to the loan are not interest. Examples ofgage, you can deduct any remaining balance inException. You can fully deduct points inthese charges are: the year the mortgage ends. However, if youthe year paid if you meet all the following tests.
refinance the mortgage with the same lender,(You can use Figure 25–B as a quick guide to1) Appraisal fees, you cannot deduct any remaining balance ofsee whether your points are fully deductible in
spread points. Instead, deduct the remaining2) Notary fees,the year paid.) 
balance over the term of the new loan.3) Preparation costs for the mortgage note or1) Your loan is secured by your main home. A mortgage may end early due to a prepay-deed of trust, ment, refinancing, foreclosure, or similar event.2) Paying points is an established business4) Mortgage insurance premiums, andpractice in the area where the loan was Example. Dan paid $3,000 in points in 1993made. 5) VA funding fees. that he had to spread out over the 15-year life of
3) The points paid were not more than the You cannot deduct these amounts as points the mortgage. He had deducted $1,800 of these
points generally charged in that area. either in the year paid or over the life of the points through 2001.
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 159

Page 162 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 25–B. Are My Points Fully Deductible This Year?
Is the loan secured by your main home?
Start Here
/H17075
/H17074Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
*The funds you provided do not have to have been applied to the points. They can include a down payment, an escrow deposit, ear nest money, and other
funds you paid at or before closing for any purpose.
Is the payment of points an established
business practice in your area?
Were the points paid more than the amount
generally charged in your area?
Do you use the cash method of accounting?
Did you take out the loan to improve your
main home?
Did you take out the loan to buy or build
your new home?
Were the points computed as a percentage of
the principal amount of the mortgage?
Were the funds you provided (other than
those you borrowed from your lender or
mortgage broker), plus any points the seller
paid, at least as much as the points charged?*
Is the amount paid clearly shown as points on
the settlement statement?
You can fully deduct the points this year on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
You cannot fully deduct the points this year. See the
discussion on Points.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
/H17075
Yes
Were the points paid in place of amounts that
ordinarily are separately stated on the
settlement sheet?
/H17074
/H17075
Yes
No
Page 160 Chapter 25 Interest Expense

Page 163 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dan prepaid his mortgage in full in 2002. He operative housing corporation) in the course of your share of investment interest from a partner-
can deduct the remaining $1,200 of points in that person’s trade or business. A governmental ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your
2002. unit is a person for purposes of furnishing the other investment interest.
statement.Refinancing. Generally, points you pay to You should receive the statement for eachAllocation of Interestrefinance a mortgage are not deductible in full inyear by January 31 of the following year. A copythe year you pay them. This is true even if the Expenseof this form will also be sent to the IRS.new mortgage is secured by your main home. The statement will show the total interest youHowever, if you use part of the refinanced If you borrow money for business or personalpaid during the year. If you purchased a mainmortgage proceeds to improve your main purposes as well as for investment, you musthome during the year, it will also show the de-home and you meet the first six tests listed allocate the debt among those purposes. Onlyductible points paid during the year, includingunder Exception, earlier, you can fully deduct the interest expense on the part of the debt usedseller-paid points. However, it should not showthe part of the points related to the improvement for investment purposes is treated as invest-any interest that was paid for you by a govern-in the year you paid them with your own funds. ment interest. The allocation is not affected byment agency.You can deduct the rest of the points over the life the use of property that secures the debt.As a general rule, Form 1098 will includeof the loan. only points that you can fully deduct in the year
paid. However, certain points not included onLimit on DeductionExample 1. In 1991, Bill Fields got a mort-Form 1098 also may be deductible, either in thegage to buy a home. In 2002, Bill refinanced thatyear paid or over the life of the loan. See Points, Generally, your deduction for investment inter-mortgage with a 15-year $100,000 mortgageearlier, to determine whether you can deductest expense is limited to the amount of your netloan. The mortgage is secured by his home. Topoints not shown on Form 1098. investment income.get the new loan, he had to pay three points You can carry over the amount of investment($3,000). Two points ($2,000) were for prepaidPrepaid interest on Form 1098.If you pre- interest that you could not deduct because ofinterest, and one point ($1,000) was charged forpaid interest in 2002 that accrued in full by Janu-this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedservices, in place of amounts that ordinarily areary 15, 2003, this prepaid interest may beover is treated as investment interest paid orstated separately on the settlement statement.included in box 1 of Form 1098. However, youaccrued in that next year.Bill paid the points out of his private funds, rathercannot deduct the prepaid amount for JanuaryYou can carry over disallowed investmentthan out of the proceeds of the new loan. The2003 in 2002. (See Prepaid interest, earlier.)interest to the next tax year even if it is more thanpayment of points is an established practice inYou will have to figure the interest that accruedyour taxable income in the year the interest wasthe area, and the points charged are not morefor 2003 and subtract it from the amount in boxpaid or accrued.than the amount generally charged there. Bill’s1. You will include the interest for January 2003
first payment on the new loan was due July 1.with the other interest you pay for 2003. See
He made six payments on the loan in 2002 andHow To Report, later. Net Investment Incomeis a cash basis taxpayer.
Refunded interest.If you received a refund ofBill used the funds from the new mortgage to Determine the amount of your net investmentmortgage interest you overpaid in an earlierrepay his existing mortgage. Although the new income by subtracting your investment ex-year, you generally will receive a Form 1098mortgage loan was for Bill’s continued owner- penses (other than interest expense) from yourshowing the refund in box 3. See Refunds ofship of his main home, it was not for the investment income.interest, earlier.purchase or improvement of that home. He can-
Investment income. This generally includesnot deduct all of the points in 2002. He can
your gross income from property held for invest-deduct two points ($2,000) ratably over the life of
ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, andthe loan. He deducts $67 [($2,000 ÷ 180
royalties). Investment income does not includemonths) × 6 payments] of the points in 2002.Investment Interest Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.The other point ($1,000) was a fee for services
and is not deductible. This section discusses the interest expensesChoosing to include net capital gain.In-
you may be able to deduct as an investor.vestment income generally does not include netExample 2. The facts are the same as in If you borrow money to buy property you holdcapital gain from disposing of investment prop-Example 1, except that Bill used $25,000 of thefor investment, the interest you pay is invest-erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-loan proceeds to improve his home and $75,000ment interest. You can deduct investment inter-tual funds). However, you can choose to includeto repay his existing mortgage. Bill deducts 25%est subject to the limit discussed later. However,all or part of your net capital gain in investment($25,000 ÷ $100,000) of the points ($2,000) inyou cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-income.2002. His deduction is $500 ($2,000 × 25%). duce tax-exempt income. Nor can you deduct You make this choice by completing line 4eBill also deducts the ratable part of the re-interest expenses on straddles. of Form 4952 according to its instructions.maining $1,500 ($2,000 − $500) that must be Investment interest does not include any If you choose to include any amount of yourspread over the life of the loan. This is $50qualified home mortgage interest or any interestnet capital gain in investment income, you must[($1,500 ÷ 180 months) × 6 payments] in 2002.taken into account in computing income or lossreduce your net capital gain that is eligible forThe total amount Bill deducts in 2002 is $550from a passive activity. the lower capital gains tax rates by the same($500 + $50). amount.
Limits on deduction.You cannot fully deductInvestment Property Before making this choice, consider
points on a mortgage unless the mortgage fits the overall effect on your tax liability.
into one of the categories listed earlier underProperty held for investment includes property Compare your tax if you make this
TIP
Fully deductible interest. See Publication 936 forthat produces interest, dividends, annuities, orchoice with your tax if you do not.
details. royalties not derived in the ordinary course of a
trade or business. It also includes property thatInvestment income of child reported on
produces gain or loss (not derived in the ordi-parent’s return.Investment income includesMortgage Interest nary course of a trade or business) from the salethe part of your child’s interest and dividendStatement or trade of property producing these types ofincome that you choose to report on your return.
income or held for investment (other than anIf the child does not have Alaska PermanentIf you paid $600 or more of mortgage interestinterest in a passive activity). Investment prop-Fund dividends or capital gain distributions, this(including certain points) during the year on anyerty also includes an interest in a trade or busi-is the amount on line 6 of Form 8814, Parents’one mortgage, you generally will receive a Form ness activity in which you did not materiallyElection To Report Child’s Interest and Divi-1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, or a similarparticipate (other than a passive activity).dends.statement from the mortgage holder. You will
receive the statement if you pay interest to aPartners, shareholders, and beneficiaries. Child’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.
person (including a financial institution or a co- To determine your investment interest, combine If part of the amount you report is your child’s
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 161

Page 164 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• FHA mortgage insurance premiums andTable 25–1. Where To Deduct Your Interest
VA funding fees.
• Interest to purchase or carry tax-exemptIf you had the following type of ☞ Then you can ☞ And you can find
interest expense ... deduct it on ... additional information securities.
in ...
Penalties.You cannot deduct fines and pen-Student loan interest Form 1040, line 25 or Publication 970
Form 1040A, line 18 alties paid to a government for violations of law,
regardless of their nature.Deductible home mortgage interest and Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936
points reported on Form 1098 line 10
Personal InterestDeductible home mortgage interest not Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936
reported on Form 1098 line 11 Personal interest is not deductible. Personal in-
terest is any interest that is not home mortgagePoints not reported on Form 1098 Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936
interest, investment interest, business interest,line 12
or other deductible interest. It includes the fol-
Investment interest (other than interest Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 550lowing items.
incurred to produce rents or royalties) line 13
• Interest on car loans (unless you use the
Business interest (non-farm) Schedule C or C-EZ Publication 535 car for business).
(Form 1040)
• Interest on federal, state, or local income
Farm business interest Schedule F (Form 1040) Publications 225 and 535 tax.  
Interest incurred to produce rents or Schedule E (Form 1040) Publications 527 and 535• Finance charges on credit cards, retail in-
royalties stallment contracts, and revolving charge
accounts incurred for personal expenses.Personal interest Not Deductible
• Late payment charges by a public utility.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that partForm 4952 You may be able to deduct interest youdoes not count as investment income. To figure pay on a qualified student loan. ForUse Form 4952, Investment Interest Expensethe amount of your child’s income that you can details, see Publication 970.
TIP
Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-consider your investment income, start with the
ment interest.amount on line 6 of Form 8814. Multiply that
amount by a percentage that is equal to the
Exception to use of Form 4952.You do notAlaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by
have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to yourthe total amount of interest and dividend income Allocation of Interestreturn if you meet all of the following tests.on lines 1a and 2 of Form 8814. Subtract the
result from the amount on line 6 of Form 8814. If you use the proceeds of a loan for more than• Your investment interest expense is not
one purpose (for example, personal and busi-more than your investment income fromChild’s capital gain distributions.If part ness), you must allocate the interest on the loaninterest and ordinary dividends.of the amount you report is your child’s capital to each use. However, you do not have to allo-gain distributions, that part (which is reported on• You have no other deductible investmentcate home mortgage interest if it is fully deducti-line 13 of Schedule D or line 13 of Form 1040)expenses. ble, regardless of how the funds are used.generally does not count as investment income. You allocate interest (other than fully deduct-• You have no disallowed investment inter-However, you can choose to include all or part of ible home mortgage interest) on a loan in theest expense from 2001.it in investment income. See chapter 3 of Publi- same way as the loan itself is allocated. You do
cation 550 to figure the amount to include.If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct allthis by tracing disbursements of the debt pro-
of your investment interest. ceeds to specific uses. For details on how to doYour investment income also includes the
this, see chapter 5 of Publication 535.amount on line 6 of Form 8814 (or, if applicable,
More Informationthe amount figured under Child’s Alaska Perma-
nent Fund dividends, earlier. For more information on investment interest,
see Investment Expenses in chapter 3 of Publi-How To ReportInvestment expenses. Investment expenses cation 550.
include all income-producing expenses (other You must file Form 1040 to deduct any homethan interest expense) relating to investment mortgage interest expense on your tax return.property that are allowable deductions after ap- Where you deduct your interest expense gener-
plying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneous ally depends on how you use the loan proceeds.Items You
itemized deductions. Use the smaller of: See Table 25–1 for a summary of where to
deduct your interest expense.Cannot Deduct
1) The investment expenses included on line
Home mortgage interest and points.Deduct22 of Schedule A (Form 1040), or Some interest payments are not deductible.
the home mortgage interest and points reportedCertain expenses similar to interest also are not2) The amount on line 26 of Schedule A. to you on Form 1098 on line 10 of Schedule Adeductible. Nondeductible expenses include the
(Form 1040). If you paid more deductible inter-following items.
est to the financial institution than the amountLosses from passive activities.Income or • Personal interest (discussed later). shown on Form 1098, show the larger deducti-expenses that you used in computing income or ble amount on line 10. Attach a statement ex-• Service charges (however, see Other Ex-loss from a passive activity are not included in plaining the difference and print “See attached”penses in chapter 30).determining your investment income or invest- next to line 10.
ment expenses (including investment interest• Annual fees for credit cards. Deduct home mortgage interest that was not
expense). See Publication 925, Passive Activity reported to you on Form 1098 on line 11 of• Loan fees.and At-Risk Rules, for information about passive Schedule A (Form 1040). If you paid home mort-
activities. • Credit investigation fees. gage interest to the person from whom you
Page 162 Chapter 25 Interest Expense

Page 165 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bought your home, show that person’s name, interest that was paid during the year, attach aInvestment interest.Deduct investment in-
address, and taxpayer identification numberstatement to your return explaining this. Showterest, subject to certain limits discussed in Pub-
(TIN) on the dotted lines next to line 11. Thehow much of the interest each of you paid, andlication 550, on line 13 of Schedule A (Form
seller must give you this number and you mustgive the name and address of the person who1040).
give the seller your TIN. A Form W–9 can bereceived the form. Deduct your share of the
used for this purpose. Failure to meet any ofinterest on line 11 of Schedule A (Form 1040),Amortization of bond premium. There are
these requirements may result in a $50 penaltyand print “See attached” next to the line.various ways to treat the premium you pay to
for each failure. The TIN can be either a socialIf you are the payer of record on a mortgage buy taxable bonds. See Bond Premium Amorti-
security number, an individual taxpayer identifi-on which there are other borrowers entitled to azation in Publication 550.
cation number (issued by the Internal Revenuededuction for the interest shown on the Form
Service), or an employer identification number.1098 you received, deduct only your share of theIncome-producing rental or royalty interest.See Social Security Number in chapter 1 forinterest on line 10 of Schedule A (Form 1040).Deduct interest on a loan for income-producingmore information about TINs. You should let each of the other borrowers knowrental or royalty property that is not used in yourIf you can take a deduction for points thatwhat his or her share is. business in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040).were not reported to you on Form 1098, deduct
those points on line 12 of Schedule A (Form Example. You rent out part of your homeMortgage proceeds used for business or in-1040). and borrow money to make repairs. You canvestment. If your home mortgage interest de-
deduct only the interest payment for the rentedduction is limited but all or part of the mortgageMore than one borrower.If you and at least
part in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). Deductproceeds were used for business, investment,one other person (other than your spouse if you
the rest of the interest payment on Schedule Aor other deductible activities, see Table 25–1. Itfile a joint return) were liable for and paid interest
(Form 1040) if it is deductible home mortgageshows where to deduct the part of your excesson a mortgage that was for your home, and the
interest.other person received a Form 1098 showing the interest that is for those activities.
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 163

Page 166 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
As this publication was being preparedd) Scientific.
for print, Congress was considering e) Literary.legislation that would allow individualsCAUTION
!
26. f) The prevention of cruelty to children orto deduct a portion of their charitable contribu-
tions even if they do not itemize deductions onanimals.
Schedule A (Form 1040). For more information Certain organizations that foster nationalabout this and other important tax changes, seeContributions or international amateur sports competitionPublication 553, Highlights of 2002 Tax also qualify.Changes.
2) War veterans’ organizations, including
posts, auxiliaries, trusts, or foundations,Important Reminders Useful Items organized in the United States or any of its
You may want to see: possessions.Disaster relief.You can deduct contributions
earmarked for flood relief, hurricane relief, or 3) Domestic fraternal societies, orders, andPublicationother disaster relief to a qualified organization associations operating under the lodge sys-
(defined later under Organizations That Qualify❏ 78 Cumulative List of Organizations tem.To Receive Deductible Contributions). How- Note. Your contribution to this type of❏ 526 Charitable Contributionsever, you cannot deduct contributions organization is deductible only if it is to beearmarked for relief of a particular individual or❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated used solely for charitable, religious, scien-family. Property tific, literary, or educational purposes, or for
the prevention of cruelty to children or ani-Written acknowledgment required.You can Form (and Instructions) mals. claim a deduction for a contribution of $250 or
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemizedmore only if you have a written acknowledgment 4) Certain nonprofit cemetery companies orDeductionsof your contribution from the qualified organiza- corporations.tion or if you have certain payroll deduction rec-❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions Note. Your contribution to this type ofords. For more information, see Records To organization is not deductible if it can beKeep, later in this chapter. used for the care of a specific lot or mauso-
leum crypt. Payment partly for goods or services.A
qualified organization must give you a written 5) The United States or any state, the DistrictOrganizations Thatstatement if you make a payment that is more of Columbia, a U.S. possession (includingthan $75 and is partly a contribution and partly Puerto Rico), a political subdivision of aQualify To Receivefor goods or services. The statement must tell state or U.S. possession, or an Indian tribalyou that you can deduct only the amount of your government or any of its subdivisions thatDeductiblepayment that is more than the value of the goods perform substantial government functions.or services you received. It must also give you a
Contributions Note. To be deductible, your contributiongood faith estimate of the value of those goods
to this type of organization must be madeor services. See Contributions From Which You
You can deduct your contributions only if yousolely for public purposes. Benefit, later in this chapter, for more informa-
make them to a qualified organization. To be-tion.
come a qualified organization, most organiza-
Examples. Qualified organizations include:tions other than churches and governments, asLimit on itemized deductions.If your ad-
described below, must apply to the IRS.justed gross income is more than $137,300 • Churches, a convention or association of($68,650 if you are married filing separately), the churches, temples, synagogues,You can ask any organization whetheroverall amount of your itemized deductions may mosques, and other religious organiza-it is a qualified organization, and mostbe limited. See chapter 22 for more information tions.will be able to tell you. Or you can
TIP
about this limit. check IRS Publication 78, which lists most quali-• Most nonprofit charitable organizationsfied organizations. You may find Publication 78such as the Red Cross and the Unitedin your local library’s reference section, or on theWay.internet at www.irs.gov. You can also call the
Introduction Tax Exempt/Government Entities Customer • Most nonprofit educational organizations,
Service at 1–877–829–5500 to find out if an including the Girl and Boy Scouts ofThis chapter explains how to claim a deductionorganization is qualified. America, colleges, museums, andfor your charitable contributions. It discusses:
day-care centers if substantially all the
• Organizations that are qualified to receive child care provided is to enable individuals
Types of Qualifieddeductible charitable contributions, (the parents) to be gainfully employed and
the services are available to the generalOrganizations• The types of contributions you can deduct,
public. However, if your contribution is a
• How much you can deduct, substitute for tuition or other enrollmentGenerally, only the five following types of organi-
zations can be qualified organizations. fee, it is not deductible as a charitable• What records to keep, and
contribution, as explained later under Con-• How to report your charitable contribu-1) A community chest, corporation, trust, tributions You Cannot Deduct.tions. fund, or foundation organized or created • Nonprofit hospitals and medical researchin or under the laws of the United States,organizations.A charitable contribution is a donation or giftany state, the District of Columbia, or any
to, or for the use of, a qualified organization. It ispossession of the United States (including• Utility company emergency energy pro-voluntary and is made without getting, or expect-Puerto Rico). It must be organized and op-grams, if the utility company is an agenting to get, anything of equal value. erated only for one or more of the followingfor a charitable organization that assists
purposes. individuals with emergency energy needs.Form 1040 required. To deduct a charitable
• Nonprofit volunteer fire companies.contribution, you must file Form 1040 and item-a) Religious.
ize deductions on Schedule A. The amount of • Public parks and recreation facilities.b) Charitable.your deduction may be limited if certain rules
• Civil defense organizations.and limits explained in this chapter apply to you. c) Educational.
Page 164 Chapter 26 Contributions

Page 167 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Athletic events.If you make a payment to, orTable 26–1. Examples of Charitable Contributions—A Quick Check
for the benefit of, a college or university and, as
a result, you receive the right to buy tickets to anUse the following lists for a quick check of contributions you can or cannot deduct. See
athletic event in the athletic stadium of the col-the rest of this chapter for more information and additional rules and limits that may apply.
lege or university, you can deduct 80% of the
Deductible As Not Deductible payment as a charitable contribution.
Charitable Contributions As Charitable Contributions If any part of your payment is for tickets
(rather than the right to buy tickets), that part isMoney or property you give to: Money or property you give to: not deductible. In that case, subtract the price of• Churches, synagogues, temples, • Civic leagues, social and sports clubs,the tickets from your payment. 80% of the re-mosques, and other religious labor unions, and chambers of maining amount is a charitable contribution.organizations commerce
• Federal, state, and local governments, if• Foreign organizations (except certainExample 1. You pay $300 a year for mem-
your contribution is solely for public Canadian, Israeli, and Mexican bership in an athletic scholarship program main-
purposes (for example, a gift to reduce charities) tained by a university (a qualified organization).
the public debt) • Groups that are run for personal profitThe only benefit of membership is that you have
• Nonprofit schools and hospitals • Individuals the right to buy one season ticket for a seat in a
• Public parks and recreation facilities designated area of the stadium at the• Groups whose purpose is to lobby for
university’s home football games. You can de-• Salvation Army, Red Cross, CARE, law changes
duct $240 (80% of $300) as a charitable contri-Goodwill Industries, United Way, Boy• Homeowners’ associations
bution.Scouts, Girl Scouts, Boys and Girls • Individuals
Clubs of America, etc. • Political groups or candidates for
• War veterans groups public office Example 2. The facts are the same as in
Example 1 except that your $300 payment in-Costs you pay for a student living with you, Cost of raffle, bingo, or lottery tickets
cluded the purchase of one season ticket for thesponsored by a qualified organization
stated ticket price of $120. You must subtractOut-of-pocket expenses when you serve a Dues, fees, or bills paid to country clubs,the usual price of a ticket ($120) from your $300qualified organization as a volunteer lodges, fraternal orders, or similarpayment. The result is $180. Your deductiblegroups charitable contribution is $144 (80% of $180).
Tuition Charity benefit events.If you pay a qualified
organization more than fair market value for theValue of your time or services
right to attend a charity ball, banquet, show,
Value of blood given to a blood bank sporting event, or other benefit event, you can
deduct only the amount that is more than the
value of the privileges or other benefits you
Certain foreign charitable organizations. Table 26–1 lists some examples of contribu-receive.
Under income tax treaties with Canada, Israel, If there is an established charge for thetions you can deduct and some that you cannot
and Mexico, you may be able to deduct contribu- event, that charge is the value of your benefit. Ifdeduct.
tions to certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican there is no established charge, your contribution
charitable organizations. The organization must is that part of your payment that is more than the
Contributions Frommeet tests that are essentially the same as the reasonable value of the right to attend the event.
tests that qualify U.S. organizations to receive Whether you use the tickets or other privilegesWhich You Benefit
deductible contributions. Generally, you must has no effect on the amount you can deduct.
If you receive a benefit as a result of making aHowever, if you return the ticket to the qualifiedhave income from sources in that country. For
organization for resale, you can deduct the en-additional information on the deduction of contri-contribution to a qualified organization, you can
tire amount you paid for the ticket.butions to Canadian charities, see Publicationdeduct only the amount of your contribution that
597, Information on the United States–Canadais more than the value of the benefit you Even if the ticket or other evidence ofIncome Tax Treaty. If you need more informa-receive. payment indicates that the payment istion on how to figure your contribution to Mexi- a “contribution,” this does not meanIf you pay more than fair market value to a
CAUTION
!
can and Israeli charities, see Publication 526. you can deduct the entire amount. If the ticketqualified organization for merchandise, goods,
shows the price of admission and the amount ofor services, the amount you pay that is more
the contribution, you can deduct the contributionthan the value of the item can be a charitableamount.contribution. For the excess amount to qualify,Contributions you must pay it with the intent to make a charita-
Example. You pay $40 to see a specialble contribution.You Can Deduct showing of a movie for the benefit of a qualified
organization. Printed on the ticket is “Contribu-Example 1. You pay $65 for a ticket to aGenerally, you can deduct your contributions of tion—$40.” If the regular price for the movie isdinner-dance at a church. All of the proceeds ofmoney or property that you make to, or for the $8, your contribution is $32 ($40 payment − $8the function go to the church. The ticket to theuse of, a qualified organization. A gift or contri- regular price).dinner-dance has a fair market value of $25.bution is “for the use of” a qualified organization
When you buy your ticket, you know that itsMembership fees or dues.You may be ablewhen it is held in a legally enforceable trust for
value is less than your payment. To figure theto deduct membership fees or dues you pay to athe qualified organization or in a similar legal
amount of your charitable contribution, you sub-qualified organization. However, you can deductarrangement.
only the amount that is more than the value oftract the value of the benefit you receive ($25)If you give property to a qualified organiza-
the benefits you receive. You cannot deductfrom your total payment ($65). You can deducttion, you generally can deduct the fair market
dues, fees, or assessments paid to country$40 as a contribution to the church.value of the property at the time of the contribu-
clubs and other social organizations. They aretion. See Contributions of Property, later in this
not qualified organizations.Example 2. At a fund-raising auction con-chapter.
ducted by a charity, you pay $600 for a week’sYour deduction for charitable contributions is Certain membership benefits can be disre-
stay at a beach house. The amount you pay isgenerally limited to 50% of your adjusted gross garded. Both you and the organization can
no more than the fair rental value. You have notincome, but in some cases 20% and 30% limits disregard certain membership benefits you get
may apply. See Limits on Deductions, later. made a deductible charitable contribution. in return for an annual payment of $75 or less to
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 165

Page 168 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 26–2. Volunteers’ Questions and Answers
If you do volunteer work for a qualified organization, the following questions and answers may apply to you. All of the rules explained in
this chapter also apply. See, in particular,Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services.
Question Answer
I do volunteer work 6 hours a week in the office of a qualified No, you cannot deduct the value of your time or services.
organization. The receptionist is paid $6 an hour to do the same
work I do. Can I deduct $36 a week for my time?
The office is 30 miles from my home. Can I deduct any of my car Yes, you can deduct the costs of gas and oil that are directly related
expenses for these trips? to getting to the qualified organization where you are a volunteer. If
you don’t want to figure your actual costs, you can deduct 14 cents
for each mile.
I volunteer as a Red Cross nurse’s aide at a hospital. Can I deduct Yes, you can deduct the cost of buying and cleaning your uniforms
the cost of uniforms that I must wear? if the hospital is a qualified organization, the uniforms are not
suitable for everyday use, and you must wear them when
volunteering.
I pay a babysitter to watch my children while I do volunteer work for No, you cannot deduct payments for child care expenses as a
a qualified organization. Can I deduct these costs? charitable contribution, even if they are necessary so you can do
volunteer work for a qualified organization. (If you have child care
expenses so you can work for pay, see chapter 33.)
the qualified organization. You can pay more The organization can give you the statement Any month when conditions (1)
through (3) above are met for 15 daysthan $75 to the organization if the organizationeither when it solicits or when it receives the
or more counts as a full month.does not require a larger payment for you to getpayment from you.
TIP
the benefits. The following benefits are coveredException. An organization will not have toFor additional information, see Expensesunder this rule. Paid for Student Living With You in Publicationgive you this statement if one of the following is
526.true.1) Any rights or privileges, other than those
discussed under Athletic events, earlier, Mutual exchange program. You cannot de-1) The organization is:that you can use frequently while you are a duct the costs of a foreign student living in yourmember, such as: home under a mutual exchange programa) The type of organization described in
through which your child will live with a family in(5) under Types of Qualified Organiza-a) Free or discounted admission to the
a foreign country.organization’s facilities or events, tions, earlier, or
b) Free or discounted parking, b) Formed only for religious purposes, and
Out-of-Pocket Expenses inthe only benefit you receive is an intan-c) Preferred access to goods or services,
gible religious benefit (such as admis-Giving Servicesand
sion to a religious ceremony) that
d) Discounts on the purchase of goods You may be able to deduct some amounts yougenerally is not sold in commercialand services. pay in giving services to a qualified organization.transactions outside the donative con-The amounts must be:text.2) Admission, while you are a member, to • Unreimbursed,events that are open only to members of2) You receive only items whose value is notthe organization, if the organization rea- • Directly connected with the services,substantial. See Token items, earlier.sonably projects that the cost per person • Expenses you had only because of the(excluding any allocated overhead) is not3) You receive only membership benefits thatservices you gave, andmore than $7.90. can be disregarded, as described earlier.
• Not personal, living, or family expenses.
Token items. You can deduct your entire pay- Table 26–2 contains questions and answersExpenses Paid for Studentment to a qualified organization as a charitable that apply to some individuals who volunteercontribution if both of the following are true.Living With You their services.
You may be able to deduct some expenses of1) You get a small item or other benefit of Conventions. If you are a chosen represen-
token value. having a student live with you. You can deducttative attending a convention of a qualified or-
qualifying expenses for a foreign or Americanganization, you can deduct actual unreimbursed2) The qualified organization correctly deter-
student who: expenses for travel and transportation, includingmines that the value of the item or benefit
a reasonable amount for meals and lodging,you received is not substantial and informs
1) Lives in your home under a written agree-while away from home overnight in connectionyou that you can deduct your payment in
with the convention. However, see Travel, later.ment between you and a qualified organi-full.
You cannot deduct personal expenses forzation as part of a program of the
sightseeing, fishing parties, theater tickets, ororganization to provide educational oppor-
Written statement.A qualified organization nightclubs. You also cannot deduct travel, mealstunities for the student,must give you a written statement if you make a and lodging, and other expenses for your
2) Is not your dependent or relative, andpayment to it that is more than $75 and is partly spouse or children.
a contribution and partly for goods or services. You cannot deduct your expenses in attend-3) Is a full-time student in the twelfth or anyThe statement must tell you that you can deduct ing a church convention if you go only as alower grade at a school in the Unitedonly the amount of your payment that is more member of your church rather than as a chosenStates.than the value of the goods or services you representative. You can deduct unreimbursed
You can deduct up to $50 a month for eachreceived. It must also give you a good faith expenses that are directly connected with giving
estimate of the value of those goods or services.full calendar month the student lives with you.services for your church during the convention.
Page 166 Chapter 26 Contributions

Page 169 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Uniforms. You can deduct the cost and up- camping trip. You are responsible for oversee-Contributions Tokeep of uniforms that are not suitable for every-ing the setup of the camp and for providing the
Individualsday use and that you must wear while adult supervision for the other activities during
performing donated services for a charitable or-the entire trip. You participate in the activities of
You cannot deduct contributions to specific indi-ganization. the group and really enjoy your time with them.
viduals, including the following.You oversee the breaking of camp and youFoster parents.You may be able to deduct astransport the group home. You can deduct your• Contributions to fraternal societies madea charitable contribution some of the costs oftravel expenses. for the purpose of paying medical or burialbeing a foster parent (foster care provider) if you expenses of deceased members.have no profit motive in providing the foster careExample 2. You sail from one island to an-and are not, in fact, making a profit. A qualified • Contributions to individuals who are needyother and spend 8 hours a day counting whalesorganization must designate the individuals you or worthy. This includes contributions to aand other forms of marine life. The project istake into your home for foster care. qualified organization if you indicate thatsponsored by a charitable organization. In mostYou can deduct expenses that meet both of your contribution is for a specific person.circumstances, you cannot deduct your ex-the following requirements. But you can deduct a contribution that youpenses. give to a qualified organization that in turn1) They are unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex- helps needy or worthy individuals if you doExample 3. You work for several hourspenses to feed, clothe, and care for the not indicate that your contribution is for aeach morning on an archaeological dig spon-foster child. specific person.sored by a charitable organization. The rest of2) They are mainly to benefit the qualified • Payments to a member of the clergy thatthe day is free for recreation and sightseeing.organization. can be spent as he or she wishes, such asYou cannot take a charitable contribution deduc-
for personal expenses.Unreimbursed expenses that you cannot de- tion even though you work very hard during
duct as charitable contributions may be consid-those few hours. • Expenses you paid for another person whoered support provided by you in determining provided services to a qualified organiza-whether you can claim the foster child as aExample 4. You spend the entire day at- tion.dependent. For details, see chapter 3. tending a charitable organization’s regional Example. Your son does missionary work.meeting as a chosen representative. In the eve-You pay his expenses. You cannot claim aExample. You cared for a foster child be-ning you go to the theater. You can claim yourdeduction for your son’s unreimbursed ex-cause you wanted to adopt her, not to benefit thetravel expenses as charitable contributions, butpenses related to his contribution of serv-agency that placed her in your home. Your un-you cannot claim the cost of your evening at theices.reimbursed expenses are not deductible astheater.
charitable contributions. • Payments to a hospital that are for serv-
Daily allowance (per diem).If you provide ices for a specific patient. You cannot de-
services for a charitable organization and re-Car expenses. You can deduct unreimbursed duct these payments even if the hospital is
out-of-pocket expenses, such as the cost of gas ceive a daily allowance to cover reasonableoperated by a city, a state, or other quali-
and oil, that are directly related to the use of yourtravel expenses, including meals and lodgingfied organization.
car in giving services to a charitable organiza-while away from home overnight, you must in-
tion. You cannot deduct any part of generalclude in income the amount of the allowance
repair and maintenance expenses, deprecia-that is more than your deductible travel ex-Contributions To
tion, registration fees, or the costs of tires orpenses. You can deduct your necessary travelNonqualifiedinsurance. expenses that are more than the allowance.
If you do not want to deduct your actual OrganizationsDeductible travel expenses. These in-expenses, you can use a standard mileage rate
clude:of 14 cents a mile to figure your contribution. You cannot deduct contributions to organiza-
You can deduct parking fees and tolls tions that are not qualified to receive tax-deduct-• Air, rail, and bus transportation,whether you use your actual expenses or the ible contributions, including the following.
• Out-of-pocket expenses for your car,standard mileage rate.
1) Certain state bar associations if:You must keep reliable written records of• Taxi fares or other costs of transportationyour car expenses. For more information, seebetween the airport or station and your a) The state bar is not a political subdivi-Car expenses under Records To Keep, later. hotel, sion of a state,
Travel. Generally, you can claim a charitable• Lodging costs, and b) The bar has private, as well as public,
contribution deduction for travel expenses nec- purposes, such as promoting the pro-• The cost of meals.essarily incurred while you are away from home fessional interests of members, and
performing services for a charitable organizationBecause these travel expenses are not busi- c) Your contribution is unrestricted andonly if there is no significant element of per-ness related, they are not subject to the same can be used for private purposes.sonal pleasure, recreation, or vacation in thelimits as business-related expenses. For infor-
travel. This applies whether you pay the ex-mation on business travel expenses, see Travel 2) Chambers of commerce and other busi-penses directly or indirectly. You are paying theExpenses in chapter 28. ness leagues or organizations.expenses indirectly if you make a payment to the
charitable organization and the organization 3) Civic leagues and associations.
pays for your travel expenses.
4) Communist organizations.The deduction for travel expenses will not be
Contributionsdenied simply because you enjoy providing 5) Country clubs and other social clubs.
services to the charitable organization. Even if
6) Foreign organizations other than:You Cannot Deductyou enjoy the trip, you can take a charitable
contribution deduction for your travel expenses a) A U.S. organization that transfers fundsThere are some contributions that you cannotif you are on duty in a genuine and substantial to a charitable foreign organization ifdeduct, such as those made to individuals andsense throughout the trip. However, if you have the U.S. organization controls the usethose made to nonqualified organizations. (Seeonly nominal duties, or if for significant parts of of the funds or if the foreign organiza-Contributions to Individuals and Contributions tothe trip you do not have any duties, you cannot tion is only an administrative arm of theNonqualified Organizations, next). There arededuct your travel expenses. U.S. organization, orothers that you can deduct only part of, as dis-
cussed later under Contributions From WhichExample 1. You are a troop leader for a b) Certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican
You Benefit.tax-exempt youth group and take the group on a charitable organizations. See Certain
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 167

Page 170 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
foreign charitable organizations under Future interest.This is any interest that is• The cost of meals you eat while you per-Organizations That Qualify To Receive to begin at some future time, regardless ofform services for a qualified organizationDeductible Contributions, earlier. whether it is designated as a future interestunless it is necessary for you to be awayunder state law.from home overnight while performing the7) Homeowners’ associations. services, or
Determining8) Labor unions. But you may be able to • Adoption expenses, including fees paid todeduct union dues as a miscellaneous Fair Market Valuean adoption agency and the costs of keep-itemized deduction, subject to the ing a child in your home before adoption is2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit, on This section discusses general guidelines forfinal. However, you may be able to claim aSchedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 30. determining the fair market value of varioustax credit for these expenses and exclude
types of donated property. Fair market value is9) Political organizations and candidates. from your gross income adoption expenses
the price at which property would change handspaid or reimbursed by your employer. See
between a willing buyer and a willing seller,Adoption Credit in chapter 38 and Publica-
neither having to buy or sell, and both havingContributions From tion 968, Tax Benefits for Adoption. 
reasonable knowledge of all the relevant facts.You also may be able to claim an exemp-Which You Benefit Publication 561 contains a more complete dis-tion for the child. See Adoption in chapter 3.
cussion.If you receive or expect to receive a financial or
economic benefit as a result of making a contri- Used clothing and household goods.Gen-Appraisal Feesbution to a qualified organization, you cannot erally, the fair market value of used clothing anddeduct the part of the contribution that repre- household goods is far less than its original cost.Fees that you pay to find the fair market value ofsents the value of the benefit you receive or For used clothing, you should claim as thedonated property are not deductible as contribu-expect to receive. These contributions include value the price that buyers of used items actuallytions. You can claim them, subject to thethe following. pay in used clothing stores, such as consign-2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit, as miscella-
ment or thrift shops. See Household Goods inneous deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).• Contributions for lobbying. This includes Publication 561 for information on the valuationSee chapter 30.amounts that you earmark for use in, or in of household goods, such as furniture, appli-connection with, influencing specific legis- ances, and linens.lation.
• Contributions to a retirement home that Example. Dawn Greene donated a coat to aContributionsare clearly for room, board, maintenance, thrift store operated by her church. She paid
or admittance. Also, if the amount of your $300 for the coat 3 years ago. Similar coats inof Propertycontribution depends on the type or size of the thrift store sell for $25. The fair market value
apartment you will occupy, it is not a chari- of the coat is therefore $25. Dawn’s donation isIf you contribute property to a qualified organiza-table contribution. limited to $25.tion, the amount of your charitable contribution
• Costs of raffles, bingo, lottery, etc. You is generally the fair market value of the propertyCars, boats, and aircraft.If you contribute acannot deduct as a charitable contributionat the time of the contribution. However, if thecar, boat, or aircraft to a charitable organization,amounts you pay to buy raffle or lotteryproperty has increased in value, you may haveyou must determine its fair market value.tickets or to play bingo or other games ofto make some adjustments to the amount of Certain commercial firms and trade organi-chance. For information on how to reportyour deduction. See Giving Property That Haszations publish guides, commonly called “bluegambling winnings and losses, see chap-Increased in Value, later. books,” containing complete dealer sale pricester 13 and chapter 30. For information about the records you mustor dealer average prices for recent model years.
keep and the information you must furnish withThe guides may be published monthly or sea-• Dues to fraternal orders and similar your return if you donate property, see Records sonally and for different regions of the country.groups. However, see Membership fees or To Keep and How To Report, later. These guides also provide estimates for adjust-dues, earlier, under Contributions You
ing for unusual equipment, unusual mileage,Can Deduct. As this publication was being prepared
and physical condition. The prices are not “offi-for print, Congress was considering• Tuition, or amounts you pay instead of cial” and these publications are not consideredlegislation that would allow an en-CAUTION
!
tuition, even if you pay them for children to an appraisal of any specific donated property.hanced deduction for charitable contributions ofattend parochial schools or qualifying non- But they do provide clues for making an ap-literary, musical, artistic, and scholarly composi-profit day-care centers. You also cannot praisal and suggest relative prices for compari-tions for contributions made after 2002. Fordeduct any fixed amount you may be re- son with current sales and offerings in your area.more information about this and other importantquired to pay in addition to the tuition feetax changes, see Publication 553, Highlights ofto enroll in a private school, even if it is Example. You donate your car to a local2002 Tax Changes.designated as a “donation.” high school for use by their students studying
automobile repair. Your credit union told you
Partial interest in property.Generally, you that the “blue book” value of the car is $1,600.
cannot deduct a charitable contribution (notHowever, your car needs extensive repairs and,Value of Time or Servicesmade by a transfer in trust) of less than yourafter some checking, you find that you could sell
entire interest in property. A contribution of theit for $750. You can deduct $750, the true fairYou cannot deduct the value of your time orright to use property is a contribution of less thanmarket value of the car, as a charitable contribu-services, including: your entire interest in that property and is nottion.
deductible. For exceptions and more informa-• Blood donations to the Red Cross or totion, see Partial Interest in Property Not in TrustLarge quantities.If you contribute a largeblood banks, and in Publication 561. number of the same item, fair market value is the
• The value of income lost while you work price at which comparable numbers of the item
Future interests in tangible personal prop-as an unpaid volunteer for a qualified or- are being sold.
erty. You can deduct the value of a charitableganization.
contribution of a future interest in tangible per-Giving Property Thatsonal property only after all intervening interests
in and rights to the actual possession or enjoy-Personal Expenses Has Decreased in Value
ment of the property have either expired or been
You cannot deduct personal, living, or family turned over to someone other than yourself, a If you contribute property with a fair market value
expenses, such as: related person, or a related organization. that is less than your basis in it, your deduction is
Page 168 Chapter 26 Contributions

Page 171 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
limited to fair market value. You cannot claim aerty That Has Increased in Value in Publication means that your deduction for charitable contri-
deduction for the difference between the 526. butions cannot be more than 50% of your ad-
property’s basis and its fair market value. justed gross income for the year.
Generally, the 50% limit is the only limit that
applies to gifts to organizations listed belowGiving Property That
under 50% limit organizations. But there is oneWhen To DeductHas Increased in Value exception. The 30% limit also applies to such
gifts if they are gifts of capital gain property forYou can deduct your contributions only in theIf you contribute property with a fair market value which you figure your deduction using fair mar-year you actually make them in cash or otherthat is more than your basis in it, you may have ket value without reduction for appreciation.property (or in a later carryover year, as ex-to reduce the fair market value by the amount of (See 30% Limit, later.)plained later under Carryovers). This appliesappreciation (increase in value) when you figure
whether you use the cash or an accrual methodyour deduction.
of accounting. 50% limit organizations.You can ask anyYour basis in property is generally what you
organization whether it is a 50% limit organiza-paid for it. See chapter 14 if you need moreTime of making contribution.Usually, you tion and most will be able to tell you. Or you caninformation about basis. make a contribution at the time of its uncondi-check IRS Publication 78 or call the Tax Exempt/Different rules apply to figuring your deduc-tional delivery. Government Entities Customer Service at thetion, depending on whether the property is:
number listed earlier under Organizations thatChecks. A check that you mail to a charity is1) Ordinary income property, or Qualify To Receive Deductible Contributions.considered delivered on the date you mail it.
The following is a partial list of the types of2) Capital gain property. Credit card. Contributions charged on yourorganizations that are 50% limit organizations.bank credit card are deductible in the year you
Ordinary income property.Property is ordi-make the charge. 1) Churches and conventions or associationsnary income property if its sale at fair market of churches.Pay-by-phone account.  If you use avalue on the date it was contributed would have
pay-by-phone account, the date you make aresulted in ordinary income or in short-term capi- 2) Educational organizations with a regularcontribution is the date the financial institutiontal gain. Examples of ordinary income property faculty and curriculum that normally have apays the amount. This date should be shown onare inventory, works of art created by the donor, regularly enrolled student body attendingthe statement the financial institution sends tomanuscripts prepared by the donor, and capital classes on site.you.assets held 1 year or less. 3) Hospitals and certain medical research or-The amount you can deduct for a contribu-Stock certificate.A gift to a charity of a ganizations associated with these hospi-tion of ordinary income property is its fair marketproperly endorsed stock certificate is completedtals.value less the amount that would be ordinaryon the date of mailing or other delivery to the
income or short-term capital gain if you sold the 4) Publicly supported charities.charity or to the charity’s agent. However, if you
property for its fair market value. Generally, thisgive a stock certificate to your agent or to the5) Private operating foundations.rule limits the deduction to your basis in theissuing corporation for transfer to the name of
property. 6) Private nonoperating foundations thatthe charity, your gift is not completed until the
date the stock is transferred on the books of the make qualifying distributions of 100% of
Example. You donate stock that you heldcorporation. contributions within 21/2 months following
for 5 months to your church. The fair market the year they receive the contributions.Promissory note. If you issue and deliver avalue of the stock on the day you donate it is
promissory note to a charitable organization as7) Certain private foundations whose contri-$1,000, but you paid only $800 (your basis).
a contribution, it is not a contribution until youbutions are pooled in a common fund, theBecause the $200 of appreciation would be
make the note payments. income and principal of which are paid toshort-term capital gain if you sold the stock, your
public charities.deduction is limited to $800 (fair market valueOption.  If you grant an option to buy real
less the appreciation). property at a bargain price to a charitable organi-
zation, you cannot take a deduction until theCapital gain property.Property is capital 30% Limitorganization exercises the option.gain property if its sale at fair market value on
the date of the contribution would have resultedBorrowed funds. If you make a contribu- This limit applies to the following contributions.
in long-term capital gain. It includes capital as-tion with borrowed funds, you can deduct the• Gifts of capital gain property to 50% limitsets held more than 1 year, as well as certaincontribution in the year you make it, regardless
organizations. (For other gifts of capitalreal property and depreciable property used inof when you repay the loan.
gain property, see 20% Limit, later.) How-your trade or business and, generally, held more
ever, the 30% limit does not apply whenthan 1 year.
you choose to reduce the fair market valueAmount of deduction — general rule. of the property by the amount that wouldWhen figuring your deduction for a gift of capitalLimits on Deductions have been long-term capital gain if yougain property, you usually can use the fair mar- had sold the property. Instead, only theket value of the gift. If your total contributions for the year are 20% or50% limit applies. For more information,less of your adjusted gross income, you do notExceptions. In certain situations, you must see the rules for electing the 50% limit forneed to read this section. The limits discussedreduce the fair market value by any amount that capital gain property under How To Figurehere do not apply to you.would have been long-term capital gain if you Your Deduction When Limits Apply in Pub-
The amount of your deduction may be limitedhad sold the property for its fair market value. lication 526.
to either 20%, 30%, or 50% of your adjustedGenerally, this means reducing the fair market • Gifts (other than gifts of capital gain prop-gross income, depending on the type of propertyvalue to the property’s cost or other basis. erty as explained under 20% Limit, later)you give and the type of organization you give it
for the use of any organization.Bargain sales.A bargain sale of property to ato. These limits are described below.
qualified organization (a sale or exchange forIf your contributions are more than any of the• Gifts (other than capital gain property asless than the property’s fair market value) islimits that apply, see Carryovers, later. explained under 20% Limit, later) to allpartly a charitable contribution and partly a sale qualified organizations other than 50%or exchange. A bargain sale may result in a limit organizations. This includes gifts to50% Limittaxable gain. veterans’ organizations, fraternal societ-
ies, nonprofit cemeteries, and certain pri-This limit applies to the total of all charitableMore information. For more information on
vate nonoperating foundations.contributions you make during the year. Thisdonated appreciated property, see Giving Prop-
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 169

Page 172 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ken items and membership benefits),20% Limit 1) A canceled check, or a legible and reada- and
ble account statement that shows:This limit applies to all gifts of capital gain prop- c) A description and good faith estimate of
erty to or for the use of qualified organizationsa) If payment was by check—the check the value of any goods or services de-
(other than gifts of capital gain property to 50%number, amount, date posted, and to scribed in (b). If the only benefit you
limit organizations). whom paid. received was an intangible religious
benefit (such as admission to a relig-b) If payment was by electronic funds ious ceremony) that generally is notCarryovers transfer—the amount, date posted, and sold in a commercial transactionto whom paid. outside the donative context, the ac-You can carry over your contributions that you
c) If payment was charged to a credit knowledgment must say so and doesare not able to deduct in the current year be- card—the amount, transaction date, not need to describe or estimate thecause they exceed your adjusted-gross-income and to whom paid. value of the benefit.limits. You can deduct the excess in each of the
next 5 years until it is used up, but not beyond2) A receipt (or a letter or other written com-3) It must be received by you on or before thethat time. For more information, see Carryovers munication) from the charitable organiza-earlier of:in Publication 526. tion showing the name of the organization,
a) The date you file your return for thethe date of the contribution, and the
year you make the contribution, oramount of the contribution.
b) The due date, including extensions, for3) Other reliable written records that includeRecords To Keep filing the return.the information described in (2). Records
may be considered reliable if they wereYou must keep records to prove the amount ofmade at or near the time of the contribu-the cash and noncash contributions you make Payroll deductions.If you make a contribu-tion, and were regularly kept by you, or if,tion by payroll deduction, you do not need anduring the year. The kind of records you mustin the case of small donations, you haveacknowledgment from the qualified organiza-keep depends on the amount of your contribu-emblems, buttons, or other tokens that aretion. But if your employer deducted $250 ortions and whether they are cash or noncash regularly given to persons making smallmore from a single paycheck, you must keep:contributions. cash contributions.
1) A pay stub, Form W–2, or other documentNote. An organization generally must give furnished by your employer that proves theCar expenses. If you claim expenses directlyyou a written statement if it receives a payment amount withheld, andrelated to the use of your car in giving services tofrom you that is more than $75 and is partly a
a qualified organization, you must keep reliablecontribution and partly for goods or services. 2) A pledge card or other document from thewritten records of your expenses. Whether your(See Contributions From Which You Benefit qualified organization that states the or-records are considered reliable depends on allganization does not provide goods or serv-under Contributions You Can Deduct, earlier.)the facts and circumstances. Generally, theyices in return for any contribution made toKeep the statement for your records. It maymay be considered reliable if you made them it by payroll deduction.satisfy all or part of the recordkeeping require-regularly and at or near the time you had thements explained in the following discussions.expenses. Out-of-pocket expenses.If you render serv-Your records must show the name of theices to a qualified organization and have un-Cash Contributions organization you were serving and the datereimbursed out-of-pocket expenses related toeach time you used your car for a charitablethose services, you can satisfy the written ac-Cash contributions include those paid by cash,purpose. If you use the standard mileage rate ofknowledgment requirement just discussed if:check, credit card, or payroll deduction. They14 cents a mile, your records must show the
also include your out-of-pocket expenses whenmiles you drove your car for the charitable pur-1) You have adequate records to prove thedonating your services. pose. If you deduct your actual expenses, youramount of the expenses, and
For a contribution made in cash, the recordsrecords must show the costs of operating the car
2) By the required date, you get an acknowl-that are directly related to a charitable purpose.you must keep depend on whether the contribu-
edgment from the qualified organizationtion is: See Car expenses, earlier, under that contains:Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services, for
1) Less than $250, or the expenses you can deduct. a) A description of the services you pro-
2) $250 or more. vided,
b) A statement of whether or not the or-Contributions of $250 or More
ganization provided you any goods orAmount of contribution.In figuring whether
You can claim a deduction for a contribution ofservices to reimburse you for the ex-your contribution is $250 or more, do not com-
$250 or more only if you have an acknowledg- penses you incurred,bine separate contributions. For example, if you
ment of your contribution from the qualified or-gave your church $25 each week, your weekly c) A description and a good faith estimateganization or certain payroll deduction records.payments do not have to be combined. Each of the value of any goods or servicesIf you made more than one contribution ofpayment is a separate contribution. (other than intangible religious benefits)$250 or more, you must have either a separateIf contributions are made by payroll deduc- provided to reimburse you, andacknowledgment for each or one acknowledg-tion, the deduction from each paycheck is d) A statement of any intangible religiousment that shows your total contributions.treated as a separate contribution. benefits provided to you.If you made a payment that is partly forAcknowledgment. The acknowledgmentgoods and services, as described earlier undermust meet these tests.Contributions From Which You Benefit, your
Noncash Contributionscontribution is the amount of the payment that is1) It must be written.
more than the value of the goods and services.2) It must include: For a contribution not made in cash, the records
you must keep depend on whether your deduc-
a) The amount of cash you contributed,tion for the contribution is:Contributions of Less Than $250
b) Whether the qualified organization gave1) Less than $250,For each cash contribution that is less than you any goods or services as a result of
$250, you must keep one of the following items.your contribution (other than certain to- 2) At least $250 but not more than $500,
Page 170 Chapter 26 Contributions

Page 173 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) Over $500 but not more than $5,000, or clude the amount of the reduction and how your contribution (other than certain to-
ken items and membership benefits),you figured it. If you choose the 50% limit4) Over $5,000. andinstead of the special 30% limit on certain
capital gain property, you must keep a re-Amount of contribution.In figuring whether c) A description and good faith estimate ofcord showing the years for which youyour contribution is $250 or more, do not com- the value of any goods or services de-made the choice, contributions for the cur-bine separate contributions. If you received scribed in (b). If the only benefit you
rent year to which the choice applies, andgoods or services in return, as described earlier received was an intangible religious
carryovers from preceding years to whichin Contributions From Which You Benefit, re- benefit (such as admission to a relig-
the choice applies. See How To Figureduce your contribution by the value of those ious ceremony) that generally is not
Your Deduction When Limits Apply in Pub-goods or services. If you figure your deduction sold in a commercial transaction
lication 526 for information on how toby reducing the fair market value of the donated outside the donative context, the ac-
make the capital gain property election.property by its appreciation, as described earlier knowledgment must say so and does
in Giving Property That Has Increased in Value, not need to describe or estimate the6) The amount you claim as a deduction foryour contribution is the reduced amount. value of the benefit.the tax year as a result of the contribution,
if you contribute less than your entire inter-3) It must be received by you on or before theest in the property during the tax year. earlier of:Deductions of Less Than $250 Your records must include the amount you
claimed as a deduction in any earlier yearsa) The date you file your return for theIf you make any noncash contribution, you must
for contributions of other interests in thisyear you make the contribution, orget and keep a receipt from the charitable organ-
property. They must also include the nameization showing: b) The due date, including extensions, forand address of each organization to which filing the return.1) The name of the charitable organization,you contributed the other interests, the
place where any such tangible property is2) The date and location of the charitable located or kept, and the name of any per-contribution, and son in possession of the property, otherDeductions Over $5003) A reasonably detailed description of thethan the organization to which you contrib-
property. uted. You are required to give additional information if
you claim a deduction over $500 for noncash7) The terms of any conditions attached toA letter or other written communication charitable contributions. See Records To Keepthe gift of property.from the charitable organization ac- in Publication 526 for more information.knowledging receipt of the contribution
TIP
and containing the information in (1), (2), and (3)
will serve as a receipt. Deductions of At Least $250 Qualified Conservation
You are not required to have a receipt whereBut Not More Than $500 Contribution
it is impractical to get one (for example, if you
If you claim a deduction of at least $250 but notleave property at a charity’s unattended drop If the gift was a qualified conservation contribu-
more than $500 for a noncash charitable contri-site). tion, your records must also include the fair
bution, you must get and keep an acknowledg-market value of the underlying property beforeAdditional records.You must also keep reli-ment of your contribution from the qualifiedand after the gift and the conservation purposeable written records for each item of donatedorganization. If you made more than one contri-furthered by the gift. See Qualified conservationproperty. Your written records must include thebution of $250 or more, you must have either acontribution in Publication 561 for more informa-following information. separate acknowledgment for each or one ac-tion.
knowledgment that shows your total contribu-1) The name and address of the organization
tion.to which you contributed.
The acknowledgment must contain the infor-2) The date and location of the contribution.mation in items (1) through (3) listed under De- How To Report
3) A description of the property in detail rea-ductions of Less Than $250, earlier, and your
sonable under the circumstances. For awritten records must include the informationEnter your cash contributions (including
security, keep the name of the issuer, thelisted in that discussion under Additional rec-out-of-pocket expenses) on line 15, Schedule A
type of security, and whether it is regularlyords. (Form 1040).
traded on a stock exchange or in an Enter your noncash contributions on line 16The acknowledgment must also meet these
over-the-counter market. of Schedule A (Form 1040).tests.
If your total deduction for all noncash contri-4) The fair market value of the property at the butions for the year is over $500, you must also1) It must be written.time of the contribution and how you fig- file Form 8283. See How To Report in Publica-ured the fair market value. If it was deter-2) It must include: tion 526 for more information.mined by appraisal, keep a signed copy of
a) A description (but not necessarily thethe appraisal.
value) of any property you contributed,5) The cost or other basis of the property if
b) Whether the qualified organization gaveyou must reduce its fair market value by
you any goods or services as a result ofappreciation. Your records should also in-
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 171

Page 174 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Useful Items • Accidentally breaking articles such as
You may want to see: glassware or china under normal condi-
tions.27. Publication • A family pet.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions • A fire if you willfully set it or pay someoneof Assets else to set it.Nonbusiness
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and • A car accident if your willful negligence orThefts willful act caused it. The same is true if theCasualty and willful act or willful negligence of someone❏ 584 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft
acting for you caused the accident.Loss Workbook (Personal-Use
Theft Losses Property) • Progressive deterioration (explained next).
Form (and Instructions) Progressive deterioration.Loss of prop-
erty due to progressive deterioration is not de-❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)ItemizedImportant Change ductible as a casualty loss. This is because theDeductions
damage results from a steadily operating cause
Postponed tax deadlines in disaster areas. ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040)Capital Gains or a normal process, rather than from a sudden
The maximum period of time for which the IRS and Losses event. The following are examples of damage
may postpone certain tax deadlines of taxpayers due to progressive deterioration.❏ 4684 Casualties and Theftswho are affected by a Presidentially declared
• The steady weakening of a building due todisaster is increased from 120 days to 1 year.
normal wind and weather conditions.The tax deadlines the IRS may postpone include
those for filing income and employment tax re- • The deterioration and damage to a water
turns, paying income and employment taxes, heater that bursts. But the rust and waterCasualtyand making contributions to a traditional IRA or damage to rugs and drapes caused by the
bursting of a water heater does qualify asRoth IRA. For more information, see Postponed A casualty is the damage, destruction, or loss ofa casualty.tax deadlines, later, under Disaster Area Loss. property resulting from an identifiable event that
• Most losses of property caused byis sudden, unexpected, or unusual.
droughts. To be deductible, a drought-re-
• A sudden event is one that is swift, not lated loss generally must be incurred in a
gradual or progressive. trade or business or in a transaction en-Introduction
tered into for profit.• An unexpected event is one that is ordi-This chapter explains the tax treatment of per-
narily unanticipated and unintended. • Termite or moth damage.sonal (not business related) casualty losses,
theft losses, and losses on deposits. • An unusual event is one that is not a • The damage or destruction of trees,
The chapter also explains the following top- shrubs, or other plants by a fungus, dis-day-to-day occurrence and that is not typi-
ics. ease, insects, worms, or similar pests.cal of the activity in which you were en-
But, a sudden destruction due to an unex-gaged.• How to figure the amount of your loss. pected or unusual infestation of beetles or
other insects may result in a casualty loss.• How to treat insurance and other reim-Deductible losses. Deductible casualtybursements you receive. losses can result from a number of different
• The deduction limits. causes, including the following.
• When and how to report a casualty or • Car accidents  (but see Nondeductible Thefttheft. losses, next, for exceptions).
A theft is the taking and removing of money or• Earthquakes.Forms to file.When you have a casualty or property with the intent to deprive the owner of it.theft, you have to file Form 4684. You will also• Fires (but see Nondeductible losses, next, The taking of property must be illegal under the
have to file one or more of the following forms.for exceptions). laws of the state where it occurred and it must
have been done with criminal intent.• Floods.• Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deduc-
Theft includes the taking of money or prop-tions • Government-ordered demolition or reloca-erty by the following means.
tion of a home that is unsafe to use be-• Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains
• Blackmail.cause of a disaster as discussed underand Losses
Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547. • Burglary.
• Mine cave-ins.Condemnations. For information on condem- • Embezzlement.
nations of property, see Involuntary Conver- • Shipwrecks. • Extortion.sions in chapter 1 of Publication 544.
• Sonic booms. • Kidnapping for ransom.
Workbook for casualties and thefts.Publi- • Storms, including hurricanes and torna-• Larceny.cation 584 is available to help you make a list ofdoes.
• Robbery.your stolen or damaged personal-use property
• Terrorist attacks.and figure your loss. It includes schedules to • Threats.help you figure the loss on your home, its con-• Vandalism. 
tents, and your motor vehicles. The taking of money or property through fraud• Volcanic eruptions.
or misrepresentation is theft if it is illegal under
Other sources of information.For informa- state or local law.
tion on a casualty or theft loss of business orNondeductible losses.A casualty loss is not
income-producing property, see Publicationdeductible if the damage or destruction isMislaid or lost property.The simple disap-
547. caused by the following. pearance of money or property is not a theft.
Page 172 Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 175 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
However, an accidental loss or disappearance Decrease inof property can qualify as a casualty if it resultsProof of Loss Fair Market Valuefrom an identifiable event that is sudden, unex-
pected, or unusual. Sudden, unexpected, andTo deduct a casualty or theft loss, you must beFair market value (FMV) is the price for whichunusual events are defined earlier. able to prove that you had a casualty or theft.you could sell your property to a willing buyer
You must be able to support the amount youwhen neither of you has to sell or buy and both ofExample. A car door is accidentally claim for the loss as discussed next. you know all the relevant facts.slammed on your hand, breaking the setting of
The decrease in FMV is the difference be-your diamond ring. The diamond falls from the
tween the property’s fair market value immedi-ring and is never found. The loss of the diamondCasualty loss proof.For a casualty loss, yourately before and immediately after the casualtyis a casualty. records should show all the following. or theft.
• The type of casualty (car accident, fire,FMV of stolen property.The FMV of propertystorm, etc.) and when it occurred. immediately after a theft is considered to be
• That the loss was a direct result of the zero, since you no longer have the property.Loss on Deposits
casualty.
Recovered stolen property.Recovered sto-A loss on deposits can occur when a bank, credit• That you were the owner of the propertylen property is your property that was stolen andunion, or other financial institution becomes in-or, if you leased the property from some-later returned to you. If you recover propertysolvent or bankrupt. If you incurred this type ofone else, that you were contractually liableafter you had already taken a theft loss deduc-loss, you can choose one of the following waysto the owner for the damage. tion, you must refigure your loss using theto deduct the loss.
smaller of the property’s adjusted basis (ex-• Whether a claim for reimbursement exists
• As a casualty loss. plained earlier) or the decrease in FMV from thefor which there is a reasonable expecta-
time just before it was stolen until the time it wastion of recovery.• As an ordinary loss. recovered. Use this amount to refigure your total
• As a nonbusiness bad debt. loss for the year in which the loss was deducted.
Theft loss proof.For a theft loss, your rec-If your refigured loss is less than the loss you
ords should show all the following.The loss you can deduct as an ordinary loss is deducted, you generally have to report the dif-
limited to $20,000 ($10,000 if you are married ference as income in the recovery year. But• When you discovered that your propertyfiling separately) and applies only if the financial report the difference only up to the amount of thewas missing.institution is not federally insured. loss that reduced your tax. For more information
on the amount to report, see Recoveries in• That your property was stolen.
chapter 13.Casualty loss or ordinary loss.You can • That you were the owner of the property.choose to deduct a loss on deposits as a casu-
• Whether a claim for reimbursement existsalty loss or as an ordinary loss for any year in
Figuring Decrease in FMV—for which there is a reasonable expecta-which you can reasonably estimate how much of
tion of recovery.your deposits you have lost in an insolvent or Items To Consider
bankrupt financial institution. The choice is gen-
To figure the decrease in FMV because of aerally made on the return you file for that year
casualty or theft, you generally need a compe-and applies to all your losses on deposits for the
tent appraisal. But other measures can also beyear in that particular financial institution. If you
used to establish certain decreases.treat the loss as a casualty or ordinary loss, youAmount of Loss
cannot treat the same amount of the loss as a Appraisal. An appraisal to determine the dif-nonbusiness bad debt when it actually becomesFigure the amount of your loss using the follow-ference between the FMV of the property imme-worthless. However, you can take a nonbusi-ing steps. diately before a casualty or theft andness bad debt deduction for any amount of loss immediately afterward should be made by athat is more than the estimated amount you1) Determine your adjusted basis in the prop-competent appraiser. The appraiser must rec-deducted as a casualty or ordinary loss. Onceerty before the casualty or theft. ognize the effects of any general market declineyou make this choice, you cannot change it that may occur along with the casualty. This2) Determine the decrease in fair marketwithout approval of the Internal Revenue Serv- information is needed to limit any deduction tovalue of the property as a result of theice. the actual loss resulting from damage to thecasualty or theft.
property.3) From the smaller of the amounts you de-Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choose Several factors are important in evaluatingtermined in (1) and (2), subtract any insur-to deduct the loss as a casualty loss or as an the accuracy of an appraisal, including the fol-ance or other reimbursement you receivedordinary loss, you must wait until the actual loss lowing.or expect to receive.is determined before you can deduct the loss as
• The appraiser’s familiarity with your prop-a nonbusiness bad debt. For personal-use property and property used inerty before and after the casualty or theft.performing services as an employee, apply the
How to report. The kind of deduction you • The appraiser’s knowledge of sales ofdeduction limits, discussed later, to determine
choose for your loss on deposits determines comparable property in the area.the amount of your deductible loss.
how you report your loss. If you choose:
• The appraiser’s knowledge of conditions in
• Casualty loss — report it on Form 4684 the area of the casualty.Leased property.If you are liable for casualty
first and then on Schedule A (Form 1040).damage to property you lease, your loss is the• The appraiser’s method of appraisal.amount you must pay to repair the property• Ordinary loss — report it on Schedule Aminus any insurance or other reimbursement(Form 1040). Cost of cleaning up or making repairs.Theyou receive or expect to receive.
• Nonbusiness bad debt — report it on cost of repairing damaged property is not part of
Schedule D (Form 1040). a casualty loss. Neither is the cost of cleaning upAdjusted Basis after a casualty. But you can use the cost of
cleaning up or making repairs as a measure ofMore information.For more information, seeAdjusted basis is your basis in the property (usu-the decrease in FMV if you meet all the followingSpecial Treatment for Losses on Deposits inally cost) increased or decreased by variousconditions.Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institutions in events, such as improvements and casualty
the instructions for Form 4684. losses. For more information, see chapter 14.• The repairs are actually made.
Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 173

Page 176 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The repairs are necessary to bring theDecline in market value of property in or nearTypes of Reimbursements
property back to its condition before thecasualty area.A decrease in the value of your
The most common type of reimbursement is ancasualty. property because it is in or near an area that
insurance payment for your stolen or damagedsuffered a casualty, or that might again suffer a• The amount spent for repairs is not exces- property. Other types of reimbursements arecasualty, is not to be taken into consideration.sive. discussed next. Also see the Instructions forYou have a loss only for actual casualty damage
Form 4684.• The repairs take care of the damage only.to your property. However, if your home is in a
federally declared disaster area, see Disaster• The value of the property after the repairs Employer’s emergency disaster fund.If youArea Losses in Publication 547.is not, due to the repairs, more than the receive money from your employer’s emergencyvalue of the property before the casualty. disaster fund and you must use that money toCosts of photographs and appraisals.Pho-
rehabilitate or replace property on which you aretographs taken after a casualty will be helpful inLandscaping. The cost of restoring land- claiming a casualty loss deduction, you mustestablishing the condition and value of the prop-scaping to its original condition after a casualty take that money into consideration in computingerty after it was damaged. Photographs showingmay indicate the decrease in FMV. You may be the casualty loss deduction. Take into consider-the condition of the property after it was re-able to measure your loss by what you spend on ation only the amount you used to replace yourpaired, restored, or replaced may also be help-the following. destroyed or damaged property.ful.
• Removing destroyed or damaged trees Appraisals are used to figure the decrease in
Example. Your home was extensively dam-and shrubs minus any salvage you re- FMV because of a casualty or theft. See Ap-
aged by a tornado. Your loss after reimburse-ceive. praisal, earlier under Figuring Decrease in FMV
ment from your insurance company was— Items To Consider, for information about• Pruning and other measures taken to pre- $10,000. Your employer set up a disaster reliefappraisals.serve damaged trees and shrubs. fund for its employees. Employees receivingThe costs of photographs and appraisalsmoney from the fund had to use it to rehabilitate• Replanting necessary to restore the prop-used as evidence of the value and condition ofor replace their damaged or destroyed property.erty to its approximate value before theproperty damaged as a result of a casualty areYou received $4,000 from the fund and spentcasualty. not a part of the loss. You can claim these coststhe entire amount on repairs to your home. Inas a miscellaneous itemized deduction subjectfiguring your casualty loss, you must reduceto the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit onCar value. Books issued by various automo- your unreimbursed loss ($10,000) by the $4,000Schedule A (Form 1040). For information aboutbile organizations that list your car may be useful you received from your employer’s fund. Yourmiscellaneous deductions, see chapter 30.in figuring the value of your car. You can modify casualty loss before applying the deduction lim-the book’s retail value by such factors as mile- its discussed later is $6,000.age and the condition of your car to figure itsInsurance and Other
value. The prices are not official, but they may Cash gifts. If you receive excludable cashReimbursementsbe useful in determining value and suggesting gifts as a disaster victim and there are no limits
relative prices for comparison with current sales on how you can use the money, you do notIf you receive an insurance payment or otherand offerings in your area. If your car is not listed reduce your casualty loss by these excludabletype of reimbursement, you must subtract thein the books, determine its value from other cash gifts. This applies even if you use thereimbursement when you figure your loss. Yousources. A dealer’s offer for your car as a money to pay for repairs to property damaged indo not have a casualty or theft loss to the extenttrade-in on a new car is not usually a measure of the disaster.you are reimbursed.its true value.
If you expect to be reimbursed for part or allExample. Your home was damaged by aof your loss, you must subtract the expectedhurricane. Relatives and neighbors made cashreimbursement when you figure your loss. YouFiguring Decrease in FMV— gifts to you which were excludable from yourmust reduce your loss even if you do not receiveItems Not To Consider income. You used part of the cash gifts to pay forpayment until a later tax year. See Reimburse- repairs to your home. There were no limits orment Received After Deducting Loss, later.The following items are generally not considered restrictions on how you could use the cash gifts.
when establishing the decrease in the FMV of Because it was an excludable gift, the moneyFailure to file a claim for reimbursement.Ifyour property. you received and used to pay for repairs to youryour property is covered by insurance, you musthome does not reduce your casualty loss on thefile a timely insurance claim for reimbursementReplacement cost. The cost of replacing sto- damaged home.of your loss. Otherwise, you cannot deduct thislen or destroyed property is not part of a casualty
loss as a casualty or theft loss. However, thisor theft loss. Insurance payments for living expenses.rule does not apply to the portion of the loss notYou do not reduce your casualty loss by insur-covered by insurance (for example, a deducti-Cost of protection.The cost of protecting ance payments you receive to cover living ex-ble).your property against a casualty or theft is not penses in either of the following situations.part of a casualty or theft loss. For example, you
Example. You have a car insurance policycannot deduct the amount you spend on insur- • You lose the use of your main home be-
with a $500 deductible. Because your insuranceance or to board up your house against a storm. cause of a casualty.
did not cover the first $500 of an auto collision,If you make permanent improvements to • Government authorities do not allow youthe $500 would be deductible (subject to theyour property to protect it against a casualty or access to your main home because of adeduction limits discussed later). This is truetheft, add the cost of these improvements to casualty or threat of one.even if you do not file an insurance claim, sinceyour basis in the property. An example would be
your insurance policy would never have reim-the cost of a dike to prevent flooding. Inclusion in income. If these insurancebursed you for the deductible.
payments are more than the temporary increaseRelated expenses. Any incidental expenses
in your living expenses, you must include theGain from reimbursement. If your reim-you have due to a casualty or theft, such as
excess in your income. Report this amount onbursement is more than your adjusted basis inexpenses for the treatment of personal injuries,
line 21 of Form 1040.the property, you have a gain. This is true even iffor temporary housing, or for a rental car, are not
the decrease in the FMV of the property is A temporary increase in your living expensespart of your casualty or theft loss.
smaller than your adjusted basis. If you have a is the difference between the actual living ex-
Sentimental value. Do not consider senti- gain, you may have to pay tax on it, or you may penses you and your family incurred during the
mental value when determining your loss. If a be able to postpone reporting the gain. See period you could not use your home and your
family portrait, heirloom, or keepsake is dam- Publication 547 for more information on how to normal living expenses for that period. Actual
aged, destroyed, or stolen, you must base your treat a gain from a reimbursement for a casualty living expenses are the reasonable and neces-
loss only on its FMV. or theft. sary expenses incurred because of the loss of
Page 174 Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 177 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your main home. Generally, these expenses in- adjust your tax return for the tax year in whichSingle Casualty onclude the amounts you pay for the following.you receive your actual reimbursement. This
Multiple Propertiessection explains the adjustment you may have• Rent for suitable housing. to make.
• Transportation. Personal property.If a single casualty or theft
Actual reimbursement less than expected.• Food. involves more than one item of personal prop-
If you later receive less reimbursement than youerty, you must figure the loss on each item• Utilities. expected, include that difference as a loss withseparately. Then combine the losses to deter-
your other losses (if any) on your return for the• Miscellaneous services. mine your total loss from that casualty or theft.
year in which you can reasonably expect noPersonal property is any property that is not realNormal living expenses consist of these samemore reimbursement.expenses that you would have incurred but did property.
not because of the casualty or the threat of one.Example. Your personal car had an FMV ofExample. A fire in your home destroyed an$2,000 when it was destroyed in a collision withExample. As a result of a fire, you vacated upholstered chair, an oriental rug, and an an-another car last year. The accident was due toyour apartment for a month and moved to a tique table. You did not have fire insurance tothe negligence of the other driver. At the end ofmotel. You normally pay $525 a month for rent. cover your loss. (This was the only casualty orthe year, there was a reasonable prospect thatNone was charged for the month the apartment theft you had during the year.) You paid $750 forthe owner of the other car would reimburse youwas vacated. Your motel rent for this month was the chair and you established that it had an FMVin full. You subtracted the expected reimburse-$1,200. You normally pay $200 a month for of $500 just before the fire. The rug cost $3,000ment when you figured your loss. You did notfood. Your food expenses for the month you and had an FMV of $2,500 just before the fire.have a deductible loss last year.lived in the motel were $400. You received
You bought the table at an auction for $100$1,100 from your insurance company to coverThis January, the court awarded you a judg-
before discovering it was an antique. It had beenyour living expenses. You determine the pay-ment of $2,000. However, in July it became
appraised at $900 before the fire. You figurement you must include in income as follows.apparent that you will be unable to collect any
your loss on each of these items as follows:amount from the other driver. You can deduct
1) Insurance payment for living the loss this year subject to the limits discussedexpenses .................. $1,100 Chair Rug Tablelater.2) Actual expenses during the 1) Basis (cost)....... $750 $3,000 $100month you are unable to use Actual reimbursement more than expected.your home because of the fire $1,600 2) FMV before fire..... $500 $2,500 $900
If you later receive more reimbursement than3) Normal living expenses.... 7 2 5 3) FMV after fire...... – 0 – – 0 – – 0 –
you expected after you claimed a deduction for4) Temporary increase in living ex- 4) Decrease in FMV . . . $500 $2,500 $900
the loss, you may have to include the extrapenses: Subtract line 3 from line 2 . . 875 5) Loss (smaller of (1) or
5) Amount of payment includible in (4))............. $500 $2,500 $100reimbursement in your income for the year you
income: Subtract line 4 from line 1 . . $225receive it. However, if any part of the original6) Total loss................. $3,100deduction did not reduce your tax for the earlier
Tax year of inclusion.You include the tax-year, do not include that part of the reimburse-
able part of the insurance payment in income forment in your income. You do not refigure yourReal property.In figuring a casualty loss onthe year you regain the use of your main hometax for the year you claimed the deduction. Forpersonal-use real property, treat the entire prop-or, if later, for the year you receive the taxablemore information, see Recoveries in chapter 13.erty (including any improvements, such as build-part of the insurance payment.
ings, trees, and shrubs) as one item. Figure theIf the total of all the reimbursements
you receive is more than your adjustedloss using the smaller of the adjusted basis orExample. Your main home was destroyed
basis in the destroyed or stolen prop-the decrease in FMV of the entire property.by a tornado in August 2000. You regained useCAUTION
!
erty, you will have a gain on the casualty orof your home in November 2001. The insurance
theft. If you have already taken a deduction for aExample. You bought your home a fewpayments you received in 2000 and 2001 were
loss and you receive the reimbursement in a$1,500 more than the temporary increase in years ago. You paid $160,000 ($20,000 for the
your living expenses during those years. Youlater year, you may have to include the gain inland and $140,000 for the house). You also
include this amount in income on your 2001your income for the later year. Include the gainspent $2,000 for landscaping. This year a fire
Form 1040. If, in 2002, you receive further pay-as ordinary income up to the amount of yourdestroyed your home. The fire also damaged
ments to cover the living expenses you had indeduction that reduced your tax for the earlierthe shrubbery and trees in your yard. The fire2000 and 2001, you must include those pay-year. See Publication 547 for more informationwas your only casualty or theft loss this year.ments in income on your 2002 Form 1040. on how to treat a gain from the reimbursement ofCompetent appraisers valued the property as a
a casualty or theft. whole at $200,000 before the fire, but onlyDisaster relief.Food, medical supplies, and
other forms of assistance you receive do not $30,000 after the fire. (The loss to your house-
reduce your casualty loss unless they are hold furnishings is not shown in this example. ItActual reimbursement same as expected.If
replacements for lost or destroyed property. would be figured separately on each item, asyou receive exactly the reimbursement you ex-
These items are not taxable income to you.pected, you do not have any amount to includeexplained earlier under Personal property.)
in your income or any loss to deduct. Shortly after the fire, the insurance companyQualified disaster relief payments you
paid you $155,000 for the loss. You figure yourreceive in tax years ending after Sep-
Example. Last December, you had a colli-tember 10, 2001, for expenses you in- casualty loss as follows:
TIP
sion while driving your personal car. Repairs tocurred as a result of a Presidentially declared
the car cost $950. You had $100 deductible1) Adjusted basis of the entiredisaster, are not taxable income to you. For
property (land, building, andcollision insurance. Your insurance companyinformation on qualified disaster relief pay-
landscaping)............. $162,000agreed to reimburse you for the rest of the dam-ments, see Disaster Area Losses in Publication
547. age. Because you expected a reimbursement2) FMV of entire property before fire $200,000
from the insurance company, you did not have a3) FMV of entire property after fire 30,000
casualty loss deduction last year. 4) Decrease in FMV of entire
property................ $170,000Due to the $100 rule (discussed later underReimbursement Received After
Deduction Limits), you cannot deduct the $1005) Loss (smaller of (1) or (4)).... $162,000Deducting Loss deductible you paid. When you receive the $8506) Subtract insurance......... 155,000
from the insurance company this year, do notIf you figured your casualty or theft loss using 7) Amount of loss after
report it as income. reimbursement ........... $7,000your expected reimbursement, you may have to
Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 175

Page 178 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 27–1. How To Apply the Deduction Limits for Personal-Use Property
$100 Rule 10% Rule
General Application You must reduce each casualty or theft loss by You must reduce your total casualty or theft
$100 when figuring your deduction. Apply this loss by 10% of your adjusted gross income.
rule after you have figured the amount of your Apply this rule after you reduce each loss by
loss. $100 (the $100 rule).
Single Event Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces Apply this rule only once, even if many
of property are affected. pieces of property are affected.
More Than One Event Apply to the loss from each event. Apply to the total of all your losses from all
events.
More Than One Person— Apply separately to each person. Apply separately to each person.
With Loss From the
Same Event
(other than a married couple filing jointly)
Filing Jointly Apply as if you were one person. Apply as if you were one person.Married Couple—
With Loss From theFiling Separately Apply separately to each spouse. Apply separately to each spouse.Same Event
More Than One Owner Apply separately to each owner of jointly Apply separately to each owner of jointly
(other than a married owned property. owned property.
couple filing jointly)
Car Basementbine the losses and reduce the combined
amount by $100. 1) Loss .............. $1,200 $1,700Deduction Limits
2) Subtract $100 per incident 100 100
3) Loss after $100 rule.... $1,100 $1,600Single event. Generally, events closely re-After you have figured your casualty or theft
lated in origin cause a single casualty. It is aloss, you must figure how much of the loss you 4) Total loss................. $2,700single casualty when the damage is from two orcan deduct. If the loss was to property for your 5) Subtract 10% × $25,000 AGI.... 2,500
more closely related causes, such as wind andpersonal use or your family’s use, there are two 6) Casualty loss deduction...... $200
flood damage caused by the same storm.limits on the amount you can deduct for your
casualty or theft loss. 
Gains and losses.If you had both gains and10% Rule1) You must reduce each casualty or theft losses from casualties or thefts to personal-use
loss by $100 ($100 rule). property, you must compare your total gains toYou must reduce the total of all your casualty or
your total losses. Do this after you have reducedtheft losses on personal-use property by 10% of2) You must further reduce the total of all
each loss by any reimbursements and by $100.your adjusted gross income. Apply this rule afteryour casualty or theft losses by 10% of
you reduce each loss by $100. If you have bothyour adjusted gross income (10% rule). Casualty or theft gains do not includegains and losses from casualties or thefts, see gains you choose to postpone. SeeYou make these reductions on Form 4684. Gains and losses, later in this discussion. Publication 547 for information on theCAUTION
!
These rules are explained next and Table postponement of gain.27–1 summarizes how to apply the $100 ruleExample 1. In June, you discovered that
and the 10% rule in various situations. For moreyour house had been burglarized. Your loss Losses more than gains.If your losses aredetailed explanations and examples, see Publi-after insurance reimbursement was $2,000.more than your recognized gains, subtract yourcation 547. Your adjusted gross income for the year yougains from your losses and reduce the result bydiscovered the theft is $29,500. You first apply10% of your adjusted gross income. The rest, ifthe $100 rule and then the 10% rule. Figure yourProperty used partly for business and partly any, is your deductible loss.theft loss deduction as follows.for personal purposes. When property is Gains more than losses. If your recog-used partly for personal purposes and partly for1) Loss after insurance........... $2,000 nized gains are more than your losses, subtractbusiness or income-producing purposes, the2) Subtract $100............... 1 0 0 your losses from your gains. The difference iscasualty or theft loss deduction must be figured3) Loss after $100 rule........... $1,900 treated as capital gain and must be reported onseparately for the personal-use part and for the4) Subtract 10% × $29,500 AGI..... 2,950 Schedule D (Form 1040). The 10% rule does notbusiness or income-producing part. You must5) Theft loss deduction......... –0– apply to your losses.figure each loss separately because the $100You do not have a theft loss deduction be-rule and the 10% rule apply only to the loss oncause your loss after you apply the $100 rulethe personal-use part of the property. ($1,900) is less than 10% of your adjusted gross
income ($2,950).
When To Report$100 Rule
Example 2. In March, you had a car acci-
Gain or Lossdent that totally destroyed your car. You did notAfter you have figured your casualty or theft loss
have collision insurance on your car, so you didon personal-use property, you must reduce that
If you receive an insurance or other reimburse-not receive any insurance reimbursement. Yourloss by $100. This reduction applies to each total
ment that is more than your adjusted basis in theloss on the car was $1,200. In November, a firecasualty or theft loss. It does not matter how
destroyed or stolen property, you have a gaindamaged your basement and totally destroyedmany pieces of property are involved in an
from the casualty or theft. You must include thisthe furniture, washer, dryer, and other itemsevent. Only a single $100 reduction applies.
gain in your income in the year you receive thestored there. Your loss on the basement items
reimbursement, unless you choose to postponeExample. A hailstorm damages your home after reimbursement was $1,700. Your adjusted
reporting the gain as explained in Publicationand your car. Determine the amount of loss, as gross income for the year that the accident and
547.discussed earlier, for each of these items. Since fire occurred is $25,000. You figure your casu-
the losses are due to a single event, you com- alty loss deduction as follows. If you have a loss, see Table 27–2.
Page 176 Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 179 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the IRS has decided to postpone tax deadlinesTable 27–2. When To Deduct a Loss
for up to 1 year.
IF you have a loss... THEN deduct it in the year...
Abatement of interest and penalties.TheFrom a casualty, The loss occurred.
IRS may abate the interest and penalties onIn a Presidentially declared disaster The disaster occurred or the year immediately before theunderpaid income tax for the length of any post-area, disaster. ponement of tax deadlines.
From a theft,  The theft was discovered.
More information.For more information, seeOn a deposit treated as a:
Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.
• Casualty, • A reasonable estimate can be made.
• Bad debt, • Deposits are totally worthless.
• Ordinary loss, • A reasonable estimate can be made.
How To Report
Gains and LossesLoss on deposits. If your loss is a loss on lishing a news release, revenue ruling, revenue
deposits in an insolvent or bankrupt financialprocedure, notice, announcement, or other gui-
Use Form 4684 to report a gain or a deductibleinstitution, see Loss on Deposits, earlier. dance in the Internal Revenue Bulletin (IRB).loss from a casualty or theft. If you have more
Casualty loss.Generally, you can deduct a Who is eligible.If the IRS postpones a taxthan one casualty or theft, use a separate Form
casualty loss only in the tax year in which thedeadline, the following taxpayers are eligible for4684 to determine your gain or loss for each
casualty occurred. This is true even if you do notthe postponement. event. Combine the gains and losses on one
repair or replace the damaged property until a Form 4684. Follow the form instructions as to• Any individual whose main home is lo-later year. which lines to fill out. In addition, you must usecated in a covered disaster area (definedthe appropriate schedule to report a gain or loss.Theft loss.You generally can deduct a theft next). The schedule you use depends on whether youloss only in the year you discover your property
have a gain or loss.• Any business entity or sole proprietorwas stolen. You must be able to show that there
whose principal place of business is lo-was a theft, but you do not have to know when
If you have a: Report it on:cated in a covered disaster area.the theft occurred. However, you should show
when you discovered that your property was Gain .......... Schedule D (Form• Any relief worker affiliated with a recog-missing. 1040)nized government or philanthropic organi-Loss .......... Schedule A (Formzation who is assisting in a covered 1040)Disaster Area Loss disaster area.
• Any individual, business entity, or soleIf you have a casualty loss from a disaster that
proprietor whose records are needed toAdjustments to basis.If you have a casualtyoccurred in a Presidentially declared disaster
meet a postponed deadline, provided or theft loss, you must decrease your basis inarea, you can choose to deduct the loss on your
the property by any deductible loss and anythose records are maintained in a coveredtax return or amended return for either of the
insurance or other reimbursement. Amountsdisaster area. The main home or principalfollowing years.
you spend to restore your property after a casu-place of business does not have to be
• The year the disaster occurred. alty increase your adjusted basis. See Adjustedlocated in the covered disaster area.
Basis in chapter 14 for more information.• The year immediately preceding the year• Any estate or trust that has tax recordsthe disaster occurred. necessary to meet a postponed tax dead-
Net operating loss (NOL).If your casualty orline, provided those records are main-
theft loss deduction is more than your income,tained in a covered disaster area.Postponed tax deadlines. The IRS may
you may have an NOL. You can use an NOL topostpone for up to 1 year certain tax deadlines of• The spouse on a joint return with a tax-lower your tax in an earlier year, allowing you totaxpayers who are affected by a Presidentiallypayer who is eligible for postponements.get a refund for tax you have already paid. Or,declared disaster. The tax deadlines the IRS
you can use it to lower your tax in a later year.• Any other person determined by the IRSmay postpone include those for filing income
You do not have to be in business to have anto be affected by a Presidentially declaredand employment tax returns, paying income and
NOL from a casualty or theft loss. For moredisaster.employment taxes, and making contributions to
information, see Publication 536, Net Operatinga traditional IRA or Roth IRA.
Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, andCovered disaster area.This is an area of aIf any tax deadline is postponed, the IRS will
Trusts.Presidentially declared disaster area in whichpublicize the postponement in your area by pub-
Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 177

Page 180 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Or, you can claim the special depreciation• How to treat any expense reimbursements
you may receive, andallowance by filing Form 3115, Application for
Change in Accounting Method, with your 2002 • How to report your expenses on your re-28. return. For details, see Revenue Procedure turn.2002–33.
Standard meal allowance. The standard Who does not need to use this chapter.If
meal allowance (also referred to as the limit onCar Expenses you are an employee, you will not need to read
meals and incidental expenses (M&IE rate)) forthis chapter if all of the following are true.
most small localities in the United States is $30.
and Other 1) You fully accounted to your employer forHowever, the standard meal allowance is higher
your work-related expenses.for most major cities and many other localities in
the continental United States. See PublicationEmployee 2) You received full reimbursement for your1542, Per Diem Rates . These rates (al- expenses.lowances/limits) are also listed in Appendix A of
3) Your employer required you to return anyBusiness Chapter 41, Part 301 of the Code of Federal
excess reimbursement and you did so.Regulations. If you have a computer, you can
find them on the Internet at 4) Box 12 of your Form W–2, Wage and TaxExpenses www.policyworks.gov/perdiem . Click on Statement, shows no amount with a code
“2002 Domestic Per Diem Rates.” Use of the L.
standard meal allowance is explained under
If you meet these four conditions, there is noWhat Travel Expenses Are Deductible, later.Important Change need to show the expenses or the reimburse-
Meal expenses when subject to “hours of ments on your return. See Reimbursements,
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile- service” limits.Generally, you can deduct later, if you would like more information on reim-
age rate for the cost of operating your car inonly 50% of your business-related meal ex-bursements and accounting to your employer.
2002 is 361/2 cents a mile for all business miles.penses while traveling away from your tax home If you meet these conditions and yourCar expenses and use of the standard mile-for business purposes. You can deduct a higher employer included reimbursements onage rate are explained under Transportation Ex-percentage if the meals take place during or your Form W–2 in error, ask your em-
TIP
penses, later. incident to any period subject to the Departmentployer for a corrected Form W–2.of Transportation’s “hours of service” limits.Special depreciation allowance.Generally, (These limits apply to certain workers who arenew cars bought and placed in service in 2002under certain federal regulations.) The percent-Useful Itemsqualify for a special depreciation allowance. Theage is 65% for 2002. See Exceptions to the 50%You may want to see:special allowance is a depreciation deductionlimit under 50% Limit, later.equal to 30% of the adjusted basis of the car. PublicationThe special depreciation allowance can beLimits that apply to employee deductions.
claimed for cars used more than 50% in a quali- ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and CarIf you are an employee, deduct your work-re-
fied business use. See Special Depreciation Al- Expenseslated expenses discussed in this chapter as a
lowance in Publication 463. miscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule❏ 535 Business ExpensesA (Form 1040). Generally, the amount of miscel-Depreciation limits on cars.If you claim the ❏ 1542 Per Diem Rateslaneous itemized deductions you can deduct isspecial depreciation allowance, the limit on thelimited to the amount that is more than 2% of2002 depreciation deduction for a car (including Form (and Instructions)your adjusted gross income. It may be furtherany section 179 deduction) is increased tolimited if your adjusted gross income is more❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized$7,660. For cars that do not qualify for (or forthan $137,300 ($68,650 if you are married filing Deductionswhich you choose not to claim) the special de-separately). For more information, see chapterpreciation allowance, the limit remains $3,060. ❏ Schedule C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss22 and the instructions for Schedule A (FormSee Depreciation Limits in Publication 463. From Business1040).Exception for electric cars. If you claim the
❏ Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040)Net Profitspecial depreciation allowance for an electric
From Businesscar, the limit on the 2002 depreciation deduction
(including any section 179 deduction) is in- ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040)Profit or Loss
Introductioncreased to $23,080. For electric cars that do not From Farming
qualify for (or for which you choose not to claim)You may be able to deduct the ordinary and ❏ Form 2106 Employee Businessthe special depreciation allowance, the limit re-necessary business-related expenses you have Expensesmains $9,180. See Exceptions for clean-fuelfor:cars in Publication 463. ❏ Form 2106–EZ Unreimbursed Employee
• Travel, Business Expenses
• Entertainment,
• Gifts, orImportant Reminders
• Transportation. Travel Expenses
Claiming the special depreciation allowanceAn ordinary expense is one that is common
for 2001. If you filed your 2001 calendar year If you temporarily travel away from your taxand accepted in your field of trade, business, or
return before June 1, 2002, and did not claim the home, you can use this section to determine ifprofession. A necessary expense is one that is
new special depreciation allowance for a quali- you have deductible travel expenses. This sec-helpful and appropriate for your business. An
fied car, you can claim it by filing an amended tion defines “travel expenses,” “tax home,” “tem-expense does not have to be required to bereturn on Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual porary assignment,” and the “standard mealconsidered necessary.Income Tax Return, by April 15, 2003. At the top allowance.” It also discusses the rules for travelThis chapter explains:of the Form 1040X, print “Filed pursuant to Rev- inside and outside the United States and de-
enue Procedure 2002–33.” If you are an em- ductible convention expenses.• What expenses are deductible,ployee, attach Form 2106, Employee Business
• What records you need to prove your ex-Expenses. If you are self-employed, attach Travel expenses defined.For tax purposes,
Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortization. penses, travel expenses are the ordinary and necessary
Page 178 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 181 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expenses (defined earlier) of traveling away If you do not have a regular place of business community contacts in Boston. When you com-
from home for your business, profession, or job. or post of duty and there is no place where you plete your training, you are transferred to Los
regularly live, you are considered a transient Angeles.You will find examples of deductible travel
(an itinerant) and your tax home is wherever You do not satisfy factor (1) because you didexpenses in Table 28–1.
you work. As a transient, you cannot claim a not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-
Traveling away from home. You are travel-travel expense deduction because you are cause you had duplicate living expenses. You
ing away from home if: never considered to be traveling away from also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-
home. don your apartment in Boston as your main
1) Your duties require you to be away from home, you kept your community contacts, andMain place of business or work.If you havethe general area of your tax home (defined you frequently returned to live in your apartment.more than one place of work, consider the fol-later) substantially longer than an ordinary You have a tax home in Boston.lowing when determining which one is your mainday’s work, and
place of business or work. Travel to family home.If you (and your fam-2) You need to sleep or rest to meet the de- ily) do not live at your tax home, you cannotmands of your work while away from 1) The total time you ordinarily spend in eachdeduct the cost of traveling between your taxhome. place. home and your family home. You also cannot
deduct the cost of meals and lodging while atThis rest requirement is not satisfied by merely2) The level of your business activity in each
your tax home. See Example 1 that follows.napping in your car. You do not have to be awayplace.
If you are working temporarily in the samefrom your tax home for a whole day or from dusk3) Whether your income from each place iscity where you and your family live, you may beto dawn as long as your relief from duty is longsignificant or insignificant. considered as traveling away from home. Seeenough to get necessary sleep or rest.
Example 2, below.
Example 1. You are a railroad conductor.Example. You live in Cincinnati where you
Example 1. You are a truck driver and youYou leave your home terminal on a regularlyhave a seasonal job for 8 months each year and
and your family live in Tucson. You are em-scheduled round-trip run between two cities andearn $25,000. You work the other 4 months in
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal inreturn home 16 hours later. During the run, youMiami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $9,000.
Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you returnhave 6 hours off at your turnaround point whereCincinnati is your main place of work because
to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend oneyou eat two meals and rent a hotel room to getyou spend most of your time there and earn
night there before returning home. You cannotnecessary sleep before starting the return trip.most of your income there.
deduct any expenses you have for meals andYou are considered to be away from home. No main place of business or work. You lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from
may have a tax home even if you do not have aPhoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix isExample 2. You are a truck driver. Youregular or main place of work. Your tax homeyour tax home.leave your terminal and return to it later themay be the home where you regularly live.same day. You get an hour off at your turn-
Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-around point to eat. Because you are not off toFactors used to determine tax home.If
burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. Theget necessary sleep and the brief time off is notyou do not have a regular or main place of
rest of the year you work for the same employeran adequate rest period, you are not travelingbusiness or work, use the following three factors
in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurantsaway from home. to determine where your tax home is. 
and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the
1) You perform part of your business in theMembers of the Armed Forces. If you are a same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-
area of your main home and use thatmember of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma- more.
home for lodging while doing business innent duty assignment overseas, you are not Because you spend most of your working
the area.traveling away from home. You cannot deduct time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,
your expenses for meals and lodging. You can- that city is your tax home. You cannot deduct2) You have living expenses at your mainnot deduct these expenses even if you have to any expenses you have for meals and lodginghome that you duplicate because yourmaintain a home in the United States for your there. However, when you return to work inbusiness requires you to be away fromfamily members who are not allowed to accom- Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax homethat home.pany you overseas. If you are transferred from even though you stay at your family home. You
3) You have not abandoned the area in whichone permanent duty station to another, you may can deduct the cost of your round trip between
both your historical place of lodging andhave deductible moving expenses, which are Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct
your claimed main home are located; youexplained in chapter 19. your part of your family’s living expenses for
have a member or members of your familymeals and lodging while you are living and work-A naval officer assigned to permanent duty
living at your main home; or you often useing in Pittsburgh.aboard a ship that has regular eating and living
that home for lodging.facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel
expense purposes. If you satisfy all three factors, your tax homeTemporary Assignment
is the home where you regularly live. If youor Jobsatisfy only two factors, you may have a taxTax Home
home depending on all the facts and circum-You may regularly work at your tax home andTo determine whether you are traveling awaystances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are aanother location. It may not be practical to returnfrom home, you must first determine the locationtransient; your tax home is wherever you workhome from this other location at the end of eachof your tax home. and you cannot deduct travel expenses. work day.Generally, your tax home is your regular
place of business or post of duty, regardless ofExample. You are single and live in BostonTemporary assignment vs. indefinite assign-
where you maintain your family home. It in-in an apartment you rent. You have worked forment. If your assignment or job away from
cludes the entire city or general area in which your employer in Boston for a number of years. your main place of work is temporary, your tax
your business or work is located. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month execu- home does not change. You are considered to
If you have more than one regular place oftive training program. You do not expect to re- be away from home for the whole period you are
business, your tax home is your main place ofturn to work in Boston after you complete your away from your main place of work. You can
business. See Main place of business or work,training. deduct your travel expenses, if they otherwise
later. During your training, you do not do any work qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary
If you do not have a regular or a main placein Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and assignment in a single location is one that is
of business because of the nature of your work,on-the-job training throughout the United States. realistically expected to last (and does in fact
then your tax home may be the place where youYou keep your apartment in Boston and return to last) for one year or less.
regularly live. See No main place of business orit frequently. You use your apartment to conduct However, if your assignment or job is indefi-
work, later. your personal business. You also keep up yournite, the location of the assignment or job be-
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 179

Page 182 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your days off, you are not considered away fromTable 28–1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
home while you are in your hometown. YouThis chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel
cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-away from home for business purposes. ing there. However, you can deduct your travel
expenses, including meals and lodging, whileIF you have traveling between your temporary place of workexpenses for: THEN you can deduct the costs of: and your tax home. You can claim these ex-
penses up to the amount it would have cost you
Transportation Travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home andto stay at your temporary place of work.your business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or
If you keep your hotel room during your visityou are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similarhome, you can deduct the cost of your hotelprogram, your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-Water Travel and Cruise ships (under Conventions) in penses of returning home up to the amount youPublication 463 for additional rules and limits. would have spent for meals had you stayed at
your temporary place of work.Taxi, commuter Fares for these and other types of transportation that take you
bus, and airport between:
Probationary work period.If you take a joblimousine • The airport or station and your hotel, and that requires you to move, with the understand-
• The hotel and the work location of your customers oring that you will keep the job if your work is
clients, your business meeting place, or your temporarysatisfactory during a probationary period, the job
work location. is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of your
expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-Baggage and Sending baggage and sample or display material betweenbationary period.shipping your regular and temporary work locations.
Car Operating and maintaining your car when traveling away fromWhat Travel Expenses Are
home on business. You can deduct actual expenses or theDeductible?standard mileage rate as well as business-related tolls and
parking. If you rent a car while away from home on business,Once you have determined that you are travel-
you can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.ing away from your tax home, you can determine
what travel expenses are deductible.Lodging and meals Your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight orYou can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-long enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properlypenses you have when you travel away fromperform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food,home on business. The type of expense you canbeverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals for additional deduct depends on the facts and your circum-rules and limits. stances.
Cleaning Dry cleaning and laundry. Table 28–1 summarizes travel expenses you
may be able to deduct. You may have otherTelephone Business calls while on your business trip. This includesdeductible travel expenses that are not coveredbusiness communication by fax machine or other there, depending on the facts and your circum-communication devices. stances.
Tips Tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. When you travel away from home on
business, you should keep records ofOther Other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to yourall the expenses you have and anyRECORDS
business travel. These expenses might include transportationadvances you receive from your employer. Youto or from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees,can use a log, diary, notebook, or any othercomputer rental fees, and operating and maintaining a housewritten record to keep track of your expenses.trailer. The types of expenses you need to record,
along with supporting documentation, are de-
scribed in Table 28–2 later.
comes your new tax home and you cannot
1) For the federal government,deduct your travel expenses while there. An Separating costs.If you have one expenseassignment or job in a single location is consid-2) In a temporary duty status, and that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last and other services (such as lodging or transpor-3) To investigate or prosecute, or providefor more than one year, whether or not it actually tation), you must allocate that expense betweensupport services for the investigation orlasts for more than one year. the cost of meals and entertainment and the costprosecution of, a federal crime.If your assignment is indefinite, you must of other services. You must have a reasonableinclude in your income any amounts you receiveYou can deduct your otherwise allowable travelbasis for making this allocation. For example,from your employer for living expenses, even ifexpenses throughout the period of certification.you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-they are called travel allowances and you ac- cludes one or more meals in its room charge.Determining temporary or indefinite.Youcount to your employer for them. You may be
must determine whether your assignment isable to deduct the cost of relocating to your new Travel expenses for another individual.If atemporary or indefinite when you start work. Iftax home as a moving expense. See chapter 19 spouse, dependent, or other individual goes withyou expect an assignment or job to last for onefor more information. you (or your employee) on a business trip or to ayear or less, it is temporary unless there are
business convention, you generally cannot de-facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.Exception for federal crime investigations or duct his or her travel expenses.An assignment or job that is initially temporaryprosecutions. If you are a federal employeemay become indefinite due to changed circum-Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-participating in a federal crime investigation orstances. A series of assignments to the samepenses of someone who goes with you if thatprosecution, you are not subject to the one-yearlocation, all for short periods but that togetherperson:rule. This means you may be able to deductcover a long period, may be considered an in-travel expenses even if you are away from yourdefinite assignment. 1) Is your employee,tax home for more than one year.
For you to qualify, the Attorney General mustGoing home on days off. If you go back to 2) Has a bona fide business purpose for the
certify that you are traveling: your tax home from a temporary assignment on travel, and
Page 180 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 183 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the whether your employer’s reimbursement plan lowance if you are related to your employer as
travel expenses. was accountable or nonaccountable. If you are defined next.
not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whetherRelated to employer. You are related toBusiness associate.If a business associ-the unreimbursed meal expense is for businessyour employer if: ate travels with you and meets the conditions intravel or business entertainment. The 50% limit
(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travelis explained later under Entertainment Ex- 1) Your employer is your brother or sister,expenses you have for that person. A businesspenses. Accountable and nonaccountable plans half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-associate is someone with whom you could rea-are discussed later under Reimbursements.
tor, or lineal descendant,sonably expect to actively conduct business. A
Actual cost.You can use the actual cost ofbusiness associate can be a current or prospec- 2) Your employer is a corporation in whichyour meals to figure the amount of your expensetive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier, you own, directly or indirectly, more thanbefore reimbursement and application of theemployee, agent, partner, or professional advi- 10% in value of the outstanding stock, or50% deduction limit. If you use this method, yousor.
must keep records of your actual cost. 3) Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-
Bona fide business purpose.A bona fide duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,Standard meal allowance. Generally, youbusiness purpose exists if you can prove a real a trust, and your employer.can use the “standard meal allowance” methodbusiness purpose for the individual’s presence.
as an alternative to the actual cost method. It You may be considered to indirectly own stock,Incidental services, such as typing notes or as-
allows you to use a set amount for your dailyfor purposes of (2), if you have an interest in asisting in entertaining customers, are not
meals and incidental expenses (M&IE), in- corporation, partnership, estate, or trust thatenough to make the expenses deductible.
stead of keeping records of your actual costs.owns the stock or if a member of your family or
The set amount varies depending on where andExample. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- your partner owns the stock.
when you travel. In this chapter, “standard mealness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is
allowance” refers to the federal rate for M&IE,not Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally types Use of the standard meal allowance for otherdiscussed later under Amount of standard mealnotes, performs similar services, and accompa- travel.You can use the standard meal allow-allowance. If you use the standard meal allow-nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-
ance to figure your meal expenses when youance, you still must keep records to prove theformance of these services does not establish
travel in connection with investment and othertime, place, and business purpose of your travel.that her presence on the trip is necessary to the
income-producing property. You can also use itSee Recordkeeping, later.conduct of Jerry’s business. Her expenses are
to figure your meal expenses when you travel fornot deductible. Incidental expenses.These include, but qualifying educational purposes. You cannotJerry pays $115 a day for a double room. Aare not limited to, your costs for the followinguse the standard meal allowance to figure thesingle room costs $90 a day. He can deduct theitems. cost of your meals when you travel for medicaltotal cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,
or charitable purposes.but only $90 a day for his hotel room. If he uses1) Laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing.
public transportation, he can deduct only his(These expenses are not considered inci-
fare. dental expenses after December 31, Amount of standard meal allowance. The2002.) standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE
2) Fees and tips for persons who provide rate. For travel in 2002, the rate is $30 a day forMeals services, such as porters and baggagemost small localities in the United States. Most
carriers. major cities and many other localities in theYou can deduct the cost of meals in either of the
United States are designated as high-cost ar-following two situations. Incidental expenses do not include taxicabeas, qualifying for higher standard meal al-fares, lodging taxes, or the costs of telegrams or1) It is necessary for you to stop for substan- lowances. Locations qualifying for rates of $34,telephone calls.tial sleep or rest to properly perform your $38, $42, or $46 a day are listed in Publication
duties while traveling away from home on Federal employees should refer to the1542.business. federal travel regulations at
You can also find this information onwww.policyworks.gov/ftr  forCAUTION
!
2) The meal is business-related entertain- the internet at www.policyworks.gov/changes affecting their claims for reimburse-ment. perdiem. Click on “2002 Domestic Perment of these expenses.
Diem Rates” for the period January 1, 2002 —Business-related entertainment is discussed
September 30, 2002, and “2003 Domestic Perunder Entertainment Expenses, later. The fol- 50% limit may apply. If you use this
Diem Rates” for the period October 1, 2002 —lowing discussion deals only with meals that aremethod for meal expenses and you are not reim-
December 31, 2002.not business-related entertainment. bursed or you are reimbursed under a nonac-
countable plan, you can generally deduct onlyIf you travel to more than one location in oneLavish or extravagant.You cannot deduct 50% of the standard meal allowance. If you areday, use the rate in effect for the area where youexpenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-reimbursed under an accountable plan and youstop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-gant. An expense is not considered lavish orare deducting amounts that are more than yourtation industry, however, see Special rate forextravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsreimbursements, you can deduct only 50% oftransportation workers, later.and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-the excess amount. The 50% limit is explainedlowed merely because they are more than alater under Entertainment Expenses. Accounta- Standard meal allowance for areas outsidefixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-ble and nonaccountable plans are discussedthe continental United States.The standardtaurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.later under Reimbursements. meal allowance rates do not apply to travel in
Alaska, Hawaii, or any other locations outside50% limit on meals.You can figure your meal There is no optional standard lodging
expenses using either of the following two meth- the continental United States. The federal peramount similar to the standard meal
ods. diem rates for these locations are publishedallowance. Your allowable lodging ex-CAUTION
!
monthly in the Maximum Travel Per Diem Al-pense deduction is your actual cost.1) Actual cost. lowances for Foreign Areas.
2) The standard meal allowance. Who can use the standard meal allowance. Your employer may have these ratesYou can use the standard meal allowance available, or you can purchase theBoth of these methods are explained below. But,whether you are an employee or self-employed, publication from the:regardless of the method you use, you generallyand whether or not you are reimbursed for yourSuperintendent of Documentscan deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed costtraveling expenses. U.S. Government Printing Officeof your meals.
P.O. Box 371954If you are reimbursed for the cost of yourWho cannot use the standard meal allow-
Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends onance. You cannot use the standard meal al-
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 181

Page 184 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can also order it by calling the Public transportation.If you travel by publicTravel in theGovernment Printing Office at transportation, any place in the United States
United States1–202–512–1800 (not a toll-free where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a
number). point in the United States. Once the vehicle
The following discussion applies to travel in theleaves the last scheduled stop in the United
United States. For this purpose, the UnitedYou can access foreign per diem States on its way to a point outside the United
States includes the 50 states and the District ofrates at: www.state.gov/m/a/als/ States, you apply the rules under Travel Outside
Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-prdm . the United States.
penses depends on how much of your trip was
Example. You fly from New York to Puertobusiness related and on how much of your tripSpecial rate for transportation workers.
Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You returnoccurred within the United States. See Part ofYou can use a special standard meal allowance
to New York nonstop. The flight from New YorkTrip Outside the United States, later.if you work in the transportation industry. You
to Miami is in the United States, so only the flightare in the transportation industry if your work: from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United
States. Because there are no scheduled stopsTrip Primarily for Business1) Directly involves moving people or goods between Puerto Rico and New York, all of theby airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, orYou can deduct all your travel expenses if yourreturn trip is outside the United States.truck, and trip was entirely business related. If your trip wasPrivate car.Travel by private car in the United2) Regularly requires you to travel away fromprimarily for business and, while at your busi-States is travel between points in the Unitedhome and, during any single trip, usuallyness destination, you extended your stay for aStates, even when you are on your way to ainvolves travel to areas eligible for differentvacation, made a personal side trip, or had otherdestination outside the United States.standard meal allowance rates. personal activities, you can deduct your
business-related travel expenses. These ex-If this applies to you, you can claim a $38 a day Example. You travel by car from Denver topenses include the travel costs of getting to andMexico City and return. Your travel from Denverstandard meal allowance ($42 for travel outsidefrom your business destination and any to the border and from the border back to Den-the continental United States). business-related expenses at your businessver is travel in the United States, and the rules inUsing the special rate for transportationdestination. this section apply. The rules under Travelworkers eliminates the need for you to deter- Outside the United States apply to your trip frommine the standard meal allowance for every Example. You work in Atlanta and take athe border to Mexico City and back to the border.area where you stop for sleep or rest. If youbusiness trip to New Orleans. On your way
choose to use the special rate for any trip, youhome, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.
Travel Outsidemust use the special rate (and not use the regu-You spend $630 for the 9 days you are away
lar standard meal allowance rates) for all tripsfrom home for travel, meals, lodging, and otherthe United Statesyou take that year. travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-
bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, andIf any part of your business travel is outside the
your total cost would have been $580. You can United States, some of your deductions for theTravel for days you depart and return.For cost of getting to and from your destination maydeduct $580 for your trip, including theboth the day you depart for and the day you be limited. For this purpose, the United Statesround-trip transportation to and from New Orle-return from a business trip, you must prorate the includes the 50 states and the District of Colum-ans. The deduction for your meals is subject tostandard meal allowance (figure a reduced bia.the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.amount for each day). You can do so by one of How much of your travel expenses you cantwo methods. deduct depends in part upon how much of your
trip outside the United States was business re-Trip Primarily for1) Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan- lated.Personal Reasonsdard meal allowance, or See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for informa-
tion on luxury water travel.2) Method 2: You can prorate using any If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,
method that you consistently apply andsuch as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a
that is in accordance with reasonable busi-nondeductible personal expense. However, you
Travel Entirely for Businessness practice. can deduct any expenses you have while at your
destination that are directly related to your busi-or Considered Entirely
ness. for BusinessExample. Jen is employed in New Orleans
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be aas a convention planner. In March, her employer You can deduct all your travel expenses of get-vacation even if the promoter advertises that it issent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to ting to and from your business destination if yourprimarily for business. The scheduling of inci-attend a planning seminar. She left her home in trip is entirely for business or considered entirelydental business activities during a trip, such asNew Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and for business.viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingarrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After
with general subjects, will not change what isTravel entirely for business.If you travelspending two nights there, she flew back to New
really a vacation into a business trip. outside the United States and you spend theOrleans on Friday and arrived back home at
entire time on business activities, you can de-8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amount
duct all of your travel expenses.to cover her expenses and included it with her
Part of Trip Outsidewages. Travel considered entirely for business.the United StatesUnder Method 1, Jen can claim 21/2 days of Even if you did not spend your entire time on
the standard meal allowance for Washington, business activities, your trip is considered en-If part of your trip is outside the United States,
DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday and tirely for business if you meet at least one of theuse the rules described later under Travel
Friday (the days she departed and returned), following four exceptions.Outside the United States for that part of the trip.
and the full daily rate for Thursday. For the part of your trip that is inside the UnitedException 1 – No substantial control.
Under Method 2, Jen could also use anyStates, use the rules for travel in the UnitedYour trip is considered entirely for business if
method that she applies consistently and that isStates. Travel outside the United States doesyou did not have substantial control over arrang-
in accordance with reasonable business prac-not include travel from one point in the Uniteding the trip. The fact that you control the timing of
tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of theStates to another point in the United States. Theyour trip does not, by itself, mean that you have
standard meal allowance even though a federalfollowing discussion can help you determinesubstantial control over arranging your trip.
employee would have to use method 1 and bewhether your trip was entirely within the UnitedYou do not have substantial control over
limited to only 21/2 days. States. your trip if you:
Page 182 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 185 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
education program, you can deduct your regis- This rule applies to any membership organiza-
1) Are an employee who was reimbursed ortration fees and other expenses you have that tion if one of its principal purposes is either:
paid a travel expense allowance, are directly related to your business.
1) To conduct entertainment activities for2) Are not related to your employer, and members or their guests, or
Conventions3) Are not a managing executive. 2) To provide members or their guests with
“Related to your employer” was defined ear- access to entertainment facilities.You can deduct your travel expenses when you
lier in this chapter under Who cannot use the attend a convention if you can show that yourThe purposes and activities of a club, not itsstandard meal allowance. attendance benefits your trade or business. Youname, will determine whether or not you cancannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-A “managing executive” is an employee who deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paidily.has the authority and responsibility, without be- to:
ing subject to the veto of another, to decide onIf the convention is for investment, political,
the need for the business travel. 1) Country clubs,social, or other nonbusiness purposes, you can-
not deduct the expenses.A self-employed person generally has sub- 2) Golf and athletic clubs,stantial control over arranging business trips. Your appointment or election as a dele-3) Airline clubs,gate does not, in itself, determineException 2 – Outside United States no
4) Hotel clubs, andwhether you can deduct travel ex-more than a week. Your trip is considered
CAUTION
!
penses. You can deduct your travel expensesentirely for business if you were outside the 5) Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-only if your attendance is connected to your ownUnited States for a week or less, combining cumstances generally considered to betrade or business.business and nonbusiness activities. One week conducive to business discussions.
means seven consecutive days. In counting the
days, do not count the day you leave the UnitedConvention agenda. The convention agenda Entertainment. Entertainment includes anyStates, but do count the day you return to theor program generally shows the purpose of theactivity generally considered to provide enter-United States. convention. You can show your attendance attainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples
the convention benefits your trade or businessinclude entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-Exception 3 – Less than 25% of time on
by comparing the agenda with the official dutiescial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; atpersonal activities.Your trip is considered
and responsibilities of your position. The agendasporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-entirely for business if: does not have to deal specifically with your offi-ing, vacation, and similar trips. You cannot de-
cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enoughduct expenses for entertainment that are lavish1) You were outside the United States for
if the agenda is so related to your position that itor extravagant. If you buy a ticket to an enter-more than a week, and
shows your attendance was for business pur-tainment event for a client, you generally cannot2) You spent less than 25% of the total timeposes. deduct more than the face value of the ticket,you were outside the United States on even if you paid a higher price.nonbusiness activities. Conventions held outside the North Ameri-
Gift or entertainment.Any item that mightcan area. See chapter 1 of Publication 463 forFor this purpose, count both the day your trip be considered either a gift or entertainment gen-information on conventions held outside thebegan and the day it ended. erally will be considered entertainment. How-North American area.
ever, if you give a customer packaged food orException 4 – Vacation not a major con-
beverages that you intend the customer to usesideration.Your trip is considered entirely for
at a later date, treat it as a gift.business if you can establish that a personal
If you give a customer tickets to a theatervacation was not a major consideration, even ifEntertainment performance or sporting event and you do not goyou have substantial control over arranging the
with the customer to the performance or event,trip. Expenses you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the
tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-
You may be able to deduct business-relatedment expense, whichever is to your advantage.Travel Primarily for Business entertainment expenses you have for entertain-You can change your treatment of the tickets
ing a client, customer, or employee.If you travel outside the United States primarily at a later date by filing an amended return.
You can deduct entertainment expensesfor business but spend some of your time on Generally, an amended return must be filed
only if they are both ordinary and necessarynonbusiness activities, you generally cannot de- within 3 years from the date the original return
(defined earlier) and meet one of the followingduct all of your travel expenses. You can only was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax
two tests.deduct the business portion of your cost of get- was paid, whichever is later.
ting to and from your destination. You must If you go with the customer to the event, you
1) Directly-related test.make an allocation between your business and must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
nonbusiness activities to determine your de- ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,2) Associated test.
ductible amount. These travel allocation rules to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.
Both of these tests are explained in Publicationare discussed in chapter 1 of Publication 463. Separating costs.If you have one expense463.
You do not have to allocate your travel that includes the costs of entertainment, and
The amount you can deduct for enter-expense deduction if you meet one of other services (such as lodging or transporta-
tainment expenses may be limited.the four exceptions listed earlier under tion), you must allocate that expense between
TIP
Generally, you can deduct only 50% ofCAUTION
!
Travel considered entirely for business. In those the cost of entertainment and the cost of other
your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.cases, you can deduct the total cost of getting to services. You must have a reasonable basis for
This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.and from your destination. making this allocation. For example, you must
allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-
tainment in its lounge on the same bill with yourClub dues and membership fees. You can-
room charge.not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for
Travel Primarily for Personal membership in any club organized for: A meal as a form of entertainment.Enter-Reasons
tainment includes the cost of a meal you provide1) Business,If you travel outside the United States primarily to a customer or client, whether the meal is a
for vacation or for investment purposes, the part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal2) Pleasure,
entire cost of the trip is a nondeductible per- expense includes the cost of food, beverages,3) Recreation, orsonal expense. If you spend some time attend- taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an
ing brief professional seminars or a continuing4) Other social purpose. entertainment-related meal, you or your em-
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 183

Page 186 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal
or entertainment activity,
• Cover charges for admission to a night-
club,
• Rent paid for a room in which you hold a
dinner or cocktail party, and
• Amounts paid for parking at a sports
arena.
However, the cost of transportation to and from
a business meal or a business-related entertain-
ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.
Application of 50% limit.The 50% limit on
meal and entertainment expenses applies if the
expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later in
this section.
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal
and entertainment expenses that are not
business-related. It applies to meal and enter-
tainment expenses incurred for the production of
income, including rental or royalty income. It
also applies to the cost of meals included in
deductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit.You apply the
50% limit after determining the amount that
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
determine the amount of meal and entertain-
ment expenses that would be deductible under
the other rules discussed in this chapter.
Example 1. You spend $100 for a
business-related meal. If $40 of that amount is
not allowable because it is lavish and extrava-
gant, the remaining $60 is subject to the 50%
limit. Your deduction cannot be more than $30
(.50 × $60).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
Figure 28–A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. For more information, see
50% Limit.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not include
in box 1 of your Form W–2. If self-employed, count only
reimbursements from clients or customers that are not
included on Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See How To Report.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed. . . For the excess amount. . .
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However,
since the reimbursement was
not treated as wages or as
other taxable income, you
cannot deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
Yes
No
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
paid $150 for the two tickets, which had a face
value of $60 each ($120 total). Your deduction
ployee must be present when the food or bever- cannot be more than $60 (.50 × $120).50% Limitages are provided.
In general, you can deduct only 50% of yourYou cannot claim the cost of your meal
business-related meal and entertainment ex-Exceptions to the 50% Limitboth as an entertainment expense and
penses. (If you are subject to the Department ofas a travel expense.CAUTION
!
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-Transportation’s “hours of service” limits, you
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.can deduct a higher percentage. See IndividualsTaking turns paying for meals or entertain- Figure 28–A can help you determine if the 50%subject to “hours of service” limits, later.)ment. If a group of business acquaintances limit applies to you.The 50% limit applies to employees or theirtake turns picking up each others’ meal or enter- Your meal or entertainment expense is notemployers, and to self-employed persons (in-tainment checks without regard to whether any subject to the 50% limit if the expense meetscluding independent contractors) or their clients,business purposes are served, no member of either of the following exceptions.depending on whether the expenses are reim-the group can deduct any part of the expense.bursed. Employee’s reimbursed expenses. If youFigure 28–A summarizes the general rulesTrade association meetings.You can de- are an employee, you are not subject to the 50%explained in this section.duct expenses for entertainment that are directly limit on the amount of expenses for which yourThe 50% limit applies to business meals orrelated to, and necessary for, attending busi- employer reimburses you under an accountableentertainment expenses you have while:ness meetings or conventions of certain exempt plan. Accountable plans are discussed later
organizations if the expenses of your attend- under Reimbursements.1) Traveling away from home (whether eatingance are related to your active trade or busi-alone or with others) on business, Individuals subject to “hours of service”ness. These organizations include business
limits.You can deduct a higher percentage of2) Entertaining customers at your place ofleagues, chambers of commerce, real estate
your meal expenses if the meals take placebusiness, a restaurant, or other location, orboards, trade associations, and professional as- during or incident to any period subject to thesociations. 3) Attending a business convention or recep-Department of Transportation’s “hours of serv-
tion, business meeting, or business lunch-ice” limits. The percentage is 65% for 2002, and
eon at a club.Additional information.For more information it gradually increases to 80% by the year 2008.
on entertainment expenses, including discus- Individuals subject to the Department of
sions of the directly-related and associatedIncluded expenses. Expenses subject to the Transportation’s “hours of service” limits include
tests, see chapter 2 of Publication 463. 50% limit include: the following persons. 
Page 184 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 187 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
you are treated as one taxpayer. It does not
matter whether you have separate businesses,
are separately employed, or whether each of
you has an independent connection with the
recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
ship and the partners are treated as one tax-
payer.
Incidental costs.Incidental costs, such as
engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,
and mailing, are generally not included in deter-
mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25
limit.
A cost is incidental only if it does not add
substantial value to the gift. For example, the
cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-
ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for
packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the
value of the basket is substantial compared to
the value of the fruit.
Exceptions. The following items are not con-
sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. 
1) An item that costs $4 or less and:
a) Has your name clearly and perma-
nently imprinted on the gift, and
b) Is one of a number of identical items
you widely distribute. Examples include
pens, desk sets, and plastic bags and
cases.
2) Signs, display racks, or other promotional
material to be used on the business prem-
ises of the recipient.
Gift or entertainment.Any item that might be
considered either a gift or entertainment gener-
ally will be considered entertainment. However,
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
ages that you intend the customer to use at a
later date, treat it as a gift.
If you give a customer tickets to a theater
performance or sporting event and you do not go
with the customer to the performance or event,
you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the
tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-
ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.
Figure 28–B.
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have aregular or main job
at another location
Always deductible
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home .)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
You can change your treatment of the tickets
at a later date by filing an amended return.
Generally, an amended return must be filed1) Certain air transportation workers (such as
Gift Expenses within 3 years from the date the original returnpilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and
was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxcontrol tower operators) who are underIf you give gifts in the course of your trade orwas paid, whichever is later.Federal Aviation Administration regula-business, you can deduct all or part of the cost.If you go with the customer to the event, youtions. This section explains the limits and rules formust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-2) Interstate truck operators and bus driversdeducting the costs of gifts. ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,who are under Department of Transporta- to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.$25 limit.You can deduct no more than $25tion regulations.
for business gifts you give directly or indirectly to
3) Certain railroad employees (such as engi-any one person during your tax year. A gift to a
neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-company that is intended for the eventual per-
ers, and control operations personnel) whosonal use or benefit of a particular person or aTransportationare under Federal Railroad Administrationlimited class of people will be considered an
regulations. indirect gift to that particular person or to theExpenses
individuals within that class of people who re-4) Certain merchant mariners who are under
ceive the gift. This section discusses expenses you can de-Coast Guard regulations.
If you give a gift to a member of a customer’s duct for business transportation when you are
family, the gift is generally considered to be an not traveling away from home as defined earlier.
indirect gift to the customer. This rule does not These expenses include the cost of transporta-
apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi- tion by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the cost of
ness connection with that family member and driving and maintaining your car.
the gift is not intended for the customer’s even- Transportation expenses include the ordi-
tual use. nary and necessary costs of all of the following.
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 185

Page 188 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot deduct daily transportation costsCar pools. You cannot deduct the cost of• Getting from one workplace to another inbetween your home and temporary work sites using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do notthe course of your business or professionwithin your metropolitan area. These are non- include payments you receive from the passen-when you are traveling within your taxdeductible commuting expenses. gers in your income. These payments are con-home. (Tax home is defined earlier under sidered reimbursements of your expenses.Travel Expenses.) Two places of work.If you work at two placesHowever, if you operate a car pool for a profit,
in one day, whether or not for the same em-• Visiting clients or customers. you must include payments from passengers in
ployer, you can deduct the expense of gettingyour income. You can then deduct your car• Going to a business meeting away fromfrom one workplace to the other. However, if forexpenses (using the rules in this chapter).your regular workplace. some personal reason you do not go directlyHauling tools or instruments. Haulingfrom one location to the other, you cannot de-• Getting from your home to a temporary tools or instruments in your car while commutingduct more than the amount it would have costworkplace when you have one or more to and from work does not make your car ex-you to go directly from the first location to theregular places of work. These temporary penses deductible. However, you can deductsecond.workplaces can be either within the area any additional costs you have for hauling tools orof your tax home or outside that area. Transportation expenses you have in goinginstruments (such as for renting a trailer you towbetween home and a part-time job on a day offTransportation expenses do not include ex- with your car).from your main job are commuting expenses.penses you have while traveling away from Union members’ trips from a union hall.IfYou cannot deduct them.home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex- you get your work assignments at a union hallpenses, which are discussed earlier. However, ifArmed Forces reservists.A meeting of an and then go to your place of work, the costs ofyou use your car while traveling away fromArmed Forces reserve unit is a second place ofgetting from the union hall to your place of workhome overnight, use the rules in this section tobusiness if the meeting is held on a day on whichare nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-figure your car expense deduction. See Car Ex- you work at your regular job. You can deduct thethough you need the union to get your workpenses, later. expense of getting from one workplace to theassignments, you are employed where youother as just discussed under Two places of work, not where the union hall is located.Illustration of transportation expenses.Fig- work.
ure 28–B illustrates the rules for when you can Office in the home.If you have an office inYou usually cannot deduct the expense if the
deduct transportation expenses when you have your home that qualifies as a principal place ofreserve meeting is held on a day on which you
a regular or main job away from your home. You business, you can deduct your daily transporta-do not work at your regular job. In this case, your
may want to refer to it when deciding whether tion costs between your home and another worktransportation generally is considered a nonde-
you can deduct your transportation expenses. location in the same trade or business. (Seeductible commuting expense. However, you can
chapter 30 for information on determining if yourdeduct your transportation expenses if the loca-Temporary work location.If you have one or home office qualifies as a principal place oftion of the meeting is temporary and you havemore regular work locations away from your business.)one or more regular places of work.home and you commute to a temporary work If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-Examples of deductible transportation ex-location in the same trade or business, you canitan area but not at any specific location and thepenses. The following examples show whendeduct the expenses of the daily round-tripreserve meeting is held at a temporary locationyou can deduct transportation expenses basedtransportation between your home and the tem-outside that metropolitan area, you can deducton the location of your work and your home.porary location, regardless of distance. your transportation expenses.If your employment at a work location is If you travel away from home overnight toExample 1. You regularly work in an officerealistically expected to last (and does in factattend a guard or reserve meeting, you canin the city where you live. Your employer sendslast) for one year or less, the employment isdeduct your travel expenses. These expensesyou to a one-week training session at a differenttemporary unless there are facts and circum-are discussed earlier under Travel Expenses. office in the same city. You travel directly fromstances that would indicate otherwise.
your home to the training location and returnIf your employment at a work location isCommuting expenses. You cannot deduct each day. You can deduct the cost of your dailyrealistically expected to last for more than 1 yearthe costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi,round-trip transportation between your homeor if there is no realistic expectation that theor of driving a car between your home and your and the training location.employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-main or regular place of work. These costs areployment is not temporary, regardless of personal commuting expenses. You cannot de-Example 2. Your principal place of businesswhether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.duct commuting expenses no matter how faris in your home. You can deduct the cost ofIf employment at a work location initially isyour home is from your regular place of work.round-trip transportation between your qualify-realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,You cannot deduct commuting expenses even ifing home office and your client’s or customer’sbut at some later date the employment is realisti-you work during the commuting trip. place of business.cally expected to last more than 1 year, that
employment will be treated as temporary (un-Example. You had a telephone installed inExample 3. You have no regular office, andless there are facts and circumstances thatyour car. You sometimes use that telephone toyou do not have an office in your home. In thiswould indicate otherwise) until your expectationmake business calls while commuting to andcase, the location of your first business contactchanges. It will not be treated as temporary afterfrom work. Sometimes business associates rideis considered your office. Transportation ex-the date you determine it will last more than 1with you to and from work, and you have apenses between your home and this first contactyear. business discussion in the car. These activitiesare nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-
If the temporary work location is beyond thedo not change the trip from personal to busi-portation expenses between your last business
general area of your regular place of work andness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex-contact and your home are also nondeductible
you stay overnight, you are traveling away frompenses. commuting expenses. Although you cannot de-
home. You may have deductible travel ex- duct the costs of these first and last trips, youParking fees.Fees you pay to park your carpenses as discussed earlier in this chapter. can deduct the costs of going from one client orat your place of business are nondeductible
customer to another.commuting expenses. You can, however, de-No regular place of work.If you have no duct business-related parking fees when visitingregular place of work but ordinarily work in thea customer or client. Car Expensesmetropolitan area where you live, you can de-
duct daily transportation costs between homeAdvertising display on car.Putting displayIf you use your car for business purposes, youand a temporary work site outside that metro- material that advertises your business on yourmay be able to deduct car expenses. You gener-politan area. car does not change the use of your car fromally can use one of the two following methods topersonal use to business use. If you use this carGenerally, a metropolitan area includes the figure your deductible expenses.for commuting or other personal uses, you stillarea within the city limits and the suburbs that
cannot deduct your expenses for those uses.are considered part of that metropolitan area. • Actual car expenses.
Page 186 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 189 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Standard mileage rate. If you want to use the standard mileage rate of work are nondeductible commuting ex-
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire penses.)
If you use actual car expenses to figure yourlease period. For leases that began on or before
deduction for a car you lease, there are rulesDecember 31, 1997, the standard mileage rate
that affect the amount of your lease paymentsmust be used for the entire portion of the leaseActual Car Expenses
that you can deduct. See Leasing a car under period (including renewals) that is after 1997.
If you do not use the standard mileage rate, youActual Car Expenses, later. If you choose to use the standard mileage
may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.rate, you are considered to have chosen not toIn this chapter, “car” includes a van, pickup,
use the depreciation methods under the Modi-or panel truck. If you qualify to use both methods, youfied Accelerated Cost Recovery System may want to figure your deduction bothYou may be entitled to a tax credit for(MACRS). This is because the standard mileage ways to see which gives you a largeran electric vehicle (see chapter 38) or a
TIP
rate includes an allowance for depreciation thatdeduction.deduction from gross income for a part
TIP
is not expressed in terms of years. If you changeof the cost of a clean-fuel vehicle that you placeto the actual expenses method in a later year,in service during the year. The vehicle must Actual car expenses include:but before your car is fully depreciated, you havemeet certain requirements, and you do not haveto estimate the remaining useful life of the carto use it in your business to qualify for the credit Depreciation Lease Registrationand use straight line depreciation. For more in-or the deduction. For more information, see payments feesformation about depreciation included in thechapter 12 of Publication 535. Garage rent Licenses Repairsstandard mileage rate, see the exception inGas Oil TiresMethods of depreciation under Depreciation De- Insurance Parking fees TollsRural mail carriers.If you are a rural mailduction in chapter 4 of Publication 463.
carrier, you may be able to treat the amount of Business and personal use.If you use yourStandard mileage rate not allowed. Youqualified reimbursement you received as the car for both business and personal purposes,cannot use the standard mileage rate if you:amount of your allowable expense. Because the you must divide your expenses between busi-qualified reimbursement is treated as paid under1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),ness and personal use. You can divide youran accountable plan, your employer should not expense based on the miles driven for each2) Use two or more cars at the same time (asinclude the amount of reimbursement in your purpose.in fleet operations),income. And, since the reimbursement equals
the expense, you have no deduction to report on3) Claimed a depreciation deduction for theExample. You are a contractor and driveyour tax return. car using any method other than straightyour car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,000A “qualified reimbursement” is the amount ofline depreciation, miles for business use and 8,000 miles for per-reimbursement you receive that meets both of sonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷4) Claimed a section 179 deduction on thethe following conditions. 20,000) of the cost of operating your car as acar,
business expense.1) It is given as an equipment maintenance5) Claimed the special depreciation allow-allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S. Interest on car loans.If you are an employee,ance on the car,Postal Service. you cannot deduct any interest paid on a car6) Claimed actual car expenses after 1997loan. This interest is treated as personal interest2) It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-for a car you leased, or and is not deductible. However, if you arelective bargaining agreement. Any later
self-employed and use your car in that business,agreement cannot increase the qualified7) Are a rural mail carrier who received a
see chapter 5 of Publication 535.reimbursement amount by more than the qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail
rate of inflation. carriers, earlier.) If you use a home equity loan to
purchase your car, you may be able toSee your employer for information on your reim-Two or more cars. If you own two or more deduct the interest. See chapter 25 forbursement.
TIP
cars that are used for business at the same time,more information.If you are a rural mail carrier and re-you cannot use the standard mileage rate for the
ceived a qualified reimbursement, youbusiness use of any car. However, you may beTaxes paid on your car.If you are an em-cannot use the standard mileage rate.able to deduct your actual expenses for operat-CAUTION
!
ployee, you can deduct personal property taxesing each of the cars in your business. See Actual paid on your car if you itemize deductions. EnterCar Expenses in chapter 4 of Publication 463 forthe amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Forminformation on how to figure your deduction.1040). (See chapter 24 for more information onStandard Mileage Rate You are not using two or more cars for busi-taxes.) If you are not an employee, see yourness at the same time if you alternate using (useform instructions for information on how to de-You may be able to use the standard mileageat different times) the cars for business.duct personal property taxes paid on your car.rate to figure the deductible costs of operating
You cannot deduct sales taxes, even if youyour car for business purposes. For 2002, theExample 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns ause your car 100% for business. Sales taxes arestandard mileage rate is 361/2 cents a mile for allcar and a van that she alternates using for call-part of your car’s basis and are recoveredbusiness miles. ing on her customers. She can use the standardthrough depreciation, discussed later.mileage rate for the business mileage of the carIf you use the standard mileage rate for
and the van.a year, you cannot deduct your actual Fines and collateral.You cannot deduct fines
car expenses for that year. and collateral you pay for traffic violations.CAUTION
!
Example 2. Maureen owns a car and a van
Depreciation and section 179 deductions.You generally can use the standard mileagethat are both used in her housecleaning busi-
Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax andrate regardless of whether you are reimbursedness. Her employees use the van and she uses
improvements, is a capital expense. Becauseand whether any reimbursement is more or lessthe car to travel to the various customers. Mau-
the benefits last longer than one year, you gen-than the amount figured using the standard mile-reen cannot use the standard mileage rate for
erally cannot deduct a capital expense. How-age rate. See Reimbursements under How To the car or the van. This is because both vehicles
ever, you can recover this cost through theReport, later. are used in Maureen’s business at the same
section 179 deduction (the deduction allowed bytime. She must use actual expenses for both
Choosing the standard mileage rate.If you section 179 of the Internal Revenue Code), thevehicles.
want to use the standard mileage rate for a car special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-
you own, you must choose to use it in the firstParking fees and tolls.In addition to using tion deductions. By using depreciation, you re-
year the car is available for use in your business. the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any cover the cost over more than one year by
Then in later years, you can choose to use either business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parking deducting part of it each year. The section 179
the standard mileage rate or actual expenses. fees that you pay to park your car at your place deduction, the special depreciation allowance,
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 187

Page 190 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and the depreciation deduction are discussed in is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How- wise, you must keep a record of the amounts
more detail in chapter 4 of Publication 463. ever, if you prepare a record in a computer you spend.
Generally, there are limits on these deduc- memory device with the aid of a logging pro-Timely-kept records.You should record thetions. Special rules apply if you use your car gram, it is considered an adequate record.elements of an expense or of a business use at50% or less in your work or business. or near the time of the expense or use and
support it with sufficient documentary evidence.Leasing a car.If you lease a car that you useWhat Are Adequate Records? A timely-kept record has more value than ain your business, you can use the standard mile-
statement prepared later when generally there isage rate or actual expenses to figure your de-You should keep the proof you need in an ac-
a lack of accurate recall.ductible car expense. count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-
You do not need to write down the elementsilar record. You should also keep documentaryDeductible payments. If you choose to use of every expense on the day of the expense. Ifevidence that, together with your records, willactual expenses, you can deduct the part of you maintain a log on a weekly basis whichsupport each element of an expense.each lease payment that is for the use of the car accounts for use during the week, the log isin your business. You cannot deduct any part ofDocumentary evidence. You generally must considered a timely-kept record.a lease payment that is for personal use of thehave documentary evidence, such as receipts,If you give your employer, client, or customercar, such as commuting. canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-an expense account statement, it can also beYou must spread any advance payments penses. considered a timely-kept record. This is true ifover the entire lease period. You cannot deduct you copy it from your account book, diary, state-Exception. Documentary evidence is notany payments you make to buy a car, even if the ment of expense, or similar record.needed if any of the following conditions apply.payments are called lease payments.
If you lease a car for 30 days or more, you Proving business purpose.You must gener-1) You have meals or lodging expenses while
may have to reduce your lease payment deduc- ally provide a written statement of the businesstraveling away from home for which you
tion by an “inclusion amount.” For information on purpose of an expense. However, the degree ofaccount to your employer under an ac-
reporting lease inclusion amounts, see Leasing proof varies according to the circumstances incountable plan and you use a per diem
a Car in chapter 4 of Publication 463. each case. If the business purpose of an ex-allowance method that includes meals
pense is clear from the surrounding circum-and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and
stances, then you do not need to give a writtenper diem allowances are discussed later
explanation.Sale, Trade-in, or Other Dispositionunder Reimbursements.)
Confidential information.You do not need to2) Your expense, other than lodging, is lessIf you sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your
put confidential information relating to an ele-than $75.car, you may have a taxable gain or a deductible
ment of a deductible expense (such as theloss. This is true whether you used the standard3) You have a transportation expense forplace, business purpose, or business relation-mileage rate or actual car expenses to deductwhich a receipt is not readily available.ship) in your account book, diary, or other re-the business use of your car. Publication 544
cord. However, you do have to record thehas information on sales of property used in aAdequate evidence. Documentary evi- information elsewhere at or near the time of thetrade or business, and details on how to reportdence ordinarily will be considered adequate if itexpense and have it available to fully prove thatthe disposition. shows the amount, date, place, and essentialelement of the expense.character of the expense.
For example, a hotel receipt is enough to
support expenses for business travel if it has allWhat If I Have IncompleteRecordkeeping of the following information. Records?
1) The name and location of the hotel.If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans- If you do not have complete records to prove anportation expenses, you must be able to prove2) The dates you stayed there. element of an expense, then you must prove the(substantiate) certain elements of the expense. element with: 3) Separate amounts for charges such asThis section discusses the records you need to
lodging, meals, and telephone calls.keep to prove these expenses. 1) Your own written or oral statement, con-
taining specific information about the ele-A restaurant receipt is enough to prove anIf you keep timely and accurate rec-
ment, andexpense for a business meal if it has all of theords, you will have support to show the
following information.IRS if your tax return is ever examined.RECORDS
2) Other supporting evidence that is sufficient
You will also have proof of expenses that your to establish the element.1) The name and location of the restaurant.employer may require if you are reimbursed
under an accountable plan. These plans are2) The number of people served. Destroyed records. If you cannot produce adiscussed later under Reimbursements. receipt because of reasons beyond your control,3) The date and amount of the expense.
you can prove a deduction by reconstructingIf a charge is made for items other than food andyour records or expenses. Reasons beyondHow To Prove Expenses beverages, the receipt must show that this is theyour control include fire, flood, and other casu-case. alty.Table 28–2 is a summary of records you need to
Canceled check. A canceled check, to-prove each expense discussed in this chapter.
gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-You must be able to prove the elements listed Separating and Combiningtablishes the cost. However, a canceled checkacross the top portion of the chart. You prove
by itself does not prove a business expenseExpensesthem by having the information and receipts
without other evidence to show that it was for a(where needed) for the expenses listed in the This section explains when expenses must bebusiness purpose.first column. kept separate and when expenses can be com-Duplicate information.You do not have toYou cannot deduct amounts that you bined.record information in your account book or otherapproximate or estimate.
record that duplicates information shown on aSeparating expenses. Each separate pay-CAUTION
!
receipt as long as your records and receipts ment is generally considered a separate ex-
You should keep adequate records to prove complement each other in an orderly manner. pense. For example, if you entertain a customer
your expenses or have sufficient evidence that You do not have to record amounts your or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the
will support your own statement. You must gen- employer pays directly for any ticket or other dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-
erally prepare a written record for it to be consid- travel item. However, if you charge these items ets are two separate expenses. You must record
ered adequate. This is because written evidence to your employer, through a credit card or other- them separately in your records.
Page 188 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 191 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 28–2. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements.
Place or Business Purpose andIF you have
Amount Time Description Business Relationshipexpenses for:
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense for travel, lodging, and returned of your travel (name expense or the business benefit gained or
and meals. Incidental for each trip of city, town, or expected to be gained.
expenses may be totaled in and number of other designation).
reasonable categories such days spent on Relationship: N/A
as taxis, daily meals for business.
traveler, etc.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. Incidental entertainment. or location of place expense or the business benefit gained or
expenses such as taxis, (Also see of entertainment. expected to be gained. For entertainment,
telephones, etc., may beBusiness Type of the nature of the business discussion or
totaled on a daily basis.Purpose.) entertainment if not activity. If the entertainment was directly
otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the
(Also see Business date, place, nature, and duration of the
Purpose.) business discussion, and the identities of
the persons who took part in both theGifts Cost of the gift. Date of the gift. Description of thebusiness discussion and thegift. entertainment activity.
Relationship: Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or
other designations) about the recipients
that shows their business relationship to
you. For entertainment, you must also
prove that you or your employee was
present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. For car expenses, expense. For destination. expense.
the cost of the car and any car expenses,
improvements, the date you the date of the Relationship: N/A
started using it for business, use of the car.
the mileage for each
business use, and the total
miles for the year.
Combining items. You can make one daily ords, statements, testimony, or documentary 2) Your expenses are reimbursed under a
entry in your record for reasonable categories of nonaccountable plan.evidence before a deduction is allowed.
expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone 3) Your employer does not use adequate ac-calls, or other incidental travel costs. MealsHow Long To Keep counting procedures to verify expense ac-should be in a separate category. You can in- counts.Records and Receiptsclude tips for meal-related services with the
4) You are related to your employer, as de-costs of the meals.
You must keep records as long as they may befined earlier under Who cannot use theExpenses of a similar nature occurring dur-
needed for the administration of any provision ofstandard meal allowance.ing the course of a single event are considered a
the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, thissingle expense. For example, if during entertain- See the next section, How To Report, for ameans you must keep your records that supportment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately for discussion of reimbursements, adequate ac-your deduction (or an item of income) for 3 yearseach serving of refreshments, the total expense counting, and nonaccountable plans.from the date you file the income tax return onfor the refreshments is treated as a single ex-
which the deduction is claimed. A return filedpense. Additional information.Chapter 5 of Publi-early is considered filed on the due date. For aAllocating total cost.If you can prove the cation 463 has more information on recordkeep-more complete explanation, get Publication 583,total cost of travel or entertainment but you can- ing, including examples.Starting a Business and Keeping Records.not prove how much it cost for each person who
participated in the event, you may have to allo-Reimbursed for expenses. Employees whocate the total cost among you and your guestsgive their records and documentation to theiron a pro rata basis. An allocation would be How To Reportemployers and are reimbursed for their ex-needed, for example, if you did not have a busi-penses generally do not have to keep copies ofness relationship with all of your guests. This section explains where and how to reportthis information. However, you may have to
the expenses discussed in this chapter. It dis-If your return is examined.If your return isprove your expenses if any of the following con-
cusses reimbursements and how to treat themexamined, you may have to provide additionalditions apply.
under accountable and nonaccountable plans. Itinformation to the IRS. This information could be
1) You claim deductions for expenses thatalso explains rules for fee-basis officials, certainneeded to clarify or to establish the accuracy or
are more than reimbursements. performing artists, and certain disabled employ-reliability of information contained in your rec-
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 189

Page 192 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ees. This section ends with an illustration of how ment as wage income in box 1 of your Form business-related expenses that you adequately
to report travel, entertainment, gift, and car ex- W–2. You cannot deduct personal expenses. accounted for to your employer.
penses on Form 2106–EZ. The definition of reasonable period of time
depends on the facts and circumstances of your
ReimbursementsSelf-employed. You must report your income situation. However, regardless of the facts and
and expenses on Schedule C or C–EZ (Form circumstances of your situation, actions thatThis section explains what to do when you re-1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- take place within the times specified in the fol-ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any ofule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not lowing list will be treated as taking place within athe employee business expenses discussed inuse Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. See your form reasonable period of time.this chapter.instructions for information on how to completeIf you received an advance, allowance, oryour tax return. You can also find information in 1) You receive an advance within 30 days ofreimbursement for your expenses, how you re-Publication 535 if you are a sole proprietor, or in the time you have an expense.port this amount and your expenses depends onPublication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide, if you are 2) You adequately account for your expenseswhether the reimbursement was paid to youa farmer. within 60 days after they were paid or in-under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable
curred.plan.Both self-employed and an employee. If
This section explains the two types of plans,you are both self-employed and an employee, 3) You return any excess reimbursementhow per diem and car allowances simplify prov-you must keep separate records for each busi- within 120 days after the expense wasing the amount of your expenses, and the taxness activity. Report your business expenses for paid or incurred.treatment of your reimbursements and ex-self-employment on Schedule C, C–EZ, or F
4) You are given a periodic statement (atpenses.(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your
least quarterly) that asks you to either re-business expenses for your work as an em-
No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed turn or adequately account for outstandingployee on Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, as discussed
or given an allowance for your expenses if youadvances and you comply within 120 daysnext.
are paid a salary or commission with the under-of the statement.
Employees. If you are an employee, you gen-standing that you will pay your own expenses. In
erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct yourthis situation, you have no reimbursement orEmployee meets accountable plan rules.If
travel, transportation, and entertainment ex-allowance arrangement, and you do not have toyou meet the three rules for accountable plans,
penses. However, you can use the shorter Formread this section on reimbursements. Instead,your employer should not include any reim-
2106–EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all ofsee Completing Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, bursements in your income in box 1 of your
the following conditions. later, for information on completing your tax re-Form W–2. If your expenses equal your reim-
turn. bursement, you do not complete Form 2106.1) You are an employee deducting expenses You have no deduction since your expensesattributable to your job. Reimbursement, allowance, or advance.A and reimbursement are equal.reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-2) You were not reimbursed by your em- If your employer included reimburse-rangement is a system or plan that an employerployer for your expenses (amounts in- ments in box 1 of your Form W–2 anduses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-cluded in box 1 of your Form W–2 are not you meet all three rules for accounta-penses, advances, reimbursements, and
TIP
considered reimbursements). ble plans, ask your employer for a correctedamounts charged to the employer for employee
3) If you are claiming car expenses, you use Form W–2.business expenses. Arrangements include per
the standard mileage rate. diem and car allowances.
A per diem allowance is a fixed amount ofAccountable plan rules not met. EvenFor more information on how to report yourdaily reimbursement your employer gives youthough you are reimbursed under an accounta-expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, see for your lodging, meal, and incidental expensesble plan, some of your expenses may not meetCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, later. when you are away from home on business. all three rules. Those expenses that fail to meet
Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse-(The term “incidental expenses” is defined ear-all three rules for accountable plans are treated
ments (or the reimbursements were all includedlier under Meals.) A car allowance is an amountas having been reimbursed under a nonac-
in box 1 of your Form W–2), the only businessyour employer gives you for the business use ofcountable plan (discussed later).
expense you are claiming is for gifts, and theyour car. Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-rules for certain individuals (such as performingYour employer should tell you what methodpenses. You may be reimbursed under yourartists), discussed later under Special Rules, do of reimbursement is used and what records youemployer’s accountable plan for expenses re-not apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 ormust provide. lated to that employer’s business, some of which2106–EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your
are deductible as employee business expensesdeductible gifts directly on line 20 of Schedule A
and some of which are not deductible. The reim-(Form 1040). Accountable Plans bursements you receive for the nondeductible
Statutory employees. If you received a expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountableTo be an accountable plan, your employer’sForm W–2 and the “Statutory employee” box in plans, and they are treated as paid under areimbursement or allowance arrangement mustbox 13 was checked, you report your income nonaccountable plan.include all three of the following rules.and expenses related to that income on Sched-
ule C or C–EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Example. Your employer’s plan reimburses1) Your expenses must have a business con-
Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. you for travel expenses while away from homenection — that is, you must have paid or
Statutory employees include full-time life in- on business and also for meals when you workincurred deductible expenses while per-
surance salespersons, certain agent or commis- late at the office, even though you are not awayforming services as an employee of your
sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain from home. The part of the arrangement thatemployer.
homeworkers. reimburses you for the nondeductible meals2) You must adequately account to your em-when you work late at the office is treated asIf you are entitled to a reimbursementployer for these expenses within a reason-paid under a nonaccountable plan.from your employer but you do not able period of time.
claim it, you cannot claim a deduction The employer makes the decision
CAUTION
!
3) You must return any excess reimburse-for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim- whether to reimburse employeesment or allowance within a reasonable pe-bursement applies. under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP
riod of time. countable plan. If you are an employee who
Reimbursement for personal expenses. If See Adequate Accounting and Returning receives payments under a nonaccountable
your employer reimburses you for nondeduct-Excess Reimbursements, later. plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-
ible personal expenses, such as for vacation An excess reimbursement or allowance is ments under an accountable plan by voluntarily
trips, your employer must report the reimburse- any amount you are paid that is more than theaccounting to your employer for the expenses
Page 190 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 193 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and voluntarily returning excess reimburse- mainder of 2002 if those rates and locations are
1) For per diem amounts:ments to the employer. used consistently during October, November,
and December for all employees. Employersa) The regular federal per diem rate.who did not use the high-low method during the
b) The standard meal allowance. first 9 months of 2002 cannot begin to use itAdequate Accounting before 2003. See Revenue Procedure 2002–63c) The high-low rate. for more information.One of the three rules for an accountable plan is
that you must adequately account to your em-2) For car expenses: Prorating the standard meal allowance onployer for your expenses. You adequately ac- partial days of travel.The standard meal al-a) The standard mileage rate.count by giving your employer a statement of lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If youexpense, an account book, a diary, or a similarb) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). travel for part of a day, such as on the days yourecord in which you entered each expense at or depart and return, you must prorate the full-daynear the time you had it, along with documentary M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-Regular federal per diem rate.The regularevidence (such as receipts) of your travel, mile- ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate orfederal per diem rate is the highest amount thatage, and other employee business expenses. the high-low rate.the federal government will pay to its employees(See Table 28–2, earlier, for details you need to
You can use either of the following methodsfor lodging, meal, and incidental expenses (orenter in your record and documents you need to
to figure the federal M&IE for that day.meal and incidental expenses only) while theyprove certain expenses.)
are traveling away from home in a particularYou must account for all amounts you re- 1) Method 1:area. The rates are different for different loca-ceived from your employer during the year as
tions. Your employer should have these ratesadvances, reimbursements, or allowances. This a) For the day you depart, add 3/4 of theavailable. (Employers can get Publication 1542,includes amounts you charged to your employer standard meal allowance amount forwhich gives the rates in the continental Unitedby credit card or other method. You must give that day.States for the current year.)your employer the same type of records and
b) For the day you return, add 3/4 of thesupporting information that you would have toThe standard meal allowance.The stan- standard meal allowance amount forgive to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductiondard meal allowance (discussed earlier) is the the preceding day.on your return. You must pay back the amount offederal rate for meals and incidental expenses
any reimbursement or other expense allowance(M&IE). The rate for most small localities in the2) Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-for which you do not adequately account or thatUnited States is $30. Most major cities and lowance using any method that you con-is more than the amount for which you ac-many other localities qualify for higher rates.sistently apply and that is in accordancecounted. The rates for all localities within the continentalwith reasonable business practice.United States are listed in Publication 1542.
You receive an allowance only for meals andThe standard mileage rate.This is a setPer Diem and Car Allowances incidental expenses when your employer doesrate per mile that you can use to compute yourone of the following. deductible car expenses. For 2002, the standardIf your employer reimburses you for your ex-
mileage rate is 361/2 cents a mile for all businesspenses using a per diem or car allowance, you1) Provides you with lodging (furnishes it inmiles. This rate is adjusted periodically.can generally use the allowance as proof of thekind).
amount of your expenses. A per diem or car Fixed and variable rate (FAVR).This is an2) Reimburses you, based on your receipts,allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re- allowance your employer may use to reimbursefor the actual cost of your lodging.quirements for the amount of your expenses your car expenses. Under this method, youronly if all four of the following conditions apply. 3) Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for youremployer pays an allowance that includes a
lodging. combination of payments covering fixed and va-1) Your employer reasonably limits payments riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to4) Does not have a reasonable belief that youof your expenses to those that are ordinary cover your variable operating costs (such ashad (or will have) lodging expenses, suchand necessary in the conduct of the trade gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover youras when you stay with friends or relativesor business. fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-or sleep in the cab of your truck.2) The allowance is similar in form to and not ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer
5) Computes the allowance on a basis similarmore than the federal rate (discussed chooses to use this method, your employer will
to that used in computing your compensa-later). request the necessary records from you.
tion, such as number of hours worked or3) You prove the time (dates), place, and miles traveled. Reporting your expenses with a per diem orbusiness purpose of your expenses to car allowance.If your reimbursement is in theyour employer (as explained in Table High-low rate.This is a simplified methodform of an allowance received under an ac-28–2 ) within a reasonable period of time.of computing the federal per diem rate for travelcountable plan, the following two facts affect
within the continental United States. It elimi-your reporting.4) You are not related to your employer (as
nates the need to keep a current list of the perdefined earlier under Who cannot use the
1) The federal rate.diem rate for each city.standard meal allowance). If you are re-
Under the high-low method, the per diemlated to your employer, you must be able 2) Whether the allowance or your actual ex-amount for travel during January through Sep-to prove your expenses to the IRS even if penses were more than the federal rate.tember of 2002 is $204 (including $42 for M&IE)you have already adequately accounted to
The following discussions explain where to re-for certain high-cost locations. All other areasyour employer and returned any excess
port your expenses depending upon how thehave a per diem amount of $125 (including $34reimbursement.
amount of your allowance compares to the fed-for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542If the IRS finds that an employer’s travel allow- eral rate.(Revised February 2002), which gives the areasance practices are not based on reasonablyeligible for the $204 per diem amount under theAllowance LESS than or EQUAL to the fed-accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-high-low method for all or part of this period.)eral rate.If your allowance is less than orognition of cost differences in different areas for
equal to the federal rate, the allowance will notEffective October 1, 2002, the per diemper diem amounts), you will not be considered to
be included in box 1 of your Form W–2. You dorate under this method for certainhave accounted to your employer. In this case,
not need to report the related expenses or thehigh-cost locations is $204 (includingyou must be able to prove your expenses to theCAUTION
!
allowance on your return if your expenses are$45 for M&IE). The rate for all other locations isIRS.
equal to or less than the allowance.$125 (including $35 for M&IE). However, an
The federal rate.The federal rate can be fig-employer can continue to use the rates de- However, if your actual expenses are more
ured using any one of the following methods.scribed in the preceding paragraph for the re-than your allowance, you can complete Form
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 191

Page 194 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
penses. You should be able to prove theseTable 28–3. Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses and
amounts to the IRS.Reimbursements
Example. Joe lives and works in Austin. HisIF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee employer sent him to San Diego for 4 days andother expense allowance) reports on Form reports on paid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotel bill. Thearrangement is under: W–2: Form 2106: * employer reimbursed Joe $50 a day for his
meals and incidental expenses. The federal rateAn accountable plan with:
for San Diego is $46 a day.
Actual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount. Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses
Adequate accounting made and excess totaled $290. His employer’s accountable plan
will not pay more than $50 a day for travel to Sanreturned
Diego, so Joe does not give his employer the
Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount No amount. records that prove that he actually spent $290.
Adequate accounting and return of as wages in box 1. However, he does account for the time, place,
excess both required but excess not and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe’s
returned only business trip this year.
Joe was reimbursed $200 ($50 × 4 days),Per diem or mileage allowance up toNo amount. All expenses and which is $16 more than the federal rate of $184the federal rate: reimbursements only ($46 × 4 days). The employer includes the $16Adequate accounting made and excess if excess expenses as income on Joe’s Form W–2 in box 1. The
returned. are claimed. employer also enters $184 in box 12 of Joe’s
Otherwise, form is notForm W–2, along with a code L.
filed. Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-
ductible expenses. He enters the total of hisPer diem or mileage allowance up toThe excess amount No amount. actual expenses for the year ($290) on Formthe federal rate: as wages in box 1. 2106. He also enters the reimbursements thatAdequate accounting and return of The amount up to were not included in his income ($184). His totalexcess both required but excess not the federal rate is deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is
returned. reported only in box $106. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-
12—it is not reimbursed meals and entertainment, he will
reported in box 1. include the balance, $53, as an itemized deduc-
tion.Per diem or mileage allowance exceedsThe excess amount All expenses (and
the federal rate: as wages in box 1. reimbursement
Adequate accounting up to the federal The amount up to reported on FormReturning Excessrate only and excess not returned. the federal rate is W–2, box 12) only ifReimbursementsreported only in box expenses in excess of
12—it is not the federal rate are
Under an accountable plan, you are required to
reported in box 1. claimed. Otherwise, return any excess reimbursement for your busi-
form is not required.ness expenses to the person paying the reim-
bursement or allowance. Excess
reimbursement means any amount for which
A nonaccountable plan with: you did not adequately account within a reason-
able period of time. For example, if you receivedEither adequate accounting or return of The entire amount All expenses.a travel advance and you did not spend all theexcess, or both, not required by plan as wages in box 1. money on business-related expenses, or if you
do not have proof of all your expenses, you have
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount All expenses.
an excess reimbursement.as wages in box 1.
“Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe-
* You may be able to use Form 2106–EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ. riod of time” were discussed earlier.
Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-
vance if your employer provides you with an2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched- and enters $1,650 ($3,650 − $2,000) as an item-expense allowance before you actually have theule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-ized deduction. expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS theAllowance MORE than the federal rate.If pected to be no more than your expense. Undertotal amount of your expenses and reimburse-your allowance is more than the federal rate,an accountable plan, you are required to ade-ments for the entire year. If you are using the quately account to your employer for this ad-your employer must include the allowancestandard meal allowance or the standard mile- vance and to return any excess within aamount up to the federal rate in box 12 of yourage rate, you do not have to prove that amount. reasonable period of time.Form W–2. This amount is not taxable. How-
If you do not adequately account for or do notever, the excess allowance will be included inExample. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a year return any excess advance within a reasonablebox 1 of your Form W–2. You must report thisfor business. Under her employer’s accountable period of time, the amount you do not accountpart of your allowance as if it were wage income.plan, she accounts for the time (dates), place, for or return will be treated as having been paidIf your actual expenses are less than orand business purpose of each trip. Her em- under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
equal to the federal rate, you do not completeployer pays her a mileage allowance of 20 cents Unproved amounts. If you do not proveForm 2106 or claim any of your expenses ona mile. that you actually traveled on each day for whichyour return.Since Nicole’s $3,650 expenses computed you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-
However, if your actual expenses are moreunder the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles × ing the elements described in Table 28–2), you
than the federal rate, you can complete Form361/2 cents) are more than her $2,000 reim- must return this unproved amount of the travel
2106 and, generally, deduct those excess ex-bursement (10,000 miles × 20 cents), she item- advance within a reasonable period of time. If
penses. You must report on Form 2106 yourizes her deductions to claim the excess you do not do this, the unproved amount is
reimbursements up to the federal rate (as shownexpenses. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show- considered paid under a nonaccountable plan
ing all of her expenses and reimbursements)in box 12 of your Form W–2) and all your ex- (discussed later).
Page 192 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 195 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Per diem allowance MORE than federal she must complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ and If you file Form 2106–EZ, enter the full
rate. If your employer’s accountable plan pays itemize her deductions. amount of your meals and entertainment on the
you an allowance that is higher than the federal line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by
rate, you do not have to return the difference 50%. Enter the result on line 5.
Completing Formsbetween the two rates for the period you can Hours of service limits.If you are subject2106 and 2106–EZprove business-related travel expenses. How- to the Department of Transportation’s “hours ofever, the difference will be reported as wages on service” limits, use 65% instead of 50%.This section briefly describes how employeesyour Form W–2. This excess amount is consid-
complete Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ. Tableered paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis- Reimbursements. Enter on line 7 of Form28–3 explains what the employer reports oncussed later). 2106 the amounts your employer (or third party)Form W–2 and what the employee reports onreimbursed you that were not included in box 1Form 2106. The instructions for the forms haveExample. Your employer sends you on a of your Form W–2. (You cannot use Formmore information on completing them.5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives you a 2106–EZ.) This includes any reimbursement re-$225 ($45 × 5 days) advance to cover your ported under code L in box 12 of Form W–2.Form 2106–EZ. You may be able to use themeals and incidental expenses. The federal pershorter Form 2106–EZ to claim your employeeAllocating your reimbursement. If youdiem for meals and incidental expenses forbusiness expenses. You can use this form if youwere reimbursed under an accountable plan andPhoenix is $42. Your trip lasts only 3 days.meet all 3 of the following conditions. want to deduct excess expenses that were notUnder your employer’s accountable plan, you
reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-must return the $90 ($45 × 2 days) advance for1) You are an employee deducting expenses
bursement. This is necessary if your employerthe 2 days you did not travel. You do not have toattributable to your job.
pays your reimbursement in the following man-return the $9 difference between the allowance2) You were not reimbursed by your em- ner:you received and the federal rate for Phoenixployer for your expenses (amounts in-[($45 − $42) × 3 days]. However, the $9 will be 1) Pays you a single amount that coverscluded in box 1 of your Form W–2 are notreported on your Form W–2 as wages. meals and/or entertainment, as well asconsidered reimbursements).
other business expenses, and3) If you claim car expenses, you use the
Nonaccountable Plans 2) Does not clearly identify how much is forstandard mileage rate.
deductible meals and/or entertainment.
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement orCar expenses. If you used a car to performYou must allocate the reimbursement so thatexpense allowance arrangement that does notyour job as an employee, you may be able toyou know how much to enter in Column A andmeet one or more of the three rules listed earlierdeduct certain car expenses. These are gener-Column B of line 7 of Form 2106.under Accountable Plans. ally figured in Part II of Form 2106, and thenIn addition, even if your employer has anclaimed on line 1, Column A, of Part I of FormExample. Rob’s employer paid him an ex-accountable plan, the following payments will be2106. Car expenses using the standard mileagepense allowance of $5,000 this year under antreated as being paid under a nonaccountablerate can also be figured on Form 2106–EZ byaccountable plan. The $5,000 payment con-plan. completing Part II and line 1 of Part I. sisted of $2,000 for airfare and $3,000 for enter-
1) Excess reimbursements you fail to return tainment and car expenses. The employer didTransportation expenses.Show your trans-
to your employer. not clearly show how much of the $3,000 was forportation expenses that did not involve overnight
the cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu-travel on line 2, Column A, of Form 2106 or on2) Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- ally spent $6,500 during the year ($2,000 forline 2, Part I, of Form 2106–EZ. Also include onpenses related to your employer’s busi- airfare, $2,000 for entertainment, and $2,500 forthis line business expenses you have for parkingness. See Reimbursement of car expenses).fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-nondeductible expenses earlier under Ac- Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-ating your car or expenses of commuting be-countable Plans. tified, Rob knows that $2,000 of the paymenttween your home and work.
If you are not sure if the reimbursement or goes in Column A, line 7 of Form 2106. To
Employee business expenses other thanexpense allowance arrangement is an account- allocate the remaining $3,000, Rob uses the
meals and entertainment.Show your otherable or nonaccountable plan, ask your em- worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.
employee business expenses on lines 3 and 4,ployer. His completed worksheet follows.
Column A, of Form 2106 or lines 3 and 4 of FormReporting your expenses under a nonac- 2106–EZ. Do not include expenses for meals1. Enter the total amount ofcountable plan.Your employer will combine reimbursements your employer gaveand entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is forthe amount of any reimbursement or other ex- you that were not reported to you inexpenses such as gifts, educational expensespense allowance paid to you under a nonac- box 1 of Form W–2........... $3,000(tuition and books), office-in-the-home ex-countable plan with your wages, salary, or other 2. Enter the total amount of yourpenses, and trade and professional publica-pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 expenses for the periods covered bytions.of your Form W–2. this reimbursement............ 4,500
If line 4 expenses are the only ones youYou must complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ 3. Of the amount on line 2, enter your
are claiming, you received no reim-and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex- total expense for meals and
bursements (or the reimbursements entertainment............... 2,000penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-
TIP
were all included in box 1 of your Form W–2),4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter thetertainment. Your meal and entertainment
result as a decimal (rounded to atand the Special Rules discussed later do notexpenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis-
least three places)............ .444apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 orcussed earlier under Entertainment Expenses.
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter the2106–EZ. Claim these amounts directly on lineAlso, your total expenses will be subject to the
result here and in Column B, line 7 1,33220 of Schedule A (Form 1040). List the type and2%-of- adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter theamount of each expense on the dotted lines andto most miscellaneous itemized deductions. result here and in Column A, line 7 $1,668include the total on line 20.
Example. Kim’s employer gives her $500 a On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $3,668
month ($6,000 for the year) for her businessMeal and entertainment expenses. Show ($2,000 airfare and $1,668 of the $3,000) in
expenses. Kim does not have to provide anythe full amount of your expenses for Column A and $1,332 (of the $3,000) in Column
proof of her expenses to her employer, and Kim business-related meals and entertainment onB.
can keep any funds that she does not spend. line 5, Column B, of Form 2106. Include meals
Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac- while away from your tax home overnight andAfter you complete the form.After you have
countable plan. Her employer will include the other business meals and entertainment. Enter completed your Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, follow
$6,000 on Kim’s Form W–2 as if it were wages. 50% of the line 8 meal and entertainment ex- the directions on that form to deduct your ex-
If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, penses on line 9, Column B, of Form 2106. penses on the appropriate line of your tax return.
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 193

Page 196 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For most taxpayers, this is line 20 of Schedule A deduct your employee business expenses as an Impairment-related work expenses are your
(Form 1040). However, if you are a governmentadjustment to gross income rather than as aallowable expenses for attendant care at your
official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist, ormiscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,workplace and other expenses you have in con-
a disabled employee with impairment-relatedyou must meet all of the following requirements. nection with your workplace that are necessary
work expenses, see Special Rules, later. for you to be able to work. For more information,
1) During the tax year, you perform servicessee chapter 23.Limits on employee business expenses. in the performing arts for at least two em-Your employee business expenses may be sub- ployers.ject to any of the three limits described next.
Illustrated ExampleThese limits are figured in the following order on2) You receive at least $200 each from any
the specified form. two of these employers. Bill Wilson is an employee of Fashion Clothing
1. Limit on meals and entertainment.Cer- 3) Your related performing-arts business ex-Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a typical week, Bill
tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-penses are more than 10% of your grossleaves his home on Long Island on Monday
ject to a 50% limit. Employees figure this limit onincome from the performance of those morning and drives to Albany to exhibit the
line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 of Form 2106–EZ.services. Fashion line for 3 days to prospective custom-
See 50% Limit under Entertainment Expenses, ers. Then he drives to Troy to show Fashion’s4) Your adjusted gross income is not moreearlier. new line of merchandise to Town Departmentthan $16,000 before deducting these busi-
Store, an old customer. While in Troy, he talks2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc- ness expenses.
tions. Employees deduct employee business with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for Town
expenses (as figured on Form 2106 or Department Store, to discuss the new line. HeSpecial rules for married persons.If you
2106–EZ) on line 20 of Schedule A (Form later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to dinnerare married, you must file a joint return unless
1040). Most miscellaneous itemized deductions, to discuss Attire Co.’s buying Fashion’s new lineyou lived apart from your spouse at all times
including employee business expenses, are of clothing.during the tax year.subject to a 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.If you file a joint return, you must figure re-Bill purchased his car on January 3, 1999.This limit is figured on line 25 of Schedule Aquirements (1), (2), and (3) separately for bothHe uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-(Form 1040). you and your spouse. However, requirement (4)pense purposes. He records his total mileage,
3. Limit on total itemized deductions.If applies to your and your spouse’s combinedbusiness mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the
your adjusted gross income (line 36 of Formadjusted gross income. year. Bill timely records his expenses and other
1040) is more than $137,300 ($68,650 if you are pertinent information in a travel expense log (notWhere to report. If you meet all of themarried filing separately), the total of certain shown). He obtains receipts for his expenses forabove requirements, you should first completeitemized deductions, including employee busi- lodging and for any other expenses of $75 orForm 2106 or 2106–EZ. Then you include yourness expenses, may be limited. See chapter 22 more.performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 offor more information on this limit.
Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ in the During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000
total on line 34 of Form 1040. Write “QPA” andmiles of which 20,000 miles were for business.
the amount of your performing-arts-related ex-He answers all the questions in Part II of FormSpecial Rules
penses in the space to the left of line 34 of Form2106-EZ. He figures his car expense to be
This section discusses special rules that apply1040. $7,300 (20,000 business miles × 361/2 cents
only to government officials who are paid on a standard mileage rate).If you do not meet all of the above require-
fee basis, performing artists, and disabled em-ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-His total employee business expenses areployees with impairment-related work ex- penses as an adjustment to gross income. shown in the following table.penses. Instead, you must complete Form 2106 or
2106–EZ and deduct your employee business  Type of Expense AmountOfficials paid on a fee basis.Certain fee-ba-
expenses as an itemized deduction on line 20 ofsis officials can claim their employee business Parking fees and tolls.... $ 3 2 5Schedule A (Form 1040).expenses whether or not they itemize their other Car expenses.......... 7,300
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Meals ............... 2,632
Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-Impairment-related work expenses of dis- Lodging, laundry, dry
ployed by a state or local government and whoabled employees. If you are an employee cleaning............. 8,975
are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. Theywith a physical or mental disability, your Entertainment......... 1,870
can deduct their business expenses in perform- Gifts, education, etc...... 4 3 0impairment-related work expenses are not sub-
ing services in that job as an adjustment to gross Total ............... $21,532ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit
income rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedthat applies to most other employee businessBill received an allowance of $3,600 ($300deduction. expenses. After you complete Form 2106 orper month) to help offset his expenses. Bill didIf you are a fee-basis official, include your2106–EZ, enter your impairment-related work
not have to account to his employer for theemployee business expenses from line 10 ofexpenses from line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6 of
reimbursement, and the $3,600 was included asForm 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ in theForm 2106–EZ on line 27 of Schedule A (Form
total on line 34 of Form 1040. Write “FBO” and income in box 1 of his Form W–2.1040), and identify the type and amount of thisthe amount of your employee business ex- Because Bill’s reimbursement was includedexpense on the dotted line next to line 27. Enterpenses in the space to the left of line 34 of Form in his income and he is using the standard mile-your employee business expenses that are un-1040. age rate for his car expenses, he files Formrelated to your disability from line 10 of Form
2106–EZ with his tax return. His filled-in form is2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ on line 20 ofExpenses of certain performing artists.If
you are a performing artist, you may qualify to Schedule A. shown on the next page.
Page 194 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 197 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
7,300
325
8,975
430
2,251
19,281
4,502
13 99
20,000 2,600 2,400
OMB No. 1545-1441
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
1Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multipy line 8a by 361⁄2¢ (.365)1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and entertainment4 4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ x 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses by 65%
(.65) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
(Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with
disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2002)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and
appropriate for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2002.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2002, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
General Instructions
Section references are to the Internal
Revenue Code.
Purpose of Form
You may use Form 2106-EZ instead of Form
2106 to claim your unreimbursed employee
business expenses if you meet all the
requirements listed above Part I.
Changes To Note
Standard mileage rate. The standard
mileage rate has been increased to 36 1⁄2
cents for each mile of business use in 2002.
Recordkeeping
You cannot deduct expenses for travel
(including meals, unless you used the
standard meal allowance), entertainment,
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2002 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage
rate for the first year you placed the vehicle in service or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the
portion of the lease period after 1997.
Additional Information
For more details about employee business
expenses, see:
Pub. 463, Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Pub. 529, Miscellaneous Deductions
Pub. 587, Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care Providers)
Pub. 946, How To Depreciate Property
Meal expenses. The percentage of meal
expenses that may be deducted by
employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits
has been increased to 65% for 2002.
2002
Specific Instructions
Part I—Figure Your Expenses
Line 2. See the line 8b instructions for the
definition of commuting.
Line 3. Enter lodging and transportation
expenses connected with overnight travel
away from your tax home (defined below).
You cannot deduct expenses for travel away
from your tax home for any period of
temporary employment of more than 1 year.
Do not include expenses for meals and
entertainment. For more details, including
limits, see Pub. 463.
gifts, or use of a car or other listed property,
unless you keep records to prove the time,
place, business purpose, business
relationship (for entertainment and gifts), and
amounts of these expenses. Generally, you
must also have receipts for all lodging
expenses (regardless of the amount) and any
other expense of $75 or more.
Line 4. Enter other job-related expenses not
listed on any other line of this form. Include
expenses for business gifts, education (tuition
and books), home office, trade publications,
Generally, your tax home is your main
place of business or post of duty regardless
of where you maintain your family home. If
you do not have a regular or main place of
business because of the nature of your work,
then your tax home is the place where you
regularly live. If you do not fit in either of
these categories, you are considered an
itinerant and your tax home is wherever you
work. As an itinerant, you are never away
from home and cannot claim a travel expense
deduction. For more details on your tax
home, see Pub. 463.
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 195

Page 198 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other tax benefits for education.In addition law may require you to get more education. This
to the tax benefits that are available for your additional education is qualifying education if all
work-related education expenses, there arethree of the following requirements are met.
29. benefits for educational expenses that are not
1) It is required for you to keep your presentwork related, such as your child’s college tuition
salary, status, or job,and fees and the interest on your student loan.
Information on cancellation of student loans is inTax Benefits for 2) The requirement serves a business pur-chapter 13, and information on other educationpose of your employer, andbenefits is in Publication 970.
3) The education is not part of a program thatWork-Related
will qualify you for a new trade or busi-Useful Items ness.You may want to see:Education
When you get more education than your em-
ployer or the law requires, the additional educa-Publication
tion can be qualifying education only if it❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and CarImportant Changes for maintains or improves skills required in yourExpenses present work. See Education To Maintain or
2002 Improve Skills.❏ 508 Tax Benefits for Work-Related
Education
Example. You are a teacher who has satis-Standard mileage rate. Generally, if you ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education fied the minimum requirements for teaching.drive your car to and from school, you can de-
Your employer requires you to take an additionalduct 361/2 cents per mile. See Using your car Form (and Instructions) college course each year to keep your teachingunder Transportation Expenses.
job. If the courses will not qualify you for a new❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses
Employer-provided educational assistance trade or business, they are qualifying education❏ 2106–EZ Unreimbursed Employeeprogram extended. The tax-free status of up even if you eventually receive a master’s degreeBusiness Expensesto $5,250 of employer-provided educational as- and an increase in salary because of this extra
sistance benefits each year has been extended education.❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized
through 2010. Beginning January 1, 2002, the Deductions
benefit applies to both undergraduate- and Education To Maintaingraduate-level courses.
or Improve Skills
If your education is not required by your em-Qualifying
ployer or the law, it can be qualifying work-re-Introduction lated education only if it maintains or improvesWork-RelatedIf you are working and have work-related educa- skills needed in your present work. This could
tional expenses, you may be able to deduct all or include refresher courses, courses on currentEducationpart of the cost of your education as a business developments, and academic or vocational
expense deduction. This chapter discusses: courses.You can deduct the costs of qualifying work-re-
lated education as business expenses. This is• Qualifying work-related education, Example. You repair televisions, radios,education that meets at least one of the follow-
• What work-related educational expenses and stereo systems for XYZ Store. To keep uping two tests.are deductible, and with the latest changes, you take special
courses in radio and stereo service. These1) The education is required by your em-• Where to deduct these expenses. courses maintain and improve skills required inployer or the law to keep your present
your work.salary, status, or job. The required educa-Your work-related educational expenses may
tion must serve a bona fide business pur-also qualify you for other tax benefits, such as Maintaining skills vs. qualifying for new job.pose of your employer.the tuition and fees deduction and the Hope and Education to maintain or improve skills neededlifetime learning credits. You may qualify for2) The education maintains or improves in your present work is not qualifying education ifthese other benefits even if you do not meet theskills needed in your present work. it will also qualify you for a new trade or busi-requirements listed above. ness.However, even if the education meets one orAlso, keep in mind that your work-related
both of the above tests, it is not qualifyingeducational expenses may qualify you to claim Temporary absence. If you stop working
work-related education if it:more than one tax benefit. Generally, you may for a year or less in order to get education to
claim any number of benefits as long as you use maintain or improve skills needed in your pres-1) Is needed to meet the minimum educa-different expenses to figure each one. ent work and then return to the same generaltional requirements of your present tradetype of work, your absence is considered tempo-or business, orTuition and fees deduction.You can deduct rary. Education that you get during a temporary
tuition and fees you pay that are required for absence is qualifying education if it maintains or2) Is part of a program of study that will qual-
higher education courses. You can claim these improves skills needed in your present work.ify you for a new trade or business.
expenses (up to $3,000), even if you do not
You can deduct the costs of qualifyingitemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Example. You quit your biology researchwork-related education as a business expenseSee chapter 4 of Publication 970, Tax Benefits job to become a full-time biology graduate stu-even if the education could lead to a degree.for Education, for more information. dent for one year. If you return to work in biology
You can use Figure 29–A as a quick checkresearch after completing the courses, the edu-Hope and lifetime learning credits.These to see if your education qualifies (see nextcation is related to your present work even if youeducation credits may be available for tuitionpage). do not go back to work with the same employer.and related expenses you pay for higher educa-
tion. Generally, credits are more beneficial than Indefinite absence.If you stop work forEducation Required bydeductions because they reduce your tax rather more than a year, your absence from your job is
than your taxable income. The Hope credit could considered indefinite. Education during an in-Employer or by Law
reduce your tax by up to $1,500 in 2002, and the definite absence, even if it maintains or im-
lifetime learning credit by $1,000. For more in- Once you have met the minimum educational proves skills needed in the work from which you
formation, see chapter 36. requirements for your job, your employer or the are absent, is considered to qualify you for a
Page 196 Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 199 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) Your years of service count toward ob-
taining tenure.
3) You have a vote in faculty decisions.
4) Your school makes contributions for you to
a retirement plan other than social security
or a similar program.
Example 1. The law in your state requires
beginning secondary school teachers to have a
bachelor’s degree, including 10 professional ed-
ucation courses. In addition, to keep the job, a
teacher must complete a fifth year of training
within 10 years from the date of hire. If the
employing school certifies to the state Depart-
ment of Education that qualified teachers cannot
be found, the school can hire persons with only 3
years of college. However, to keep their jobs,
these teachers must get a bachelor’s degree
and the required professional education courses
within 3 years.
Under these facts, the bachelor’s degree,
whether or not it includes the 10 professional
education courses, is considered the minimum
educational requirement for qualification as a
teacher in your state.
If you have all the required education except
the fifth year, you have met the minimum educa-
tional requirements. The fifth year of training is
qualifying education unless it is part of a pro-
gram of study that will qualify you for a new trade
or business.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in
Example 1 except that you have a bachelor’s
degree and only six professional education
courses. The additional four education courses
can be qualifying education. Although you do
Figure 29-A. Does Your Work-Related Education Qualify?
Start Here
Yes
Is the education required
by your employer or the
law to keep your present
salary, status, or job?
Does the requirement
serve a bona fide
business requirement of
your employer?
Is the education needed to meet
the minimum educational
requirements of your present
trade or business?
Is the education part of a
program of study that will
qualify you for a new
trade or business?
Does the education
maintain or improve skills
needed in your present
work?
Your education is not
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Your education is
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
not have all the required courses, you have
already met the minimum educational require-
new trade or business. Therefore, it is not quali- degree or certification, you work part time as anments.
fying education. engineer for a firm that will employ you as a
full-time engineer after you finish college. Al-Example 3. Assume the same facts as in
though your college engineering courses im-Example 1 except that you are hired with only 3
Education To Meet prove your skills in your present job, they areyears of college. The courses you take that lead
Minimum Requirements also needed to meet the minimum job require-to a bachelor’s degree (including those in edu-
ments for a full-time engineer. The education iscation) are not qualifying education. They are
Education you need to meet the minimum edu-not qualifying education. needed to meet the minimum educational re-
cational requirements for your present trade or quirements for employment as a teacher.
business is not qualifying work-related educa-Example 2. You are an accountant and you
tion. The minimum educational requirementshave met the minimum educational require- Example 4. You have a bachelor’s degree
are determined by: ments of your employer. Your employer laterand you work as a temporary instructor at a
changes the minimum educational requirementsuniversity. At the same time, you take graduate
and requires you to take college courses to keepcourses toward an advanced degree. The rules1) Laws and regulations,
your job. These additional courses can be quali-of the university state that you can become a2) Standards of your profession, trade, orfying education because you have already satis-faculty member only if you get a graduate de-business, and fied the minimum requirements that were ingree. Also, you can keep your job as an instruc-
effect when you were hired. tor only as long as you show satisfactory3) Your employer.
progress toward getting this degree. You haveOnce you have met the minimum educa- not met the minimum educational requirementstional requirements that were in effect when you to qualify you as a faculty member. The gradu-Requirements for Teacherswere hired, you do not have to meet any new ate courses are not qualifying education.minimum educational requirements. This meansStates or school districts usually set the mini-
that if the minimum requirements change aftermum educational requirements for teachers.
Certification in a new state.Once you haveyou were hired, any education you need to meetThe requirement is the college degree or the
met the minimum educational requirements forthe new requirements can be qualifying educa-minimum number of college hours usually re-
teachers for your state, you are considered totion. quired of a person hired for that position.
have met the minimum educational require-You have not necessarily met the mini-If there are no requirements, you will havements in all states. This is true even if you mustmum educational requirements of yourmet the minimum educational requirements get additional education to be certified in an-trade or business simply because youCAUTION
!
when you become a faculty member. You gen-other state. Any additional education you needare already doing the work. erally will be considered a faculty member whenis qualifying education. You have already met
one or more of the following occurs. the minimum requirements for teaching. Teach-
Example 1. You are a full-time engineering ing in another state is not a new trade or busi-
student. Although you have not received your 1) You have tenure. ness.
Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related EducationPage 197

Page 200 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You hold a permanent teaching erwise) until your expectation changes. It will not
certificate in State A and are employed as a be treated as temporary after the date you deter-What Educationalteacher in that state for several years. You move mine it will last more than 1 year.
to State B and are promptly hired as a teacher.
Expenses Are Attendance at school on a temporaryYou are required, however, to complete certain basis was formerly defined as attend-prescribed courses to get a permanent teachingDeductible as ance on an irregular or short-term ba-CAUTION
!
certificate in State B. These additional courses sis (generally a matter of days or weeks).are qualifying education because the teachingBusiness Expenses?position in State B involves the same general You can file an amended return onkind of work for which you were qualified in StateIf your education meets the requirements de- Form 1040X, Amended U.S. IndividualA. scribed earlier under Qualifying Work-Related Income Tax Return, for any year in
TIP
Education, you can generally deduct your which you used the former definition of attend-
work-related educational expenses as businessEducation That ance on a temporary basis. However, you gen-
expenses. If you are not self-employed, you canerally must file the amended return within 3Qualifies You for a deduct business expenses only if you itemizeyears from the time you filed the original return
your deductions on Schedule A.New Trade or Business or within 2 years from the time you paid the tax,
You cannot deduct expenses related to whichever is later.
Education that is part of a program of study thattax-exempt and excluded income.
will qualify you for a new trade or business is not Deductible expenses. If you are regularly
qualifying work-related education. This is trueDeductible expenses. The following educa-employed and go directly from home to school
even if you do not plan to enter that trade ortional expenses can be deducted. on a temporary basis, you can deduct the
business. round-trip costs of transportation between your• Tuition, books, supplies, lab fees, and sim-If you are an employee, a change of duties home and school. This is true regardless of theilar items.that involves the same general kind of work is location of the school, the distance traveled, or
not a new trade or business. • Certain transportation and travel costs.whether you attend school on nonwork days.
Transportation expenses include the actual• Other educational expenses, such asExample 1. You are an accountant. Your costs of bus, subway, cab, or other fares, as wellcosts of research and typing when writingemployer requires you to get a law degree at as the costs of using your car. Transportationa paper as part of an educational program.your own expense. You register at a law school expenses do not include amounts spent forfor the regular curriculum that leads to a law travel, meals, or lodging while you are awaydegree. Even if you do not intend to become aNondeductible expenses. Educational ex- from home overnight.lawyer, the education is not qualifying becausepenses do not include personal or capital ex-
the law degree will qualify you for a new trade orpenses. For example, you cannot deduct the Example 1. You regularly work in Camden,
business. dollar value of vacation time or annual leave youNew Jersey, and go directly from work to home.
take to attend classes. This amount is a per-You also attend school every work night for 3Example 2. You are a general practitionersonal expense. months to take a course that improves your jobof medicine. You take a 2-week course to review skills. Since you are attending school on a tem-Unclaimed reimbursement. If you do notdevelopments in several specialized fields of porary basis, you can deduct your dailyclaim reimbursement that you are entitled tomedicine. The course does not qualify you for a round-trip transportation expenses in going be-receive from your employer, you cannot deductnew profession. It is qualifying education be- tween home and school. This is true regardlessthe expenses that apply to the reimbursement.cause it maintains or improves skills required in of the distance traveled.your present profession. Example. Your employer agrees to pay
Example 2. Assume the same facts as inyour educational expenses if you file a voucher
Example 1 except that on certain nights you goshowing your expenses. You do not file aBar or CPA Review Course directly from work to school and then home. Youvoucher, and you do not get reimbursed. Be-
can deduct your transportation expenses fromcause you did not file a voucher, you cannotReview courses to prepare for the bar examina- your regular work site to school and then home.deduct the expenses on your tax return.tion or the certified public accountant (CPA) ex-
amination are not qualifying education. They are Example 3. Assume the same facts as inpart of a program of study that can qualify youTransportation Expenses Example 1 except that you attend the school forfor a new profession. 9 months on Saturdays, nonwork days. SinceIf your education qualifies, you can deduct localyou are attending school on a temporary basis,transportation costs of going directly from workyou can deduct your round-trip transportationto school. If you are regularly employed and goTeaching and Related Duties expenses in going between home and school.to school on a temporary basis, you can also
All teaching and related duties are considereddeduct the costs of returning from school toExample 4. Assume the same facts as inthe same general kind of work. A change inhome. Example 1 except that you attend classes twiceduties in any of the following ways is not consid- a week for 15 months. Since your attendance inered a change to a new business. Temporary basis. If your attendance at school is not considered temporary, you cannotschool is realistically expected to last (and doesdeduct your transportation expenses in going1) Elementary school teacher to secondaryin fact last) for 1 year or less, you go to school onbetween home and school. If you go directlyschool teacher. a temporary basis (unless there are facts andfrom work to school, you can deduct thecircumstances that would indicate otherwise).2) Teacher of one subject, such as biology, to one-way transportation expenses of going fromIf your attendance at school is realisticallyteacher of another subject, such as art. work to school. If you go from work to home toexpected to last for more than 1 year or if there isschool and return home, your transportation ex-3) Classroom teacher to guidance counselor.no realistic expectation that the attendance willpenses cannot be more than if you had gonelast for 1 year or less, the attendance is not4) Classroom teacher to school administrator. directly from work to school.temporary, regardless of whether it actually lasts
for more than 1 year. Using your car. If you use your car
If attendance at school initially is realistically (whether you own or lease it) for transportation
expected to last for 1 year or less, but at some to school, you can deduct your actual expenses
later date the attendance is realistically ex- or use the standard mileage rate to figure the
pected to last more than 1 year, that attendance amount you can deduct. The standard mileage
will be treated as temporary (unless there are rate for 2002 is 36
1/2 cents per mile. Whichever
facts and circumstances that would indicate oth- method you use, you can also deduct parking
Page 198 Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 201 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
fees and tolls. See Car Expenses in chapter 28 2) Conventions outside the North Americanrequirements. Your employer can tell you
for information on deducting your actual ex- area. whether there is a qualified program where you
penses of using a car. work.For a discussion of the limits on travel expense
deductions that apply to cruises and conven-Educational assistance. Tax-free educa-
Travel Expenses tions, see Luxury Water Travel and Conventions tional assistance benefits include payments forin Publication 463. tuition, fees and similar expenses, books, sup-You can deduct expenses for travel, meals (see plies, and equipment. For courses beginning on50% Limit on Meals, later), and lodging if: or after January 1, 2002, the payments may be50% Limit on Meals for either undergraduate- or graduate-level1) You travel overnight to obtain qualified ed-
courses. The payments do not have to be forucation, and You can deduct only 50% of the cost of yourwork-related courses.qualifying meals while traveling away from home2) The main purpose of the trip is to attend a Educational assistance benefits do not in-to obtain education. You cannot have been re-work-related course or seminar. clude payments for the following items.imbursed for the meals.
Travel expenses for qualifying work-related edu- Employees must use Form 2106 or Form 1) Meals, lodging, transportation, or tools orcation are treated the same as travel expenses2106–EZ to apply the 50% limit. supplies (other than textbooks) that youfor other employee business purposes. For can keep after completing the course ofmore information, see chapter 28. instruction.
Travel as EducationYou cannot deduct expenses for per- 2) Education involving sports, games, or hob-sonal activities, such as sightseeing, bies unless the education has a reasona-You cannot deduct the cost of travel as a form ofvisiting, or entertaining.CAUTION
!
ble relationship to the business of youreducation even if it is directly related to your
employer or is required as part of a degreeduties in your work or business.Mainly personal travel.If your travel away program.
from home is mainly personal, you cannot de-Example. You are a French languageduct all of your expenses for travel, meals, andteacher. While on sabbatical leave granted forBenefit over $5,250.If your employer payslodging. You can deduct only your expenses fortravel, you traveled through France to improvemore than $5,250 for educational benefits forlodging and 50% of your expenses for mealsyour knowledge of the French language. Youyou during the year, you must generally pay taxduring the time you attend the qualified educa-chose your itinerary and most of your activitieson the amount over $5,250. Your employertional activities. to improve your French language skills. Youshould include in your wages (box 1 of yourWhether a trip’s purpose is mainly personalcannot deduct your travel expenses as educa-Form W–2) the amount you must include inor educational depends upon the facts and cir-tional expenses. This is true even if you spentincome.cumstances. An important factor is the compari-most of your time learning French by visitingson of time spent on personal activities with time Working condition fringe benefit.How-French schools and families, attending moviesspent on educational activities. If you spend ever, if the payments also qualify as a workingor plays, and engaging in similar activities.more time on personal activities, the trip is con- condition fringe benefit, your employer does not
sidered mainly educational only if you can show have to include them in your wages. A workingExpenses Relating toa substantial nonpersonal reason for traveling to condition fringe benefit is a benefit which, had
a particular location. you paid for it, you could deduct as an employeeTax-Exempt and
business expense.Excluded IncomeExample 1. John works in Newark, New
Jersey. He traveled to Chicago to take a deducti-Some educational assistance you receive mayble 1-week course at the request of his em-be tax-exempt or excluded from your income.ployer. His main reason for going to Chicago Where To DeductSince you do not pay tax on this income, youwas to take the course. may not be able to deduct the related expenses.While there, he took a sightseeing trip, enter- ExpensesExamples of tax-exempt or excluded incometained some friends, and took a side trip toinclude scholarships, veterans’ educational as-Pleasantville for a day. Self-employed persons and employees reportsistance, and the Education Savings Bond Pro-Since the trip was mainly for business, he business expenses differently.gram. If you received assistance from any ofcan deduct his round-trip airfare to Chicago. He The following information explains whatthese sources, see Expenses Relating tocannot deduct his transportation expenses of forms you must use to deduct the cost of yourTax-Exempt and Excluded Income in Publica-going to Pleasantville. He can deduct only the qualifying work-related education as a businesstion 508.meals (subject to the 50% limit) and lodging expense.connected with his educational activities.
Employer-Provided
Example 2. Dave works in Nashville and Self-Employed PersonsEducational Assistancerecently traveled to California to take a 2-week
If you are self-employed, you must report theseminar. The seminar is qualifying education.If you receive educational assistance benefitscost of your qualifying work-related education onWhile there, he spent an extra 8 weeks onfrom your employer under an educational assis-the appropriate form used to report your busi-personal activities. The facts, including the extratance program, you can exclude up to $5,250 ofness income and expenses (Schedule C,8-week stay, show that his main purpose was tothose benefits each year. This means your em-C–EZ, or F). If your educational expenses in-take a vacation. ployer should not include the benefits with yourclude expenses for a car or truck, travel, orHe cannot deduct his round-trip airfare or hiswages, tips, and other compensation shown inmeals, report them the same way you reportmeals and lodging for the 8 weeks. He canbox 1 of your Form W–2. This also means thatother business expenses for those items. Seededuct only his expenses for meals (subject toyou do not have to include the benefits on yourthe instructions for the form you file for informa-the 50% limit) and lodging for the 2 weeks heincome tax return. tion on how to complete it.attended the seminar.
You must reduce your deductible edu-Cruises and conventions. Certain cruises cational expenses by the amount ofEmployeesand conventions offer seminars or courses as any tax-free educational assistanceCAUTION
!
part of their itinerary. Even if the seminars orbenefits you received for those expenses.If you are an employee, you can deduct the costcourses are work related, your deduction for
of qualifying education only if you were not reim-travel may be limited. This applies to:
Educational assistance program.To qualify bursed by your employer or if the costs ex-
1) Travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other as an educational assistance program, the plan ceeded your reimbursement. (Amounts your
form of luxury water transportation, and must be written and must meet certain other employer paid under a nonaccountable plan and
Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related EducationPage 199

Page 202 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
included in box 1 of your Form W–2 are not If you meet both of these requirements, enterImpairment-related work expenses.If you
considered reimbursements.) How you treat any are disabled and have impairment-related workthe expenses directly on line 20 of Schedule A
reimbursement you receive depends on the type expenses that are necessary for you to be able(Form 1040). (Special rules for expenses of cer-
of reimbursement arrangement and the amount to get qualifying work-related education, you cantain performing artists and fee-basis officials and
of the reimbursement. For information on how to deduct these expenses on line 27 of Schedule Afor impairment-related work expenses are ex-report your reimbursement, see chapter 28. (Form 1040). They are not subject to the 2%-of-plained later.)In order to deduct the cost of your qualifying adjusted-gross-income limit.
Using Form 2106–EZ. This form is shorterwork-related education as a business expense, For more information on impairment-related
and easier to use than Form 2106. Generallyinclude the amount with your deduction for any work expenses, see chapter 28.
other employee business expenses on line 20 ofyou can use this form if:
Schedule A (Form 1040). (Special rules for ex-
• You were not reimbursed for any of yourpenses of certain performing artists and fee-ba-
expenses, andsis officials and for impairment-related work Recordkeepingexpenses are explained later in this chapter.)• You are using the standard mileage rate ifThis deduction is subject to the you are claiming vehicle expenses. You must keep records as proof of any2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
deduction claimed on your tax return.to most miscellaneous itemized deductions. If you do not meet both of these requirements,Generally, you should keep your rec-RECORDS
Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. To figure your de-use Form 2106. ords for 3 years from the date of filing the returnduction for employee business expenses, in- and claiming the deduction.cluding qualifying work-related education, youPerforming artists and fee-basis officials.If For specific information about keeping rec-generally must complete Form 2106 or Form
you are a qualified performing artist, or a stateords of business expenses, see Recordkeeping2106–EZ.
(or local) government official who is paid inin chapter 28.Form not required.Do not complete eitherwhole or in part on a fee basis, you can deductForm 2106 or Form 2106–EZ if: the cost of your qualifying work-related educa-
• You were not reimbursed for any of yourtion as an adjustment to gross income rather
expenses, and than as an itemized deduction.
For more information on qualified performing• You are not claiming travel, transportation,
artists and fee-basis officials, see chapter 28.meal, or entertainment expenses.
Page 200 Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 203 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that is more than 2% of your adjusted gross• Medical examinations required by an em-
income. You figure your deduction on Scheduleployer.
A by subtracting 2% of your adjusted gross in-• Occupational taxes.30. come from the total amount of these expenses.
Your adjusted gross income is the amount on• Passport for a business trip.
line 36, Form 1040. • Subscriptions to professional journals andGenerally, you apply the 2% limit after youtrade magazines related to your work.Miscellaneous apply any other deduction limit. For example,
you apply the 50% (or 65%) limit on business-re-• Travel, transportation, entertainment, gift,
lated meals and entertainment (discussed in and car expenses related to your work.Deductions
chapter 28) before you apply the 2% limit. (See chapter 28.)
Deductions subject to the 2% limit are dis-
cussed in the three categories in which you
Business Liability Insurancereport them on Schedule A.Important Reminder
You can deduct insurance premiums you paid1) Unreimbursed employee expenses (lineLimit on itemized deductions.For 2002, if for protection against personal liability for20).your adjusted gross income is more than wrongful acts on the job.2) Tax preparation fees (line 21).$137,300 ($68,650 if you are married filing sep-
arately), you may have to reduce the amount of3) Other expenses (line 22).certain itemized deductions, including most mis- Damages for Breachcellaneous deductions. Impairment-related work expenses.If you of Employment Contract
have a physical or mental disability, certain ex-
If you break an employment contract, you canpenses you incur that allow you to work may not
deduct damages you pay your former employerbe subject to the 2% limit. See Impairment-Re-
Introduction lated Work Expenses under Deductions Not if the damages are attributable to the pay you
Subject to the 2% Limit, later. received from that employer.This chapter explains which expenses you can
claim as miscellaneous itemized deductions onPerforming artists.If you are a qualified per-
Schedule A (Form 1040). You must reduce theforming artist, you may be able to deduct yourDepreciation on Computerstotal of most miscellaneous itemized deductionsemployee business expenses as an adjustment
or Cellular Telephonesby 2% of your adjusted gross income. This chap-to income rather than as a miscellaneous item-
ter covers the following topics. ized deduction. See Special Rules in chapter 28You can claim a depreciation deduction for aif you need more information about this excep-• Deductions subject to the 2% limit. computer or cellular telephone that you use intion. your work as an employee if its use is:• Deductions not subject to the 2% limit.
State and local government officials paid on
• Expenses you cannot deduct. 1) For the convenience of your employer, anda fee basis.If you performed services as an
employee of a state or local government and you2) Required as a condition of your employ-were paid in whole or in part on a fee basis, youYou must keep records to verify your ment.can claim your trade or business expenses indeductions. You should keep receipts,
For more information about the rules andperforming those services as an adjustment tocanceled checks, financial accountRECORDS
exceptions to the rules affecting the allowableincome, rather than as a miscellaneous deduc-statements, and other documentary evidence.
deductions for a home computer or cellular tele-tion. See Officials Paid on a Fee Basis underFor more information on recordkeeping, get
Deductions Not Subject to the 2% Limit, later. phone, see Publication 529.Publication 552, Recordkeeping for Individuals.
UnreimbursedUseful Items Dues to Chambers of Commerce
Employee ExpensesYou may want to see: and Professional Societies
(Line 20) You may be able to deduct dues paid to profes-Publication
sional organizations (such as bar associationsYou can deduct only unreimbursed employee❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions and medical associations) and to chambers ofexpenses that are:
❏ 535 Business Expenses commerce and similar organizations, if member-
1) Paid or incurred during your tax year,ship helps you carry out the duties of your job.❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home
Similar organizations include:2) For carrying on your trade or business of(Including Use by Day-Care
being an employee, andProviders) • Boards of trade,
3) Ordinary and necessary.❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property • Business leagues,
An expense is ordinary if it is common and • Civic or public service organizations,Form (and Instructions) accepted in your type of trade or business. An
• Real estate boards, andexpense is necessary if it is appropriate and❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses
helpful to your trade or business. • Trade associations.❏ 2106–EZ Unreimbursed Employee Examples of unreimbursed employee ex-Business Expenses penses are listed next. The list is followed byYou cannot deduct dues paid to an organiza-discussions of additional unreimbursed em-tion if one of its main purposes is to:ployee expenses.
1) Conduct entertainment activities for mem-• Business bad debt of an employee.
bers or their guests, orDeductions Subject • Education that is work related. (See chap-
2) Provide members or their guests with ac-ter 29.)to the 2% Limit cess to entertainment facilities.• Legal fees related to your job.
Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon clubsYou can deduct certain expenses as miscellane-• Licenses and regulatory fees. are not deductible. See Club Dues under Non-ous itemized deductions on Schedule A (Form
1040). You can claim the amount of expenses• Malpractice insurance premiums. deductible Expenses, later.
Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 201

Page 204 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Lobbying and political activities.You may trip is primarily to look for a new job. The amount You can also deduct assessments for benefit
not be able to deduct that part of your dues that payments to unemployed union members. How-of time you spend on personal activity compared
is for certain lobbying and political activities. See ever, you cannot deduct the part of the assess-to the amount of time you spend in looking for
Dues used for lobbying under Lobbying Ex- ments or contributions that provides funds forwork is important in determining whether the trip
penses, later. the payment of sick, accident, or death benefits.is primarily personal or is primarily to look for a
Also, you cannot deduct contributions to a pen-new job.
sion fund, even if the union requires you to makeEven if you cannot deduct the travel ex-
the contributions.Home Office penses to and from an area, you can deduct the
You may not be able to deduct amounts youexpenses of looking for a new job in your pres-If you use a part of your home regularly and pay to the union that are related to certain lobby-ent occupation while in the area.exclusively for business purposes, you may be ing and political activities. See Lobbying Ex-You may choose to use the standard mile-able to deduct a part of the operating expenses penses under Nondeductible Expenses, later.age rate to figure your car expenses. The stan-and depreciation of your home. dard mileage rate for 2002 is 361/2 cents perYou can claim this deduction for the busi-mile. See chapter 28 for more information.ness use of a part of your home only if you use Work Clothes and Uniforms
that part of your home regularly and
exclusively: You can deduct the cost and upkeep of workLicenses and Regulatory Fees clothes if the following two requirements are
1) As your principal place of business for any met.You can deduct the amount you pay each yeartrade or business,
to state or local governments for licenses and1) You must wear them as a condition of your2) As a place to meet or deal with your pa-regulatory fees for your trade, business, or pro-employment.tients, clients, or customers in the normalfession.
course of your trade or business, or 2) The clothes are not suitable for everyday
wear.3) In the case of a separate structure not
Occupational Taxesattached to your home, in connection with It is not enough that you wear distinc-your trade or business. tive clothing. The clothing must be spe-You can deduct an occupational tax charged at
The regular and exclusive business use cifically required by your employer. Nora flat rate by a locality for the privilege of workingCAUTION
!
must be for the convenience of your em- is it enough that you do not, in fact, wear youror conducting a business in the locality. If you
ployer and not just appropriate and helpful in work clothes away from work. The clothing mustare an employee, you can claim occupational
your job. Get Publication 587 for more detailed not be suitable for taking the place of your regu-taxes only as a miscellaneous deduction subject
information and a worksheet. lar clothing.to the 2% limit; you cannot claim them as a
deduction for taxes elsewhere on your return.Examples of workers who may be able to
deduct the cost and upkeep of work clothes are:Job Search Expenses delivery workers, firefighters, health care work-
Repayment of ers, law enforcement officers, letter carriers,You can deduct certain expenses you have inIncome Aid Payment professional athletes, and transportation work-looking for a new job in your present occupation, ers (air, rail, bus, etc.).even if you do not get a new job. An “income aid payment” is one that is receivedMusicians and entertainers can deduct theYou cannot deduct job search expenses if:under an employer’s plan to aid employees whocost of theatrical clothing and accessories if theylose their jobs because of lack of work. If youare not suitable for everyday wear.1) You are looking for a job in a new occupa-repay a lump-sum income aid payment that youHowever, work clothing consisting of whitetion, received and included in income in an earliercap, white shirt or white jacket, white bib over-2) There was a substantial break betweenyear, you can deduct the repayment. alls, and standard work shoes, which a painter isthe ending of your last job and your look- required by his union to wear on the job, is noting for a new one, or distinctive in character or in the nature of a
Research Expenses of uniform. Similarly, the costs of buying and main-3) You are looking for a job for the first time.
a College Professor taining blue work clothes worn by a welder at the
request of a foreman are not deductible.Employment and outplacement agency fees. If you are a college professor, you can deductYou can deduct employment and outplacementresearch expenses, including travel expenses,Protective clothing.You can deduct the costagency fees you pay in looking for a new job infor teaching, lecturing, or writing and publishingof protective clothing required in your work, suchyour present occupation. on subjects that relate directly to the field of youras safety shoes or boots, safety glasses, hard
Employer pays you back.If, in a later year,teaching duties. You must have undertaken thehats, and work gloves.
your employer pays you back for employmentresearch as a means of carrying out the dutiesExamples of workers who may be required to
agency fees, you must include the amount youexpected of a professor and without expectation wear safety items are: carpenters, cement work-
receive in your gross income up to the amount of ers, chemical workers, electricians, fishing boatof profit apart from salary. However, you cannot
your tax benefit in the earlier year. (See Recov- crew members, machinists, oil field workers,deduct the cost of travel as a form of education.
eries in chapter 13.) pipe fitters, steamfitters, and truck drivers.
Employer pays the employment agency. Military uniforms.You generally cannot de-Tools Used in Your WorkIf your employer pays the fees directly to the duct the cost of your uniforms if you are on
employment agency and you are not responsi- full-time active duty in the armed forces. How-Generally, you can deduct amounts you spendble for them, you do not include them in your ever, if you are an armed forces reservist, youfor tools used in your work if the tools wear outgross income. can deduct the unreimbursed cost of your uni-and are thrown away within 1 year from the date
form if military regulations restrict you fromof purchase. You can depreciate the cost ofR´esum´e. You can deduct amounts you spend wearing it except while on duty as a reservist. Intools that have a useful life substantially beyondfor typing, printing, and mailing copies of a r´e- figuring the deduction, you must reduce the costthe tax year. For more information about depre-sum´e to prospective employers if you are look- by any nontaxable allowance you receive forciation, get Publication 946.ing for a new job in your present occupation. these expenses.
Travel and transportation expenses.If you If local military rules do not allow you to wear
travel to an area and, while there, you look for a fatigue uniforms when you are off duty, you canUnion Dues and Expenses
new job in your present occupation, you may be deduct the amount by which the cost of buying
You can deduct dues and initiation fees you payable to deduct travel expenses to and from the and keeping up these uniforms is more than the
for union membership.area. You can deduct the travel expenses if the uniform allowance you receive.
Page 202 Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 205 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can deduct the cost of your uniforms if investment expenses as miscellaneous item-Clerical Help and Office Rent
ized deductions subject to the 2% limit.you are a civilian faculty or staff member of a
You can deduct office expenses, such as rentmilitary school.
and clerical help, that you have in connectionExample. You are a member of an invest-
with your investments and collecting the taxablement club that is formed solely to invest in secur-
Tax Preparation Fees income on them. ities. The club is treated as a partnership. The
partnership’s income is solely from taxable divi-(Line 21)
dends, interest, and gains from sales of securi-
Depreciation on ties. In this case, you can deduct your share ofYou can usually deduct tax preparation fees in
the partnership’s operating expenses as miscel-Home Computerthe year you pay them. Thus, on your 2002
laneous itemized deductions subject to the 2%return, you can deduct fees paid in 2002 forYou can deduct depreciation on your home limit. However, if the investment club partner-preparing your 2001 return. These fees includecomputer if you use it to produce income (forship has investments that also produce nontax-the cost of tax preparation software programsexample, to manage your investments that pro-able income, you cannot deduct your share ofand tax publications. They also include any feeduce taxable income). You generally must de-the partnership’s expenses that produce theyou paid for electronic filing of your return.preciate the computer using the straight linenontaxable income.
method over the Alternative Depreciation Sys-Deduct expenses of preparing tax schedules
tem (ADS) recovery period. But if you work as anPublicly offered mutual funds.Publicly of-relating to profit or loss from business (Schedule
employee and also use the computer in thatfered mutual funds do not pass deductions forC or C–EZ), rentals or royalties (Schedule E), or
work, see Publication 946. investment expenses through to shareholders.farm income and expenses (Schedule F) on the
A mutual fund is “publicly offered” if it is:appropriate schedule. Deduct the expenses of
preparing the remainder of the return on line 21, 1) Continuously offered pursuant to a publicExcess Deductions of an EstateSchedule A (Form 1040). offering,
If an estate’s total deductions in its last tax year2) Regularly traded on an established securi-are more than its gross income for that year, theOther Expenses (Line 22) ties market, orbeneficiaries succeeding to the estate’s prop-
3) Held by or for at least 500 persons at allerty can deduct the excess. Do not include de-You can deduct certain other expenses as mis-
times during the tax year.ductions for the estate’s personal exemptioncellaneous itemized deductions subject to the
and charitable contributions when figuring the2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. These are A publicly offered mutual fund will send you aestate’s total deductions. The beneficiaries canexpenses you pay: Form 1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions,claim the deduction only for the tax year inor a substitute form, showing the net amount ofwhich, or with which, the estate terminates,dividend income (gross dividends minus invest-1) To produce or collect income that must bewhether the year of termination is a normal yearment expenses). This net figure is the amountincluded in your gross income, or a short tax year. For more information, seeyou report on your return as income. You cannotTermination of Estate in Publication 559, Survi-2) To manage, conserve, or maintain prop- deduct investment expenses.vors, Executors, and Administrators.erty held for producing such income, or
Information returns.You should receive in-3) To determine, contest, pay, or claim a re-
formation returns from pass-through entities.fund of any tax. Fees to Collect
Partnerships and S corporations.TheseInterest and DividendsYou can deduct expenses you pay for the pur- entities issue Schedule K–1, which lists theposes in (1) and (2) above only if they are rea- items and amounts you must report and identi-You can deduct fees you pay to a broker, bank,sonably and closely related to these purposes. fies the tax return schedules and lines to use.trustee, or similar agent to collect your taxableSome of these other expenses are explained inbond interest or dividends on shares of stock.Nonpublicly offered mutual funds.Thesethe following discussions. But you cannot deduct a fee you pay to a brokerfunds will send you a Form 1099–DIV, or aIf the expenses you pay produce income thatto buy investment property, such as stocks orsubstitute form, showing your share of grossbonds. You must add the fee to the cost of theis only partially taxable, see Tax-Exempt Income income and investment expenses. You canproperty.Expenses, later, under Nondeductible Ex- claim the expenses only as a miscellaneous
penses. itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit.You cannot deduct the fee you pay to a
broker to sell securities. You can use the fee
only to figure gain or loss from the sale. See the
Appraisal Fees Investment Fees and Expensesinstructions for columns (d) and (e) of Schedule
D (Form 1040) for information on how to reportYou can deduct appraisal fees if you pay them to You can deduct investment fees, custodial fees,the fee.figure a casualty loss or the fair market value of trust administration fees, and other expenses
donated property. you paid for managing your investments that
produce taxable income.Hobby Expenses
Certain Casualty and You can generally deduct hobby expenses, but
Legal Expensesonly up to the amount of hobby income. A hobbyTheft Losses
is not a business because it is not carried on to
You can usually deduct legal expenses that youmake a profit. See Activity not for profit in chap-You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as a
incur in attempting to produce or collect taxableter 13 under Other Income.miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to the income or that you pay in connection with the2% limit if you used the damaged or stolen determination, collection, or refund of any tax.property in performing services as an employee. You can also deduct legal expenses that are:Indirect Deductions ofFirst report the loss in Section B of Form 4684,
Pass-Through EntitiesCasualties and Thefts. You may also have to 1) Related to either doing or keeping your
job, such as those you paid to defendinclude the loss on Form 4797, Sales of Busi-Pass-through entities include partnerships, Syourself against criminal charges arisingness Property, if you are otherwise required tocorporations, and mutual funds that are not pub-out of your trade or business,file that form. Your deduction is the amount oflicly offered. Deductions of pass-through entities
the loss included on lines 32 and 38b of Formare passed through to the partners or sharehold- 2) For tax advice related to a divorce if the bill
4684 and line 18b(1) of Form 4797. For otherers. The partners or shareholders can deduct specifies how much is for tax advice and it
casualty and theft losses, see chapter 27.their share of passed-through deductions for is determined in a reasonable way, or
Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 203

Page 206 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) To collect taxable alimony. Federal Estate Tax on Income
in Respect of a DecedentYou can deduct expenses of resolving taxDeductions
issues relating to profit or loss from business You can deduct the federal estate tax attributa-(Schedule C or C–EZ), rentals or royaltiesNot Subject to ble to income in respect of a decedent that you(Schedule E), or farm income and expenses as a beneficiary include in your gross income.(Schedule F) on the appropriate schedule. Youthe 2% Limit Income in respect of the decedent is gross in-deduct expenses of resolving nonbusiness tax come that the decedent would have receivedissues on Schedule A (Form 1040). You can deduct the items listed below as miscel-had death not occurred and that was not prop-
laneous itemized deductions. They are not sub-erly includible in the decedent’s final income tax
ject to the 2% limit. Report these items on linereturn. See Publication 559 for more informa-Loss on Deposits 27, Schedule A (Form 1040). tion.
For information on whether, and if so, how, you
may deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualifiedList of Deductions Gambling Losses Up to thefinancial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent or
Bankrupt Financial Institution in chapter 15. Amount of Gambling WinningsEach of the following items are discussed in
detail after the list. You must report the full amount of your gambling
winnings for the year on line 21, Form 1040. You• Amortizable premium on taxable bonds.Repayments of Income
deduct your gambling losses for the year on line• Casualty and theft losses fromIf you had to repay an amount that you included 27, Schedule A (Form 1040). You cannot deduct
income-producing property.in income in an earlier year, you may be able to gambling losses that are more than your win-
deduct the amount you repaid. If the amount you nings.• Federal estate tax on income in respect of
had to repay was ordinary income of $3,000 ora decedent. You cannot reduce your gambling win-less, the deduction is subject to the 2% limit. If it nings by your gambling losses and re-• Gambling losses up to the amount of gam-was more than $3,000, see Repayments Under port the difference. You must report theCAUTION
!
bling winnings.Claim of Right under Deductions Not Subject to full amount of your winnings as income andthe 2% Limit, later. • Impairment-related work expenses of per-claim your losses up to the amount of winnings
sons with disabilities. as an itemized deduction. Therefore, your rec-
ords should show your winnings separately from• Repayments of more than $3,000 under aRepayments of your losses.claim of right.Social Security Benefits
• Unrecovered investment in an annuity. Diary of winnings and losses. YouFor information on how to deduct your repay- must keep an accurate diary or similarments of certain social security benefits, see• Expenses of officials paid on a fee basis. record of your losses and winnings.RECORDS
Repayments More Than Gross Benefits in chap- Your diary should contain at least the follow-ter 12. ing information.Amortizable Premium
on Taxable Bonds
Safe Deposit Box Rent 1) The date and type of your specific wagerIn general, if the amount you pay for a bond is
or wagering activity.greater than its stated principal amount, the ex-You can deduct safe deposit box rent if you use
the box to store taxable income-producingcess is bond premium. You can elect to amortize2) The name and address or location of the
stocks, bonds, or investment-related papers andthe premium on taxable bonds. The amortization gambling establishment.
documents. You cannot deduct the rent if youof the premium is generally an offset to interest3) The names of other persons presentuse the box only for jewelry, other personalincome on the bond rather than a separate de- with you at the gambling establishment.items, or tax-exempt securities. duction item.
4) The amount(s) you won or lost.Part of the premium on some bonds may be
See Publication 529 for more information.a miscellaneous deduction not subject to the 2%Service Charges on
limit. For more information, see AmortizableDividend Reinvestment Plans
Premium on Taxable Bonds in Publication 529
You can deduct service charges you pay as aand Bond Premium Amortization in chapter 3 ofImpairment-Related
subscriber in a dividend reinvestment plan.Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex- Work ExpensesThese service charges include payments for:penses.
If you have a physical or mental disability that1) Holding shares acquired through a plan, limits your being employed, or substantially lim-
its one or more of your major life activities, such2) Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends,Certain Casualty and
as performing manual tasks, walking, speaking,and Theft Losses breathing, learning, and working, you can de-3) Keeping individual records and providing duct your impairment-related work expenses.You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as adetailed statements of accounts. Impairment-related work expenses are ordi-miscellaneous itemized deduction not subject to
nary and necessary business expenses for at-the 2% limit if the damaged or stolen property
tendant care services at your place of work andwas income-producing property (property held
Trustee’s Administrative other expenses in connection with your place offor investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds,
work that are necessary for you to be able toFees for IRA gold, silver, vacant lots, and works of art). Firstwork.report the loss in Section B of Form 4684. YouTrustee’s administrative fees that are billed sep-may also have to include the loss on Form 4797Where to report.If you are an employee, youarately and paid by you in connection with your
if you are otherwise required to file that form.enter impairment-related work expenses onindividual retirement arrangement (IRA) are de-
Your deduction is the amount of the loss in-Form 2106 or Form 2106–EZ. Enter on line 27,ductible (if they are ordinary and necessary) as a
cluded on lines 32 and 38b of Form 4684 andSchedule A (Form 1040) that part of the amountmiscellaneous itemized deduction subject to the
line 18b(1) of Form 4797. For more informationon line 10 of Form 2106, or line 6 of Form2% limit. For more information about IRAs, see
on casualty and theft losses, see chapter 27.2106–EZ, that is related to your impairment.chapter 18.
Page 204 Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 207 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Enter the amount that is unrelated to your im-• Hobby losses — but see Hobby Ex- parking tickets, tax penalties, and penalties de-
penses, earlier. ducted from teachers’ paychecks after an illegalpairment on line 20, Schedule A (Form 1040).
strike.• Home repairs, insurance, and rent.
• Illegal bribes and kickbacks—see BribesRepayments Under
and kickbacks in chapter 13 of PublicationHealth Spa ExpensesClaim of Right
535.
You cannot deduct health spa expenses, even ifIf you had to repay more than $3,000 that you• Losses from the sale of your home, furni-there is a job requirement to stay in excellentincluded in your income in an earlier year be-ture, personal car, etc. physical condition, such as might be required ofcause at the time you thought you had an un-
a law enforcement officer.• Personal disability insurance premiums.restricted right to it, you may be able to deduct
the amount you repaid or take a credit against• Personal, living, or family expenses.your tax. See Repayments in chapter 13 for
Home Security System• The value of wages never received or lostmore information.
vacation time.
You cannot deduct the cost of a home security
system as a miscellaneous deduction. However,Unrecovered Investment Adoption Expenses you may be able to claim a deduction for a homein Annuity security system as a business expense if you
You cannot deduct the expenses of adopting ahave a home office. See Home Office underA retiree who contributed to the cost of an annu-child, but you may be able to take a credit forUnreimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier, andity can exclude from income a part of eachthose expenses. See chapter 38. Security System under Deducting Expenses inpayment received as a tax-free return of the Publication 587.retiree’s investment. If the retiree dies before the
entire investment is recovered tax free, any un-Campaign Expensesrecovered investment can be deducted on the
Homeowners’ Insurance Premiumsretiree’s final income tax return. See chapter 11You cannot deduct campaign expenses of a
for more information about the tax treatment ofcandidate for any office, even if the candidate isYou cannot deduct premiums that you pay orpensions and annuities. running for reelection to the office. These in-that are placed in escrow for insurance on your
clude qualification and registration fees for pri-home, such as fire and liability or mortgage
mary elections. insurance.Officials Paid on Legal fees. You cannot deduct legal feesa Fee Basis paid to defend charges that arise from partici-
Investment-Related Seminarspation in a political campaign.If you are a fee-basis official, you can claim your
expenses in performing services in that job as You cannot deduct any expenses for attending a
an adjustment to income rather than as a miscel- convention, seminar, or similar meeting for in-Check-Writing Feeslaneous itemized deduction. To qualify as a vestment purposes.on Personal Accountfee-basis official, you must be employed by a
state or local government and be paid in whole
If you have a personal checking account, youor in part on a fee basis. Life Insurance Premiumscannot deduct fees charged by the bank for the
privilege of writing checks, even if the accountWhere to report.If you qualify as a fee-basis You cannot deduct premiums you pay on yourpays interest.official, you should first complete Form 2106 or life insurance. You may be able to deduct, as
Form 2106–EZ. Then include your expenses in alimony, premiums you pay on life insurance
performing services in that job (line 10 of Form policies assigned to your former spouse. SeeClub Dues2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ) on line 34 of chapter 20 for information on alimony.
Form 1040. Then write “FBO” and the amount ofGenerally, you cannot deduct the cost of mem-those expenses on the dotted line next to line 34bership in any club organized for business, plea-of Form 1040. Lobbying Expensessure, recreation, or other social purpose. This
includes business, social, athletic, luncheon,You generally cannot deduct amounts paid orsporting, airline, hotel, golf, and country clubs.incurred for lobbying expenses. These includeFor exceptions, see Dues to Chambers of Com- expenses to:Nondeductible merce and Professional Societies under Un-
reimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier. 1) Influence legislation,
Expenses
2) Participate or intervene in any political
campaign for, or against, any candidate forExamples of nondeductible expenses are listedCommuting Expenses public office,next. The list is followed by discussions of addi-
You cannot deduct commuting expenses (thetional nondeductible expenses. 3) Attempt to influence the general public, orcost of transportation between your home andsegments of the public, about elections,your main or regular place of work). If you haullegislative matters, or referendums, orList of Nondeductible tools, instruments, or other items, in your car to
4) Communicate directly with covered execu-Expenses and from work, you can deduct only the addi-
tive branch officials in any attempt to influ-tional cost of hauling the items such as the rent
ence the official actions or positions ofon a trailer to carry the items.• Broker’s commissions that you paid in those officials.connection with your IRA or other invest-
ment property. Lobbying expenses also include any amounts
Fines or Penalties paid or incurred for research, preparation, plan-• Burial or funeral expenses, including the ning, or coordination of any of these activities.cost of a cemetery lot.  You cannot deduct fines or penalties you pay to
a governmental unit for violating a law. ThisDues used for lobbying. If a tax-exempt• Capital expenses. includes an amount paid in settlement of your organization notifies you that part of the dues or
• Fees and licenses, such as car licenses,actual or potential liability for a fine or penalty other amounts you pay to the organization are
marriage licenses, and dog tags. (civil or criminal). Fines or penalties include used to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses,
Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 205

Page 208 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you cannot deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex- You cannot deduct these expenses even if a to get information that would be useful in making
penses in Publication 529 for information on result of the legal proceeding is the loss of further investments.
exceptions. income-producing property.
Tax-Exempt Income Expenses
Lost or Mislaid Political Contributions
You cannot deduct expenses to produce tax-ex-Cash or Property You cannot deduct contributions made to a polit- empt income. You cannot deduct interest on a
ical candidate, a campaign committee, or adebt incurred or continued to buy or carryYou cannot deduct a loss based on the mere
newsletter fund. Advertisements in convention tax-exempt securities.disappearance of money or property. However,
bulletins and admissions to dinners or programs If you have expenses to produce both taxa-an accidental loss or disappearance of property
that benefit a political party or political candidate ble and tax-exempt income, but you cannotcan qualify as a casualty if it results from an
are not deductible. identify the expenses that produce each type ofidentifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or
income, you must divide the expenses based onunusual. See chapter 27.
the amount of each type of income to determine
the amount that you can deduct.Professional Accreditation FeesExample. A car door is accidentally
slammed on your hand, breaking the setting of
You cannot deduct professional accreditationExample. During the year, you receivedyour diamond ring. The diamond falls from the
fees such as the following. taxable interest of $4,800 and tax-exempt inter-ring and is never found. The loss of the diamond
est of $1,200. In earning this income, you hadis a casualty. 1) Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini-total expenses of $500 during the year. Youtial right to practice accounting. cannot identify the amount of each expense item
that is for each income item. Therefore, 80%2) Bar exam fees and incidental expenses inLunches With Coworkers
($4,800/$6,000) of the expense is for the taxablesecuring admission to the bar.
You cannot deduct the expenses of lunches with interest and 20% ($1,200/$6,000) is for the3) Medical and dental license fees paid to getco-workers, except while traveling away from tax-exempt interest. You can deduct, subject toinitial licensing.home on business. See chapter 28 for informa- the 2% limit, expenses of $400 (80% of $500).
tion on deductible expenses while traveling
away from home.
Travel Expenses forProfessional Reputation
Another Individual
You cannot deduct expenses of radio and TVMeals While Working Late
appearances to increase your personal prestigeYou generally cannot deduct travel expenses
You cannot deduct the cost of meals while work-or establish your professional reputation.you pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, or
ing late. However, you may be able to claim a other individual who accompanies you (or your
deduction if the cost of meals is a deductible employee) on business travel. See chapter 28
entertainment expense, or if you are travelingRelief Fund Contributions for more information on deductible travel ex-
away from home. See chapter 28 for information penses.
You cannot deduct contributions paid to a pri-on deductible entertainment expenses and ex-
vate plan that pays benefits to any covered em-penses while traveling away from home.
ployee who cannot work because of any injury orVoluntary Unemployment
illness not related to the job. Benefit Fund ContributionsPersonal Legal Expenses
You cannot deduct voluntary unemploymentYou cannot deduct personal legal expensesResidential Telephone Service benefit fund contributions you make to a unionsuch as those for the following. fund or a private fund. However, you can deductYou cannot deduct any charge (including taxes)contributions as taxes if state law requires you to1) Custody of children. for basic local telephone service for the firstmake them to a state unemployment fund thattelephone line to your residence, even if it is2) Breach of promise (to marry) suit. covers you for the loss of wages from unemploy-used in a trade or business. ment caused by business conditions.3) Civil or criminal charges resulting from a
personal relationship.
Stockholders’ Meetings4) Damages for personal injury. Wristwatches
5) Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec-You cannot deduct transportation and other ex-You cannot deduct the cost of a wristwatch,tion of a title). penses you pay to attend stockholders’ meet-even if there is a job requirement that you knowings of companies in which you own stock butthe correct time to properly perform your duties.6) Preparation of a will. have no other interest. You cannot deduct these
7) Property claims or property settlement in aexpenses even if you are attending the meeting
divorce.
Page 206 Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 209 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Six.
The eight chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax and how to figureFiguring Your the tax of certain children who have more than $1,500 of investment income.
They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions are subtracted directlyTaxes and from your tax and reduce your tax, dollar for dollar. Chapter 37 discusses the
earned income credit and how you may be able to get part of the credit paid to
Credits you in advance throughout the year.
explain whether you are eligible for these cred- in other chapters of this publication and your
its. You can find that information in chapters 33 form instructions. See the following table for
through 38 and your form instructions. See the other taxes you may need to add to your income31. following table for credits you may be able to tax.
subtract from your income tax.
OTHER TAXES
How To Figure SeeCREDITS
For information on: chapter:See
For information on: chapter: Additional taxes on qualified retirementYour Tax
plans and IRAs.............. 11, 18Adoption.................. 3 8
Advance earned income creditChild and dependent care...... 3 3
payments ................. 3 7Child tax credit.............. 3 5
Household employment taxes..... 3 3Introduction Education................. 3 6
Social security and Medicare tax onElderly or disabled........... 3 4After you have figured your income and deduc- unreported tips.............. 7Foreign tax................ 3 8tions as explained in Parts One through Five Uncollected social security andHealth insurance credit........ 3 8your next step is to figure your tax. This chapter Medicare tax on tips.......... 7Mortgage interest............ 3 8discusses: Prior year minimum tax........ 3 8 Another tax you may have to pay, the alter-Electric vehicle.............. 3 8• The general steps you take to figure your native minimum tax, is discussed later in thisRetirement savings contributions . . 38tax, chapter.
Some credits (such as the earned income• An additional tax you may have to pay There are other taxes that are not discussed
credit) are not listed above because they arecalled the alternative minimum tax, and in this publication. These include the following
treated as payments. See Payments, later. items.• The conditions you must meet if you wantThere are other credits that are not dis-the IRS to figure your tax. 1) Self-employment tax. You must figure thiscussed in this publication. These include the
tax if either of the following applies to youfollowing items.
(or your spouse if you file a joint return).
• General business credit, which is made up
of several separate business-related cred-a) Your net earnings from self-employ-
its. These generally are reported on Form ment from other than church employeeFiguring Your Tax
3800, General Business Credit, and are income were $400 or more. The term
discussed in chapter 4 of Publication 334, “net earnings from self-employment”Your income tax is based on your taxable in-
Tax Guide for Small Business. may include certain nonemployee com-come. After you figure your income tax, subtract
pensation and other amounts reportedyour tax credits and add any other taxes you• Empowerment zone and renewal commu- to you on Form 1099–MISC, Miscella-may owe. The result is your total tax. Comparenity employment credit, which is for certainneous Income. If you received a Formyour total tax with your total payments to deter-employers who are engaged in a business 1099–MISC, see the Instructions tomine whether you are entitled to a refund or owein an empowerment zone, a renewal com-additional tax. Recipients on the back. Also see themunity, or the DC zone. See PublicationThis section provides a general outline of instructions for Schedule SE (Form954, Tax Incentives for Empowermenthow to figure your tax. You can find step-by-step 1040), Self-Employment Tax, and Pub-Zones and Other Distressed Communities,directions in the instructions for Forms 1040EZ, lication 533, Self-Employment Tax.and the instructions for Form 8844, Em-1040A, and 1040. If you are unsure of which taxpowerment Zone and Renewal Commu- b) You had church employee income ofform you should file, see Which Form Should I nity Employment Credit. $108.28 or more.Use? in chapter 1.
• District of Columbia first-time homebuyer2) Recapture taxes. You may have to payTax. Most taxpayers use either the Tax Tablecredit, which is for certain persons who these taxes if you previously claimed anor the Tax Rate Schedules to figure their incomebuy a main home in the District. See the education credit, an investment credit, atax. However, there are special methods if yourinstructions for Form 8859, District of Co- low-income housing credit, a mortgage in-income includes any of the following items. lumbia First-Time Homebuyer Credit. terest credit, a new markets credit, a quali-• Capital gains (see chapter 17). • Credit for fuel from a nonconventional fied electric vehicle credit, or an Indian
source, which is for the person who sold employment credit. For more information• Lump-sum distributions (see chapter 11).
the fuel. See the instructions for line 53 of about recapture of an education credit, see• Farm income (see Schedule J (Form Form 1040 and section 29 of the Internal chapter 36. For more information about1040), Farm Income Averaging). Revenue Code. other recapture taxes, see the instructions
for line 61 of Form 1040.• Investment income over $1,500 for chil-
dren under age 14 (see chapter 32). Other taxes.After you subtract your tax cred- 3)Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. If
its, determine whether there are any other taxes you are (or were) a 5% owner of a busi-
you must pay. This chapter does not explain ness and you received a distribution thatCredits. After you figure your income tax, de-
these other taxes. You can find that information exceeds the benefits provided for youtermine your tax credits. This chapter does not
Chapter 31 How To Figure Your Tax Page 207

Page 210 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Federal income tax withheld..... 5under the qualified pension or annuity plan • Change in certain passive activity loss
Regulated investment company deductions,formula, you may have to pay this addi-
credit.................... 3 8tional tax. See Tax on Excess Benefits in • Addition of certain depletion that is moreTax paid with extension........ 1chapter 4 of Publication 560, Retirement than the adjusted basis of the property,Plans for Small Business (SEP, SIMPLE, Another credit that is treated as a payment is• Addition of part of the deduction for certainand Qualified Plans). the credit for federal excise tax paid on fuels.intangible drilling costs, andThis credit is for persons who have a nontaxable4) Uncollected social security and Medicare
• Addition of tax-exempt interest on certainuse of certain fuels, such as diesel fuel andtax on group-term life insurance. If your
private activity bonds.kerosene. It is claimed on line 68 of Form 1040.former employer provides you with more
than $50,000 of group-term life insurance See Publication 378, Fuel Tax Credits and Re-
coverage, you must pay the employee partfunds, and Form 4136, Credit for Federal TaxMore information. For more informationof social security and Medicare taxes onPaid on Fuels. about the alternative minimum tax, see the in-those premiums. The amount should be structions for Form 1040, line 43, and Formshown in box 12 of your Form W–2 withRefund or balance due. To determine 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals.codes M and N. whether you are entitled to a refund or owe
additional tax, compare your total payments with5) Tax on golden parachute payments. This
your total tax. If you are entitled to a refund, seetax applies if you received an “excess par-
your form instructions for information on havingachute payment” (EPP) due to a change in Tax Figured by IRSit directly deposited into your financial accounta corporation’s ownership or control. See
instead of receiving a paper check.the instructions for line 61 of Form 1040. If you file by April 15, 2003, you can have the
IRS figure your tax for you on Form 1040EZ,6) Tax on accumulation distribution of trusts.
Form 1040A, or Form 1040.This applies if you are the beneficiary of a If the IRS figures your tax and you paid tootrust that accumulated its income instead much, you will receive a refund. If you did notAlternativeof distributing it currently. See the instruc- pay enough, you will receive a bill for the bal-tions for Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation ance. To avoid interest or the penalty for lateMinimum TaxDistribution of Trusts. payment, you must pay the bill within 30 days of
7) Additional tax on MSAs. If amounts con- the date of the bill or by the due date for yourThis section briefly discusses an additional tax
tributed to, or distributed from, your medi- return, whichever is later.you may have to pay.
cal savings account do not meet the rulesThe tax law gives special treatment to someWhen the IRS cannot figure your tax.Thefor these accounts, you may have to paykinds of income and allows special deductionsIRS cannot figure your tax for you if any of theadditional taxes. See Publication 969,and credits for some kinds of expenses. Taxpay-following apply.Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs), Form ers who benefit from the law in these ways may8853, Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care have to pay at least a minimum amount of tax1) You want your refund directly deposited.Insurance Contracts, and Form 5329, Ad- through an additional tax. This additional tax isditional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Includ- 2) You want any part of your refund appliedcalled the alternative minimum tax (AMT).ing IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored to your 2003 estimated tax.You may have to pay the alternative mini-Accounts. 3) Any of your income for the year was frommum tax if your taxable income for regular tax
8) Additional tax on Coverdell ESAs. This ap- other than wages, salaries, tips, interest,purposes, combined with certain adjustments
plies if amounts contributed to, or distrib- dividends, taxable social security benefits,and tax preference items, is more than:
uted from, your Coverdell ESA do not unemployment compensation, IRA distri-
• $49,000 if your filing status is married filingmeet the rules for these accounts. See butions, pensions, and annuities.
joint (or qualifying widow(er) with depen-Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Educa- 4) Your taxable income is $100,000 or more.dent child),tion, Form 5329, and Form 8606, Nonde-
ductible IRAs. 5) You itemize deductions.• $35,750 if your filing status is single or
head of household, or9) Additional tax on qualified tuition pro- 6) You file any of the following forms.
grams. This applies to amounts distributed• $24,500 if your filing status is married filinga) Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income.from qualified tuition programs that do notseparate.meet the rules for these accounts. See b) Form 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned In-Publication 970 and Form 5329. come Exclusion.Adjustments and tax preference items.The
c) Form 4137, Social Security and Medi-more common adjustments and tax preferencePayments. After you determine your total tax, care Tax on Unreported Tip Income.items include:figure the total payments you have already
d) Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Distri-made for the year. Include credits that are• Addition of personal exemptions,
bution of Trusts.treated as payments. This chapter does not ex-
• Addition of the standard deduction (ifplain these payments and credits. You can find e) Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distribu-claimed),that information in other chapters of this publica- tions.tion and your form instructions. See the follow-• Addition of itemized deductions claimed
f) Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.ing table for amounts you can include in yourfor state and local taxes, certain interest,
total payments. most miscellaneous deductions, and part g) Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—
of medical expenses, Individuals.
• Subtraction of any refund of state and h) Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs and
local taxes included in gross income, Coverdell ESAs.
PAYMENTS • Changes to accelerated depreciation of i) Form 8615, Tax for Children Under Age
See certain property, 14 Who Have Investment Income of
For information on: chapter: More Than $1,500.• Difference between gain or loss on the
Child tax credit (additional)...... 3 5 sale of property reported for regular taxj) Form 8814, Parents’ Election To ReportEarned income credit......... 3 7 purposes and AMT purposes, Child’s Interest and Dividends.Estimated tax paid........... 5
• Addition of certain income from incentive k) Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex-Excess social security and RRTA
tax withheld................ 3 8 stock options, penses.
Page 208 Chapter 31 How To Figure Your Tax

Page 211 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
l) Form 8853, Archer MSAs and if they apply to you. Do not fill in lines 30 and 41 if If you are filing a joint return, write your taxa-
Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts.you want the IRS to figure the credits shown onble income and your spouse’s taxable income in
those lines. Also, enter any write-in informationthe space under the words “Adjusted Gross In-
that applies to you in the space to the left of linecome” on the front of your return.
43. Read lines 43 through 68. Fill in the lines thatFiling the Return
apply to you, but do not fill in the “Total” lines. Do
Credit for child and dependent care ex- not fill in lines 47 and 64 if you want the IRS toAfter you complete the line entries for the tax
penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-figure the credits shown on those lines.form you are filing (discussed next), attach the
cussed in chapter 33, complete Schedule 2 andpeel-off label, enter your social security Fill in any forms or schedules asked for onattach it to your return. Enter the amount of thenumber(s), sign the return, and mail it. If you do the lines you completed, and attach them to yourcredit on line 29 (Form 1040A). The IRS will notnot have a peel-off label, fill in your name and return.figure this credit.address. See chapter 1 for more information.
Credit for child and dependent care ex-Credit for the elderly or the disabled.If you penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 34,Form 1040EZ Line Entries cussed in chapter 33, complete Form 2441 andattach Schedule 3 (1040A), Credit for the Elderlyattach it to your return. Enter the amount of theor the Disabled for Form 1040A Filers. PrintRead lines 1 through 8 and fill in the lines that credit on line 46. The IRS will not figure this“CFE” in the space to the left of line 30 (Formapply to you. If you are filing a joint return, write credit.1040A). The IRS will figure this credit for you. Onyour taxable income and your spouse’s taxable
Schedule 3, check the box in Part I for your filingincome to the left of line 6.
Credit for the elderly or the disabled.If youstatus and age. Complete Part II and lines 11Earned income credit. If you can take this can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 34,and 13 of Part III if they apply.credit, as discussed in chapter 37, the IRS can attach Schedule R, Credit for the Elderly or the
figure it for you. Print “EIC” in the space to the Disabled. Print “CFE” on the dotted line next toEarned income credit. If you can take thisleft of line 8. line 47 of Form 1040. The IRS will figure thecredit, as discussed in chapter 37, the IRS willIf your credit for any year after 1996 was credit for you. On Schedule R check the box infigure it for you. Print “EIC” in the space to thereduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also Part I for your filing status and age. Completeleft of line 41. If you have a qualifying child, youhave to file Form 8862, Information To Claim Part II and lines 11 and 13 of Part III if they apply.must fill in Schedule EIC, Earned Income Credit,Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with and attach it to your return.your return. For details, see the Form 1040EZIf your credit for any year after 1996 wasEarned income credit. If you can take thisinstructions. reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsocredit, as discussed in chapter 37, the IRS will
have to file Form 8862 with your return. Forfigure it for you. Print “EIC” in the space to the
details, see the Form 1040A instructions.left of line 64 of Form 1040. If you have a qualify-Form 1040A Line Entries ing child, you must fill in Schedule EIC and
attach it to your return.Read lines 1 through 27 and fill in the lines that
Form 1040 Line Entries If your credit for any year after 1996 wasapply to you. If you are filing a joint return, write
reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsoyour taxable income and your spouse’s taxable
have to file Form 8862 with your return. Forincome in the space to the left of line 27. Com- Read lines 1 through 41 and fill in the lines
plete lines 29 through 33, 37, and 39 through 42 that apply to you. details, see the Form 1040 instructions.
Chapter 31 How To Figure Your Tax Page 209

Page 212 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form (and Instructions)
❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 14 WithParent’s Election
Investment Income of More Than32. $1,500 To Report Child’s
❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s
Interest and DividendsInterest and Dividends
Tax on You may be able to elect to include your child’s
interest and dividend income (including capital
Investment gain distributions) on your tax return. If you do,
Which Parent’s your child will not have to file a return.
You can make this election for 2002 only if allIncome of Return To Use the following conditions are met.
If a child’s parents are married to each other andCertain Minor 1) Your child was under age 14 at the end offile a joint return, use the joint return to figure the
2002. A child born on January 1, 1989, istax on the investment income of a child under
considered to be age 14 at the end ofage 14. For parents who do not file a joint return,Children
2002.the following discussions explain which parent’s
tax return must be used to figure the tax. Only2) Your child is required to file a return forthe parent whose tax return is used can make2002, unless you make this election.the election described under Parent’s ElectionImportant Reminder
To Report Child’s Interest and Dividends. The 3) Your child had income only from interest
tax rate and other return information from thatand dividends (including capital gain distri-Parent’s election to report child’s interestparent’s return are used to compute the child’sbutions and Alaska Permanent Fund divi-and dividends. You may be able to elect totax as explained later under Tax for Children dends).include your child’s interest and dividends onUnder Age 14 Who Have Investment Income ofyour tax return. If you make this election, the 4) The dividend and interest income was lessMore Than $1,500.child does not have to file a return. See Parent’s than $7,500.
Election To Report Child’s Interest and Divi-Parents are married.If the child’s parents file5) No estimated tax payment was made fordends, later. separate returns, use the return of the parent2002 and no 2001 overpayment was ap-with the greater taxable income.
plied to 2002 under your child’s name and
Parents not living together.If the child’s social security number.
parents are married to each other but not living
6) No federal income tax was taken out oftogether, and the parent with whom the childIntroduction
your child’s income under the backup with-lives (the custodial parent) is considered unmar-This chapter discusses two special rules that holding rules.ried, use the return of the custodial parent. If theapply to the tax on certain investment income ofcustodial parent is not considered unmarried,7) You are the parent whose return must bea child under age 14. use the return of the parent with the greaterused when applying the special tax rulestaxable income. for children under age 14. (See Which1) If the child’s interest, dividends, and otherFor an explanation of when a married personParent’s Return To Use, earlier.)investment income total more than $1,500,living apart from his or her spouse is considered
part of that income may be taxed at theunmarried, see Head of Household in chapter 2.These conditions are also shown in Figureparent’s tax rate instead of the child’s tax 32–A.Parents are divorced.If the child’s parentsrate. (See Tax for Children Under Age 14
are divorced or legally separated, and the parentWho Have Investment Income of More
How to make the election.Make the electionwho had custody of the child for the greater partThan $1,500, later.)
of the year (the custodial parent) has not remar-by attaching Form 8814 to your Form 1040 or2) The child’s parent may be able to chooseried, use the return of the custodial parent.Form 1040NR. (If you make this election, youto include the child’s interest and dividend cannot file Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) At-Custodial parent remarried.If the custo-income (including capital gain distribu- tach a separate Form 8814 for each child fordial parent has remarried, the stepparent (rathertions) on the parent’s return rather than file whom you make the election. You can make thethan the noncustodial parent) is treated as thea return for the child. (See Parent’s Elec- election for one or more children and not forchild’s other parent. Therefore, if the custodialtion To Report Child’s Interest and Divi- others.parent and the stepparent file a joint return, usedends, later.) that joint return. Do not use the return of the
For these rules, the term “child” includes a le-noncustodial parent. Effect of Making thegally adopted child and a stepchild. These rulesIf the custodial parent and the stepparent are
apply whether or not the child is a dependent. Electionmarried, but file separate returns, use the return
of the one with the greater taxable income. If theThese rules do not apply if: The federal income tax on your child’s incomecustodial parent and the stepparent are married
may be more if you make the Form 8814 elec-but not living together, the earlier discussion1) The child is not required to file a tax return,
under Parents not living together applies. tion.or
Parents never married.If a child’s parents2) Neither of the child’s parents were living at
Rate may be higher. If you use Form 8814,did not marry each other, but lived together allthe end of the tax year.
the child’s income may be taxed at a higher rateyear, use the return of the parent with the
on your return than it would be on the child’s owngreater taxable income. If the parents did not live
Useful Items return.together all year, the rules explained earlier
under Parents are divorced apply.You may want to see:
Deductions you cannot take.By making theWidowed parent remarried. If a widow orPublication Form 8814 election, you cannot take any of thewidower remarries, the new spouse is treated as
following deductions that the child would be enti-❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and the child’s other parent. The rules explained
tled to on his or her return.Dependents earlier under Custodial parent remarried apply.
Page 210 Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 213 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
come may reduce certain deductions or credits
on your return including the following.
1) Deduction for contributions to a traditional
individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
2) Deduction for student loan interest.
3) Itemized deductions for medical expenses,
casualty and theft losses, and certain mis-
cellaneous expenses.
4) Total itemized deductions.
5) Personal exemptions.
6) Credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses.
7) Child tax credit.
8) Education tax credits.
9) Earned income credit.
Penalty for underpayment of estimated tax.
If you make this election for 2002 and did not
have enough tax withheld or pay enough esti-
mated tax to cover the tax you owe, you may be
subject to a penalty. If you plan to make this
election for 2003, you may need to increase your
federal income tax withholding or your estimated
tax payments to avoid the penalty. See chapter
5 for more information.
Figuring Child’s Income
Use Part I of Form 8814 to figure your child’s
interest and dividend income to report on your
return. Only the amount over $1,500 is added to
your income. This amount is shown on line 6 of
Form 8814. Include this amount on line 21 of
Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. Write “Form 8814”
in the space next to line 21. If you file more than
one Form 8814, include the total amounts from
line 6 of all your Forms 8814 on line 21.
Capital gain distributions.If your child’s divi-
dend income included any capital gain distribu-
tions, see Capital gain distributions under
Figuring Child’s Income in Part 2 of Publication
929.
Figuring Additional Tax
Use Part II of Form 8814 to figure the tax on the
$1,500 of your child’s interest and dividends that
you do not include in your income. This tax is
added to the tax figured on your income.
This additional tax is the smaller of:
1) 10% × (your child’s gross income − $750),
or
2) $75.
Include the amount from line 9 of all your
Forms 8814 in the total on line 42, Form 1040, or
line 40, Form 1040NR. Check box a on Form
1040, line 42, or Form 1040NR, line 40.
Figure 32–A. Can You Include Your Child’s Income On Your Tax
Return?
Start Here
/H17074
Was your child under age 14
at the end of 2002?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is your child required to file a tax return
for 2002 if you do not make this
election?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s only income interest and
dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends)?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s income less than
$7,500?
/H17074
Yes
Did the child make any estimated tax
payments for 2002?
/H17074
No
Did the child have an overpayment of
tax on his or her 2001 return applied to
the 2002 estimated tax?
/H17074
No
Was any federal income tax withheld from
the child’s income (backup withholding)?
/H17074
No
Are you the parent whose return must
be used?*
/H17074
Yes
You can include your child’s income on
your tax return by completing Form 8814
and attaching it to your return. If you do,
your child is not required to file a return.
You cannot include
your child’s income
on your return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Illustrated Example
1) The higher standard deduction for a blind3) Itemized deductions (such as your child’sDavid and Linda Parks are married and will filechild. investment expenses or charitable contri-separate tax returns for 2002. Their only child,
butions). Philip, is 8. Philip received a Form 1099–INT2) The deduction for a penalty on an early
showing $3,200 taxable interest income and awithdrawal of your child’s savings.
Reduced deductions or credits.If you use Form 1099–DIV showing $300 ordinary divi-
Form 8814, your increased adjusted gross in- dends. His parents decide to include that in-
Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 211

Page 214 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
These conditions are also shown in Figure
32–B .
If neither parent was alive on December 31,
2002, do not use Form 8615. Instead, figure
the child’s tax in the normal manner.
If the parent does not or cannot choose to
include the child’s income on the parent’s return,
use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attach
the completed form to the child’s Form 1040,
Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
The following discussions explain the paren-
tal information needed for Form 8615 and the
steps to follow in figuring the child’s tax. Form
8615 is illustrated later.
Providing Parental
Information
(Form 8615, lines A–C)
On lines A and B of Form 8615, enter the
parent’s name and social security number. (If
the parents filed a joint return, enter the name
and social security number listed first on the joint
return.) On line C, check the box for the parent’s
filing status.
See Which Parent’s Return To Use at the
beginning of this chapter for information on
which parent’s return information must be used
on Form 8615.
Parent with different tax year.If the parent
and the child do not have the same tax year,
complete Form 8615 using the information on
the parent’s return for the tax year that ends in
the child’s tax year.
Parent’s return information not known
Figure 32–B. Do You Have To Use Form 8615 To Figure Your
Child’s Tax?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the child under age 14 at the end of 2002?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is the child required to file a tax return for 2002?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s investment income more than $1,500?
/H17074
Yes
Use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attach it to the
child’s return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Note: If the child’s parent* chooses to report the child’s income
by filing Form 8814, the child is not required to file a tax return.
Do not use Form 8615. (See Parent’s Election To Report Child’s
Interest and Dividends.)
Do not use
Form 8615 to
figure the
child’s tax.
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
timely. If the information needed from the
parent’s return is not known by the time thecome on one of their returns so they will not enters the result, $2,750, on line 8. Because thatchild’s return is due (usually April 15), you canhave to file a return for Philip. amount is not less than $750, she checks thefile the return using estimates.First, David and Linda each figure their taxa-“No” box and enters $75 on line 9. This is the taxYou can use any reasonable estimate. Thisble income (Form 1040, line 41) without regardon the first $1,500 of Philip’s income, whichincludes using information from last year’s re-to Philip’s income. David’s taxable income isLinda did not have to add to her income. Sheturn. If you use an estimated amount on Form$41,700 and Linda’s is $59,300. Because hermust add this additional tax to the tax figured on8615, write “Estimated” on the line next to thetaxable income is greater, Linda can elect toher revised taxable income. amount.include Philip’s income on her return. See Which The tax on her $61,300 revised taxable in-When you get the correct information, file anParent’s Return To Use, earlier. come is $13,603. She adds $75, and enters theamended return on Form 1040X, Amended U.S.On Form 8814 (see illustrated form), Linda$13,678 total on line 42 of Form 1040, andIndividual Income Tax Return.enters her name and social security number,checks box a. Instead of using estimated information, youthen Philip’s name and social security number. may want to request an extension of time to file.Linda attaches Form 8814 to her Form 1040.She enters Philip’s taxable interest income, Extensions are discussed in chapter 1.$3,200, on line 1a. Philip had no tax-exempt
interest income, so she leaves line 1b blank.
Step 1. Figuring theLinda enters Philip’s ordinary dividends, $300,
on line 2. Philip did not have any capital gainTax for Children UnderChild’sdistributions, so she leaves line 3 blank.
Net Investment IncomeLinda adds lines 1a and 2 and enters theAge 14 Who Have
result, $3,500, on line 4. From that amount she (Form 8615, Part I)
subtracts the $1,500 base amount shown on lineInvestment Income of
5 and enters the result, $2,000, on line 6. This is The first step in figuring a child’s tax using Form
the part of Philip’s income that Linda must add toMore Than $1,500 8615 is to figure the child’s net investment in-
her income. come. To do that, use Part I of Form 8615.
Linda includes the $2,000 in the total on linePart of a child’s 2002 investment income may be
21 of her Form 1040 and in the space next to Line 1 (investment income).If the child hadsubject to tax at the parent’s tax rate if:
that line prints “Form 8814 – $2,000.” Adding no earned income, enter on this line the ad-
1) The child’s investment income was morethat amount to her income increases each of the justed gross income shown on the child’s return.
than $1,500,amounts on lines 22, 35, 36, 39, and 41 of her Adjusted gross income is shown on line 36 of
Form 1040 by $2,000. Linda is not claiming any Form 1040, line 22 of Form 1040A, or line 35 of2) The child is required to file a return fordeductions or credits that are affected by the Form 1040NR. Form 1040EZ and Form2002, andincrease to her income. Therefore, her revised 1040NR-EZ cannot be used if Form 8615 must
3) The child was under age 14 at the end oftaxable income on line 41 is $61,300 ($59,300 + be filed.
2002. A child born on January 1, 1989, is$2,000). If the child had earned income, figure the
considered to be age 14 at the end ofOn Form 8814, Linda subtracts the $750 amount to enter on line 1 of Form 8615 by using
shown on line 7 from the $3,500 on line 4 and 2002. the worksheet in the instructions for the form.
Page 212 Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 215 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Linda P arks
Philip P arks
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
000 00 0000
3,200
300
3,500
2,000
2,750
75
OMB No. 1545-1128Parents’ Election To Report
Child’s Interest and Dividends
Form 8814
/H17075See instructions below and on back.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 40/H17075Attach to parents’ Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
How To Make the Election. To make the
election, complete and attach Form(s) 8814
to your tax return and file your return by
the due date (including extensions). A
separate Form 8814 must be filed for each
child whose income you choose to report.
● There were no estimated tax payments
for the child for 2002 (including any
overpayment of tax from his or her 2001
return applied to 2002 estimated tax).
General Instructions
Purpose of Form. Use this form if you
elect to report your child’s income on your
return. If you do, your child will not have to
file a return. You can make this election if
your child meets all of the following
conditions.
● There was no Federal income tax
withheld from the child’s income.
● The child was under age 14 at the end
of 2002. A child born on January 1, 1989,
is considered to be age 14 at the end of
2002.
You must also qualify. See Parents Who
Qualify To Make the Election below.
● The child’s only income was from
interest and dividends, including capital
gain distributions and Alaska Permanent
Fund dividends.
● The child’s gross income for 2002 was
less than $7,500.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on your return
Child’s social security numberChild’s name (first, initial, and last)
If more than one Form 8814 is attached, check here /H17075
Child’s Interest and Dividends To Report on Your Return
Enter your child’s taxable interest. If this amount is different from the amounts shown on the
child’s Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID, see the instructions
1a
1a
b Enter your child’s tax-exempt interest. Do not include this
amount on line 1a 1b
2 Enter your child’s ordinary dividends, including any Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. If your
child received any ordinary dividends as a nominee, see the instructions
Enter your child’s capital gain distributions. If your child received any capital gain distributions
as a nominee, see the instructions
Add lines 1a, 2, and 3. If the total is $1,500 or less, skip lines 5 and 6 and go to line 7. If the
total is $7,500 or more, do not file this form. Your child must file his or her own return to report
the income
3
1,500 00
4
Base amount
4
5
Subtract line 5 from line 4. If you checked the box on line C above or if you entered an amount
on line 3, see the instructions. Also, include this amount in the total on Form 1040, line 21, or
Form 1040NR, line 21. In the space next to line 21, enter “Form 8814” and show the amount.
Go to line 7 below
/H170756
Tax on the First $1,500 of Child’s Interest and Dividends
750 00Amount not taxed
9
77
Subtract line 7 from line 4. If the result is zero or less, enter -0-
No. Enter $75 here and see the Note below.
Tax. Is the amount on line 8 less than $750?
8 8
Yes. Multiply line 8 by 10% (.10). Enter the result here and see the Note below.
Note: If you checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Otherwise, include the amount from line 9 in the tax you enter
on Form 1040, line 42, or Form 1040NR, line 40. Be sure to check box a on Form 1040, line 42, or Form 1040NR, line 40.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form. Form 8814 (2002)Cat. No. 10750J
/H20854
A B
C
● The child is required to file a 2002
return.
(99)
3
6
2
5
Part I
Part II
9
Parents Who Qualify To Make the
Election. You qualify to make this election
if you file Form 1040 or Form 1040NR and
any of the following apply.
● You are filing a joint return for 2002 with
the child’s other parent.
● You were unmarried, treated as
unmarried for Federal income tax
purposes, or separated from the child’s
other parent by a divorce or separate
maintenance decree. You must have had
custody of your child for most of the year
(you were the custodial parent). If you were
the custodial parent and you remarried,
you may make the election on a joint
return with your new spouse. But if you
and your new spouse do not file a joint
return, you qualify to make the election
only if you had higher taxable income than
your new spouse.
Caution: The Federal income tax on your child’s income, including capital gain distributions, may be less if you file a separate tax
return for the child instead of making this election. This is because you cannot take certain tax benefits that your child coul d take
on his or her own return. For details, see Tax Benefits You May Not Take on the back.
● You and the child’s other parent were
married to each other but file separate
returns for 2002 and you had the higher
taxable income.
(continued)
2002
/H12011
Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 213

Page 216 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
However, if the child has excluded any for- 2) $1,500. investment income of any other child whose
Form 8615 includes the tax return information ofeign earned income or deducted either a loss
Directly connected.Itemized deductions that parent) and the tax figured without it.from self-employment or a net operating loss
are directly connected with the production ofWhen figuring the tentative tax at thefrom another year, use the Alternate Worksheet
investment income if they are for expenses paidparent’s tax rate, do not refigure any of thefor Line 1 of Form 8615 in Publication 929 to
to produce or collect taxable income or to man-exclusions, deductions, or credits on thefigure the amount to enter on line 1 of Form
age, conserve, or maintain property held forparent’s return because of the child’s net invest-8615.
producing income. These expenses include ment income. For example, do not refigure theInvestment income defined. Investment custodian fees and service charges, servicemedical expense deduction.income is generally all income other than sala-fees to collect taxable interest and dividends, Figure the tentative tax on lines 6 through 13ries, wages, and other amounts received as payand certain investment counsel fees. of Form 8615.for work actually done. It includes taxable inter-These expenses are added to certain otherest, dividends, capital gains (including capitalmiscellaneous deductions on Schedule A (FormNote. If the child has any capital gains orgain distributions), the taxable part of social se-1040). Only the amount greater than 2% of the losses, get Publication 929 for help in complet-curity and pension payments, and certain distri-child’s adjusted gross income can be deducted. ing Part II of Form 8615.butions from trusts. Investment income includesSee chapter 30 for more information.amounts produced by assets the child obtained Line 7 (net investment income of other chil-
with earned income (such as interest on a sav- dren). If the tax return information of the par-Example 1. Roger, age 12, has investmentings account into which the child deposited ent is also used on any other child’s Form 8615,income of $8,000, no other income, no adjust-wages). enter on line 7 the total of the amounts from linements to income, and itemized deductions of
5 of all the other children’s Forms 8615. Do not$300 (net of the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeNontaxable income. For this purpose, in-
include the amount from line 5 of the Form 8615limit) that are directly connected with his invest-vestment income includes only amounts that the
being completed.ment income. His adjusted gross income ischild must include in total income. Nontaxable
$8,000, which is entered on line 36 of Form 1040investment income, such as tax-exempt interest
Example. Paul and Jane Persimmon haveand on line 1 of Form 8615. Line 2 is $1,500and the nontaxable part of social security and
three children, Sharon, Jerry, and Mike, whobecause that is more than the sum of $750 andpension payments, is not included.
must attach Form 8615 to their tax returns. Thehis directly-connected itemized deductions ofIncome from property received as a gift. children’s net investment income amounts on$300.A child’s investment income includes all income line 5 of their Forms 8615 are:
produced by property belonging to the child.Example 2. Eleanor, 8, has investment in-• Sharon — $800This is true even if the property was transferredcome of $16,000 and an early withdrawal pen-to the child regardless of when the property was • Jerry — $600alty of $100. She has no other income. She hastransferred or purchased or who transferred it.itemized deductions of $1,050 (net of the • Mike — $1,000A child’s investment income includes income2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) that are di-
produced by property given as a gift to the child.rectly connected with the production of her in-Line 7 of Sharon’s Form 8615 will showThis includes gifts to the child from grandparentsvestment income. Her adjusted gross income,$1,600 ($600 + $1,000), the total of the amountsor any other person and gifts made under theentered on line 1, is $15,900 ($16,000 − $100). on line 5 of Jerry’s and Mike’s Forms 8615.Uniform Gift to Minors Act. The amount on Line 2 is $1,800. This is theLine 7 of Jerry’s Form 8615 will show $1,800
larger of: ($800 + $1,000).Example. Amanda Black, age 13, received Line 7 of Mike’s Form 8615 will show $1,4001) $750 plus the $1,050 of directly connectedthe following income. ($800 + $600).itemized deductions, or• Dividends — $600 Other children’s information not available.2) $1,500. If the net investment income of the other children• Wages — $2,100
is not available when the return is due, either fileLine 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 and enter the• Taxable interest — $1,200 the return using estimates or get an extension ofresult on this line. If zero or less, do not completetime to file. See Parent’s return information not• Tax-exempt interest — $100 the rest of the form. However, you must stillknown timely, earlier.attach Form 8615 to the child’s tax return. Figure• Net capital gains — $100.
the tax on the child’s taxable income in theLine 11 (tentative tax).Subtract line 10 fromThe dividends were on stock given to her by hernormal manner. line 9 and enter the result on this line. This is thegrandparents. tentative tax.Line 4 (child’s taxable income).Enter on lineAmanda’s investment income is $1,900. This If line 7 is blank, skip lines 12a and 12b and4 the child’s taxable income from Form 1040,is the total of the dividends ($600), taxable inter- enter the amount from line 11 on line 13.line 41; Form 1040A, line 27; or Form 1040NR,est ($1,200), and net capital gains ($100). Herline 39. Lines 12a and 12b (dividing the tentativewages are earned (not investment) income be-
tax). If an amount is entered on line 7, divideLine 5 (net investment income).A child’s netcause they are received for work actually done.
the tentative tax shown on line 11 among theinvestment income cannot be more than his orHer tax-exempt interest is not included because
children according to each child’s share of theher taxable income. Enter on line 5 the smallerit is nontaxable.
total net investment income. This is done onof line 3 or line 4 of Form 8615. This is the child’sTrust income. If a child is the beneficiary of lines 12a, 12b, and 13. Add the amount on line 7net investment income. If zero or less, do nota trust, distributions of taxable interest, divi- to the amount on line 5 and enter the total on linecomplete the rest of the form. However, youdends, capital gains, and other investment in- 12a. Divide the amount on line 5 by the amountmust still attach Form 8615 to the child’s taxcome from the trust are investment income to on line 12a and enter the result as a decimal onreturn. Figure the tax on the child’s taxable in-the child. line 12b.come in the normal manner.
Line 2 (deductions).If the child does not Example. In the earlier example under LineStep 2. Figuringitemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 7 (net investment income of other children),
or Form 1040NR), enter $1,500 on line 2. Tentative Tax at Sharon’s Form 8615 shows $1,600 on line 7.
If the child does itemize deductions, enter on The amount entered on line 12a is $2,400, thethe Parent’s Tax Rateline 2 the larger of: total of lines 5 and 7 ($800 + $1,600). The
(Form 8615, Part II) decimal on line 12b is .333, figured as follows
1) $750 plus the child’s itemized deductions and rounded to three places.
that are directly connected with the pro-The tentative tax is the difference between the
duction of investment income entered ontax on the parent’s taxable income figured with
line 1, or the child’s net investment income (plus the net
$800
$2,400 .333=
Page 214 Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 217 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
John and Laura Brown have one child, Sara. John enters $48,000 on line 6. This is theStep 3. Figuring She is 13 and has $2,750 taxable interest and taxable income from line 41 of their joint Form
the Child’s Tax dividend income and $1,500 earned income. 1040 return. Sara is an only child, so line 7 is
She does not itemize deductions. John and blank. He adds line 5 ($1,250), line 6 ($48,000),(Form 8615, Part III) Laura file a joint return with John’s name and and line 7 (blank), and enters $49,250 on line 8.
social security number listed first. They claim Using the column for married filing jointly inThe final step in figuring a child’s tax using Form
three exemptions, including an exemption for the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $49,250. He8615 is to determine the larger of:
Sara, on their return. enters the tax, $7,100 on line 9. He enters
Because Sara is under age 14 and has more $6,763 on line 10. This is the tax from line 42 of1) The total of:
than $1,500 investment income, part of her in- John and Laura’s Form 1040. He enters $337 on
a) The child’s share of the tentative taxcome may be subject to tax at her parents’ rate. line 11 ($7,100 − $6,763).
based on the parent’s tax rate, plusA completed Form 8615 must be attached to her Because line 7 is blank, John skips lines 12a
return. and 12b and enters $337 on line 13.b) The tax on the child’s taxable income in
Sara’s father, John, fills out Sara’s return for John subtracts line 5 ($1,250) from line 4excess of net investment income, fig-
her. ($2,500) and enters the result, $1,250, on lineured at the child’s tax rate, or
John enters his name and social security 14. Using the column for single filing status in
number on Sara’s Form 8615 because his name the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $1,250 and2) The tax on the child’s taxable income, fig-
and number are listed first on the joint return he enters this tax, $126, on line 15. He adds linesured at the child’s tax rate.
and Laura are filing. He checks the box for 13 ($337) and 15 ($126) and enters $463 on line
This is the child’s tax. It is figured on lines 14married filing jointly. 16.
through 18 of Form 8615. He enters Sara’s investment income, Using the column for single filing status in the
$2,750, on line 1. Sara does not itemize deduc- Tax Table, John finds the tax on $2,500 ( line 4)Alternative minimum tax. A child may be
tions, so John enters $1,500 on line 2. He enters and enters this tax, $251, on line 17.subject to alternative minimum tax (AMT) if he or
$1,250 ($2,750 − $1,500) on line 3. John compares lines 16 and 17 and entersshe has certain items given preferential treat-
Sara’s taxable income, as shown on line 27 the larger amount, $463, on line 18 of Sara’sment under the tax law. See Alternative Mini-
of her Form 1040A, is $2,500. This is her total Form 8615. He also enters that amount on linemum Tax in chapter 31.
income ($4,250) minus her standard deduction 28 of Sara’s Form 1040A.For more information on who is liable for
($1,750). Her standard deduction is limited toJohn also completes Schedule 1 (FormAMT and how to figure it, get Form 6251. For
the amount of her earned income plus $250. 1040A) for Sara.information on special limits that apply to a child
John enters $2,500 on line 4.who files Form 6251, Alternative Minimum
John compares lines 3 and 4 and enters theTax—Individuals, see Alternative Minimum Tax
smaller amount, $1,250, on line 5.in Publication 929.
Illustrated Example
The following example includes a completed
Form 8615. Form 1040A is not shown.
Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 215

Page 218 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sara L. Brown
John J. Brown
1 1 7 00 1 1 1 1
007 00 0001
2,750
1,500
1,250
2,500
1,250
48,000
49,250
7,100
6,763
337
1,250
126
463
251
463
337
OMB No. 1545-0998Tax for Children Under Age 14
With Investment Income of More Than $1,500
Form 8615
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 33
/H17075Attach only to the child’s Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
Child’s social security numberChild’s name shown on return
Parent’s social security numberParent’s name (first, initial, and last). Caution: See instructions before completing.
Parent’s filing status (check one):
Child’s Net Investment Income
Enter the child’s investment income (see instructions)1 1
If the child did not itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR), enter
$1,500. Otherwise, see instructions
2
2
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero or less, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do
attach it to the child’s return
3
3
4
Enter the child’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 41; Form 1040A, line 27; or Form 1040NR,
line 39
4
Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4. If zero, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do
attach it to the child’s return 
5
5
Tentative Tax Based on the Tax Rate of the Parent
Enter the parent’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 41; Form 1040A, line 27; Form 1040EZ,
line 6; TeleFile Tax Record, line K(1); Form 1040NR, line 39; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14. If zero
or less, enter -0-
6
6
Enter the total, if any, from Forms 8615, line 5, of all other children of the parent named
above. Do not include the amount from line 5 above
7
7
8Add lines 5, 6, and 7. 8
9
Enter the tax on the amount on line 8 based on the parent’s filing status above (see instructions).
If the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) is used, check here /H17075
9
10 Enter the parent’s tax from Form 1040, line 42; Form 1040A, line 28, minus any alternative
minimum tax; Form 1040EZ, line 10; TeleFile Tax Record, line K(2); Form 1040NR, line 40; or
Form 1040NR-EZ, line 15. Do not include any tax from Form 4972 or 8814. If the Capital Gain
Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) was used to figure the tax, check here
/H1707510
Subtract line 10 from line 9 and enter the result. If line 7 is blank, also enter this amount on line
13 and go to Part III
11
11
12aAdd lines 5 and 712a
12b .Divide line 5 by line 12a. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at least three places)b
Multiply line 11 by line 12b13 13
Child’s Tax—If lines 4 and 5 above are the same, enter -0- on line 15 and go to line 16.
1414 Subtract line 5 from line 4
15
15 Enter the tax on the amount on line 14 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If
the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax,
check here
/H17075
1616 Add lines 13 and 15
17
17 Enter the tax on the amount on line 4 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If
the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax,
check here
/H17075
18 Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 here and on the child’s Form 1040, line 42; Form 1040A,
line 28; or Form 1040NR, line 40 18
Form 8615 (2002)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see the instructions.
A B
C
Single
Cat. No. 64113U
/H11003
Part III
Part I
Part II
(99) /H17075See separate instructions.
Before you begin: If the child, the parent, or any of the parent’s other children under age 14 received capital gains (including
capital gain distributions) or farm income, see Pub. 929, Tax Rules for Children and Dependents. It explains
how to figure the child’s tax using the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 or Form 1040A
instructions, or Schedule D or J (Form 1040).
Married filing jointly Married filing separately Head of household Qualifying widow(er)
2002
Page 216 Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 219 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dependent care benefits. If you received (See Payments to Relatives under
Work-Related Expense Test, later.)any dependent care benefits from your em-
ployer during the year, you may be able to ex-6) Your filing status must be single, head of33. clude from your income all or part of them. Youhousehold, qualifying widow(er) with de-must complete Part III of Form 2441 or Schedulependent child, or married filing jointly. You2 (Form 1040A) before you can figure the must file a joint return if you are married,amount of your credit. See Employer-Provided unless an exception applies to you. (SeeDependent Care Benefits under How To FigureChild and Joint Return Test, later.)the Credit, later.
7) You must identify the care provider on
Dependent Care your tax return. (See Provider IdentificationUseful Items Test, later.)You may want to see:
8) If you exclude dependent care benefitsCredit
provided by your employer, the amountPublication
you exclude must be less than the dollar❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, limit for qualifying expenses (generally,and Filing Information $2,400 if one qualifying person was caredImportant Change for
for or $4,800 if two or more qualifying per-❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care
sons were cared for). (See Reduced Dollar2002 Expenses
Limit under How To Figure the Credit,
❏ 926 Household Employer’s Tax Guide later.)New definition of earned income.For tax
years after 2001, earned income will no longer These tests are presented in Figure 33–A andForm (and Instructions)
include employee compensation that is nontax- are also explained in detail in this chapter.
❏ 2441 Child and Dependent Careable.
Expenses
Qualifying Person Test
❏ Schedule 2 (Form 1040A)Child and
Dependent Care Expenses for Your child and dependent care expenses must
Form 1040A Filers be for the care of one or more qualifying per-Important Reminders
sons.❏ Schedule H (Form 1040)Household A qualifying person is:Employment TaxesTaxpayer identification number needed for
each qualifying person.You must include on 1) Your dependent who was under age 13❏ W–7 Application for IRS Individualline 2 of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) when the care was provided and for whomTaxpayer Identification Numberthe name and taxpayer identification number you can claim an exemption,
❏ W–10 Dependent Care Provider’s(generally the social security number) of each
2) Your spouse who was physically or men-Identification and Certificationqualifying person. See Taxpayer identification
tally not able to care for himself or herself,number under Qualifying Person Test, later. or
You may have to pay employment taxes.If 3) Your dependent who was physically oryou pay someone to come to your home and mentally not able to care for himself orcare for your dependent or spouse, you may beTests To Claim herself and for whom you can claim ana household employer who has to pay employ- exemption (or could claim an exemptionment taxes. Usually, you are not a household the Credit except the person had $3,000 or more ofemployer if the person who cares for your de- gross income).pendent or spouse does so at his or her home orTo be able to claim the credit for child and
If you are divorced or separated, see Child ofplace of business. See Employment Taxes for dependent care expenses, you must file Form
Divorced or Separated Parents, later, to deter-Household Employers, later. 1040 or Form 1040A, not Form 1040EZ, and
mine which parent may treat the child as a quali-meet all the following tests. fying person.
1) The care must be for one or more qualify-Physically or mentally not able to care foring persons who are identified on the formoneself. Persons who cannot dress, clean, orIntroduction you use to claim the credit. (See Qualifying feed themselves because of physical or mentalPerson Test.)This chapter discusses the credit for child and problems are considered not able to care for
dependent care expenses and covers the fol- themselves. Also, persons who must have con-2) You (and your spouse if you are married)lowing topics. stant attention to prevent them from injuringmust keep up a home that you live in with
themselves or others are considered not able tothe qualifying person or persons. (See• Tests you must meet to claim the credit. care for themselves.Keeping Up a Home Test, later.)
• How to figure the credit. 3) You (and your spouse if you are married)Person qualifying for part of year.You de-
• How to claim the credit. termine a person’s qualifying status each day.must have earned income during the year.
For example, if the person for whom you pay(However, see Rule for student-spouse or• Employment taxes you may have to pay
child and dependent care expenses no longerspouse not able to care for self underas a household employer. qualifies on September 16, count only thoseEarned Income Test, later.)
expenses through September 15. Also see Dol-You may be able to claim the credit if you pay4) You must pay child and dependent carelar Limit under How To Figure the Credit, later.someone to care for your dependent who is expenses so you (and your spouse if you
under age 13 or for your spouse or dependentare married) can work or look for work.Taxpayer identification number.You must
who is not able to care for himself or herself. The(See Work-Related Expense Test, later.) include on your return the name and taxpayer
credit can be up to 30% of your expenses. To identification number (generally the social se-5) You must make payments for child andqualify, you must pay these expenses so you curity number) of the qualifying person(s). If thedependent care to someone you (or yourcan work or look for work. correct information is not shown, the credit mayspouse) cannot claim as a dependent. Ifbe reduced or disallowed.This credit should not be confused withyou make payments to your child, he or
the Child Tax Credit discussed in chap- she cannot be your dependent and must Individual taxpayer identification number
ter 35.CAUTION
!
be age 19 or older by the end of the year.(ITIN) for aliens.If your qualifying person is a
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 217

Page 220 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 33–A. Can You Claim the Credit?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the care for one or more qualifying persons?
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you
1 
keep up a home for you and that qualifying person or
persons?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you
2 
have earned income during the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you pay the expenses to allow you
2 
to work or look for work?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to someone you or your spouse could
claim as a dependent?
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your child who was under the age of
19 at the end of the year?
No
Yes
/H17075
Are you single?
Are you filing a joint return?
Do you meet the requirements
to be considered unmarried?
Do you know the care provider’s name, address,
and identifying number?
Did you make a reasonable effort to get this
information? (See Due diligence.)
Did you exclude at least $2,400 of dependent
care benefits ($4,800 if two or more qualifying
persons)?
You CAN claim the child and
dependent care credit. Fill out
Form 2441 or Schedule 2
(Form 1040A).
You CANNOT claim the child
and dependent care credit.
3
/H17074
No
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17075
1
This includes your spouse if you were married.
2
This also applies to your spouse, unless your spouse was disabled or a full-time student.
3
If you had expenses that met the requirements for 2001, except that you did not pay them until 2002, you may be able to claim t hose expenses in 2002.
See Expenses not paid until the following year under How To Figure the Credit.
Page 218 Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 221 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nonresident or resident alien who does not haveCustodial parent.You are the custodial par-Nontaxable employee compensation not in-
and cannot get a social security number (SSN), ent if, during the year, you have custody of yourcluded. When figuring your earned income for
use that person’s ITIN. To apply for an ITIN, file child longer than your child’s other parent has the child and dependent care credit, do not
Form W–7 with the IRS. The ITIN is entered custody. count nontaxable employee compensation such
wherever an SSN is requested on a tax return. as parsonage allowances, meals and lodging
Divorced or separated.For purposes of de-furnished for the convenience of the employer,An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitletermining whether your child is a qualifying per-voluntary salary deferrals, military basicthe holder to social security benefits or changeson, you are considered divorced or separated ifquarters and subsistence allowances andthe holder’s employment or immigration statuseither of the following applies. in-kind quarters and subsistence, and militaryunder U.S. law.
pay earned in a combat zone.1) You are divorced or separated under a de-Adoption taxpayer identification number
Members of certain religious faiths op-cree of divorce or separate maintenance(ATIN). If your qualifying person is a child who
posed to social security.Certain incomeor a written separation agreement.was placed in your home for adoption and for
earned by persons who are members of certainwhom you do not have an SSN, you must get an2) You lived apart from your spouse for all ofreligious faiths that are opposed to participationATIN for the child. File Form W–7A, Application the last 6 months of the year. in Social Security Act Programs and have anfor Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending
IRS-approved form that exempts certain incomeU.S. Adoptions.
from social security and Medicare taxes may not
Keeping Up a Home Test be considered earned income for this purpose.
See Earned Income Test in Publication 503.Child of Divorced To claim the credit, you must keep up a home.
or Separated Parents You and one or more qualifying persons mustNot earned income. Earned income does notlive in the home. include pensions or annuities, social securityTo be a qualifying person, your child usuallyYou are keeping up a home if you (and yourpayments, workers’ compensation, interest, div-must be your dependent for whom you can claimspouse if you are married) pay more than halfidends, or unemployment compensation. It alsoan exemption. But an exception may apply if youthe cost of running it for the year. does not include scholarship or fellowshipare divorced or separated. Under the exception, grants, except amounts paid to you (and re-if you are the custodial parent, you can treat yourHome. The home you keep up must be the ported on Form W–2) for teaching, research, orchild as a qualifying person even if you cannotmain home for both you and the qualifying per-other services.claim the child’s exemption. If you are the non-son. Your home can be the qualifying person’s
custodial parent, you cannot treat your child as amain home even if he or she does not live thereRule for student-spouse or spouse not ablequalifying person even if you can claim theall year because of his or her: to care for self.Your spouse is treated aschild’s exemption. having earned income for any month that he or1) Birth,This exception applies if all of the following she is:
are true. 2) Death, or
1) A full-time student, or3) Temporary absence due to:1) One or both parents had custody of the 2) Physically or mentally not able to care forchild for more than half of the year. a) Sickness, himself or herself.
2) One or both parents provided more than b) School, Figure the earned income of the nonworkinghalf of the child’s support for the year. spouse described under (1) or (2) above asc) Business,3) Either— explained under Earned Income Limit, later.
d) Vacation, This rule applies to only one spouse for anya) The custodial parent signed Form one month. If, in the same month, both you ande) Military service, or8332, Release of Claim to Exemption your spouse do not work and are either full-timefor Child of Divorced or Separated Par-f) Custody agreement. students or physically or mentally not able toents, or a similar statement, agreeing care for yourselves, only one of you can benot to claim the child’s exemption for treated as having earned income in that month.the year, or Costs of keeping up home. The costs of
Full-time student.You are a full-time stu-keeping up a home normally include propertyb) The noncustodial parent provided at dent if you are enrolled at and attend a school fortaxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility charges,least $600 for the child’s support and the number of hours or classes that the schoolhome repairs, insurance on the home, and foodcan claim the child’s exemption under a considers full time. You must have been a stu-eaten at home.pre-1985 decree of divorce or separate dent for some part of each of 5 calendar monthsmaintenance or written agreement. Costs not included.The costs of keepingduring the year. (The months need not be con-up a home do not include payments for clothing,secutive.) If you attend school only at night, youFor purposes of 3(a), a similar statement in-education, medical treatment, vacations, life in-are not a full-time student. However, as part ofcludes a divorce decree or separation agree-surance, transportation, or mortgage principal. your full-time course of study, you may attendment that went into effect after 1984 that allowsThey also do not include the purchase, per-some night classes.the noncustodial parent to claim the child’s ex-manent improvement, or replacement of prop-
School. The term “school” includes elemen-emption without any conditions, such as pay-erty. For example, you cannot include the cost of
tary schools, junior and senior high schools,ment of support. replacing a water heater. However, you can in-
colleges, universities, and technical, trade, andclude the cost of repairing a water heater.You can use Figure 33–B to see whether
mechanical schools. It does not includethis exception applies to you. If it applies, only
on-the-job training courses, correspondencethe custodial parent can treat the child as aEarned Income Test schools, and night schools.qualifying person. If the exception does not ap-
ply, follow the regular rules for a qualifying per-To claim the credit, you (and your spouse if you
son under Qualifying Person Test, earlier. Work-Relatedare married) must have earned income during
the year. Expense TestExample. You are divorced and have cus-
tody of your 8-year-old child. You sign FormEarned income. Earned income includes Child and dependent care expenses must be8332 to allow your ex-spouse to take the exemp- wages, salaries, tips, other taxable employeework related to qualify for the credit. Expensestion. You pay child care expenses so you can compensation, and net earnings from self-em-are considered work related only if both of thework. Your child is a qualifying person and you,ployment. A net loss from self-employmentfollowing are true.the custodial parent, can claim the credit for reduces earned income. Earned income also
those expenses, even though your ex-spouse includes strike benefits and any disability pay• They allow you (and your spouse if you
claims an exemption for the child. you report as wages. are married) to work or look for work.
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 219

Page 222 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 33–B. Is a Child of Divorced or Separated Parents a Qualifying Person?
Start Here
/H17074
Is the child’s exemption claimed under a
multiple support agreement?
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17076
/H17074
Were you divorced or legally separated, or
did you live apart from your spouse the last 6
months of the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you and the other parent together have
custody of the child for more than half of the
year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you and the other parent together provide
more than half the child’s support for the year?
Yes
Yes
/H17075
Did you have custody of the child for more of
the year than the other parent?
No
No
/H17075
Do not use this chart. Determine whether
your child is a qualifying person using the
regular rules. (See Qualifying Person Test).
Yes
/H17075
Could you claim the child’s exemption except
that you signed an agreement to let the other
parent claim it?
Could you claim the child’s exemption except
that the other parent claims it under a
pre-1985 agreement?
This child is a qualifying person.
This child is not a qualifying
person.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No Yes
/H17076
/H17075
Can you claim the child’s exemption?
Was the child capable of
caring for himself or herself?
Was the child under age 13
when the care was provided?
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
No
/H17076
Yes
/H17076
/H17074
No Yes
Page 220 Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 223 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• They are for a qualifying person’s care.Example 1. You take your 3-year-old child
1) A dependent for whom you (or yourto a nursery school that provides lunch and
spouse if you are married) can claim aneducational activities as a part of its preschoolWorking or Looking for Work exemption, orchild-care service. You can count the total cost
when you figure the credit. 2) Your child who was under age 19 at theTo be work related, your expenses must allow
end of the year, even if he or she is notyou to work or look for work. If you are married,Example 2. You place your 10-year-old your dependent.generally both you and your spouse must workchild in a boarding school so you can work fullor look for work. Your spouse is treated as work-time. Only the part of the boarding school ex-ing during any month he or she is a full-timepense that is for the care of your child is aJoint Return Teststudent or is physically or mentally not able towork-related expense. You can count that partcare for himself or herself. of the expense in figuring your credit if it can beGenerally, married couples must file a joint re-Your work can be for others or in your ownseparated from the cost of education. You can-turn to take the credit. However, if you are legallybusiness or partnership. It can be either full timenot count any part of the amount you pay theseparated or living apart from your spouse, youor part time. school for your child’s education. may be able to file a separate return and stillWork also includes actively looking for work. take the credit.However, if you do not find a job and have noCare outside your home.You can count theearned income for the year, you cannot take this Legally separated.You are not consideredcost of care provided outside your home if thecredit. See Earned Income Test, earlier. married if you are legally separated from yourcare is for your dependent under age 13 or anyWhether your expenses allow you to work or spouse under a decree of divorce or separateother qualifying person who regularly spends atlook for work depends on the facts. For example, maintenance. You are eligible to take the creditleast 8 hours each day in your home.the cost of a sitter while you and your spouse go on a separate return.
Dependent care center. You can countout to eat is not normally a work-related ex-
Married and living apart.You are not consid-care provided outside your home by a depen-pense.
ered married and are eligible to take the credit ifdent care center only if the center complies withAn expense is not considered work related
all the following apply.all state and local regulations that apply to thesemerely because you had it while you were work-
centers.ing. The purpose of the expense must be to 1) You file a separate return.A dependent care center is a place that pro-enable you to work.
vides care for more than six persons (other than2) Your home is the home of a qualifying per-Volunteer work.  For this purpose, you arepersons who live there) and receives a fee, son for more than half the year.not considered to be working if you do unpaidpayment, or grant for providing services for any3) You pay more than half the cost of keepingvolunteer work or volunteer work for a nominalof those persons, even if the center is not run forup your home for the year.salary. profit.
4) Your spouse does not live in your home forWork for part of year.If you work or activelyCamp. The cost of sending your child to anthe last 6 months of the year.look for work during only part of the period cov-overnight camp is not considered a work-related
ered by the expenses, then you must figure yourexpense. Death of spouse. If your spouse died duringexpenses for each day. For example, if you work
the year and you do not remarry before the endall year and pay care expenses of $200 a monthTransportation.The cost of getting a qualify-of the year, you generally must file a joint return($2,400 for the year), all the expenses are working person from your home to the care locationto take the credit. If you do remarry before therelated. However, if you work or look for work forand back, or from the care location to school andend of the year, the credit can be claimed ononly 2 months and 15 days during the year andback, is not considered a work-related expense.your deceased spouse’s separate return.pay expenses of $200 a month, your work-re-This includes the costs of bus, subway, taxi, or
lated expenses are limited to $500 (21/2 months private car. Also, if you pay the transportation
× $200). cost for the care provider to come to your home,Provider
you cannot count this cost as a work-relatedPayments while you are out sick.Do not Identification Testexpense.count as work-related expenses amounts you
pay for child and dependent care while you are You must identify all persons or organizationsHousehold services. Expenses you pay foroff work because of illness. These amounts are that provide care for your child or dependent.household services meet the work-related ex-not paid to allow you to work. This applies even if Use Part I of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Formpense test if they are at least partly for theyou get sick pay and are still considered an 1040A) to show the information.well-being and protection of a qualifying person.employee. Household services are ordinary and usualInformation needed.To identify the care pro-
services done in and around your home that arevider, you must give the provider’s:
necessary to run your home. They include theCare of a Qualifying Person 1) Name,services of a housekeeper, maid, or cook. How-
ever, they do not include the services of a chauf-To be work related, your expenses must be to 2) Address, andfeur, bartender, or gardener. See Householdprovide care for a qualifying person. You do not 3) Taxpayer identification number.Services in Publication 503 for more informa-have to choose the least expensive way of pro-
tion.viding the care. If the care provider is an individual, the tax-
In this chapter, the term housekeeper refersExpenses are for the care of a qualifying payer identification number is his or her social
to any household employee whose services in-person only if their main purpose is the person’s security number or individual taxpayer identifi-
clude the care of a qualifying person.well-being and protection. cation number. If the care provider is an organi-
Expenses for household services qualify if zation, then it is the employer identificationTaxes paid on wages. The taxes you pay
part of the services is for the care of qualifying number (EIN).on wages for qualifying child and dependent
persons. See Household services, later. You do not have to show the taxpayer identi-care services are work-related expenses. See
fication number if the care provider is one ofEmployment Taxes for Household Employers,Expenses not for care.Expenses for care do certain tax-exempt organizations (such as alater.not include amounts you pay for food, clothing, church or school). In this case, write “Tax-Ex-education, and entertainment. However, you empt” in the space where the tax form calls forcan include small amounts paid for these items if the number.Payments to Relativesthey are incident to and cannot be separated If you cannot provide all of the information orfrom the cost of caring for the qualifying person.You can count work-related payments you make if the information you provide is incorrect you
Education. Expenses to attend first grade to relatives who are not your dependents, even if must be able to show that you used due dili-
or a higher grade are not expenses for care. Do they live in your home. However, do not count gence (discussed later) in trying to furnish the
not use these expenses to figure your credit. any amounts you pay to: necessary information.
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 221

Page 224 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Getting the information.You can use Form later year as if they were actually paid in that you cannot take the credit. You cannot use Form
W–10 to request the required information from later year. 1040EZ.
the care provider. If you do not use Form W–10, The amount you can exclude is limited to the
Expenses not paid until the following year.you can get the information from: smallest of:
Do not count 2001 expenses that you paid in
1) A copy of the provider’s social security 1) The total amount of dependent care bene-2002 as work-related expenses for 2002. You
card, fits you received during the year,may be able to claim an additional credit for
them on your 2002 return, but you must figure it2) A copy of the provider’s driver’s license (in 2) The total amount of qualified expensesseparately. See Payments for previous year’sa state where the license includes the so- you incurred during the year,expenses under Amount of Credit in Publicationcial security number), 3) Your earned income,503.
3) A copy of the provider’s completed Form 4) Your spouse’s earned income, orIf you had expenses in 2002 that youW–4 if he or she is your household em- did not pay until 2003, you cannot 5) $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately).ployee, count them when figuring your 2002
TIP
4) A copy of the statement furnished by yourcredit. You may be able to claim a credit for themStatement for employee. Your employeremployer if the provider is your employer’son your 2003 return. must give you a Form W-2 (or similar state-dependent care plan, or ment), showing in box 10 the total amount of
Expenses reimbursed. If a state social serv-5) A letter or invoice from the provider if it dependent care benefits provided to you during
ices agency pays you a nontaxable amount toshows the information. the year under a qualified plan. Your employer
reimburse you for some of your child and depen-will also include any dependent care benefits
dent care expenses, you cannot count the ex-You should keep this information with over $5,000 in your wages shown in box 1 of
penses that are reimbursed as work-relatedyour tax records. Do not send Form your Form W–2.
expenses.W–10 (or other document containingRECORDS
Forfeitures. Forfeitures are amountsthis information) to the Internal Revenue Serv- credited to your dependent care benefit accountExample. You paid work-related expensesice. (flexible spending account) and included in theof $3,000. You are reimbursed $2,000 by a stateamount shown in box 10 of your Form W–2, butsocial services agency. You can use onlyDue diligence.If the care provider information not received because you did not incur the ex-$1,000 to figure your credit.you give is incorrect or incomplete, your credit pense. When figuring your exclusion, subtractmay not be allowed. However, if you can show any forfeitures from the total dependent careMedical expenses. Some expenses for thethat you used due diligence in trying to supply benefits reported by your employer. To do this,care of qualifying persons who are not able tothe information, you can still claim the credit. enter the forfeited amount on line 13 of Formcare for themselves may qualify as work-relatedYou can show due diligence by getting and 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).expenses and also as medical expenses. Youkeeping the provider’s completed Form W–10
can use them either way, but you cannot use the Forfeitures do not include amounts thator one of the other sources of information listed
same expenses to claim both a credit and a you expect to receive in the future.earlier. Care providers can be penalized if they
medical expense deduction.do not provide this information to you or if they CAUTION
!
If you use these expenses to figure the creditprovide incorrect information.
and they are more than the earned income limitEffect of exclusion.If you exclude dependentProvider refusal.If the provider refuses toor the dollar limit, discussed later, you can addcare benefits from your income, the amount ofgive you their identifying information, you shouldthe excess to your medical expenses. However,the excluded benefits:report whatever information you have (such asif you use your total expenses to figure your
the name and address) on the form you use tomedical expense deduction, you cannot use any1) Is not included in your work-related ex-claim the credit. Write “See page 2” in the col-part of them to figure your credit. penses, andumns calling for the information you do not have.
Amounts excluded from your incomeOn the bottom of page 2, explain that you re- 2) Reduces the dollar limit, discussed later.under your employer’s dependent carequested the information from the care provider,
benefits plan cannot be used to claimCAUTION
!
but the provider did not give you the information.
a medical expense deduction.This statement will show that you used due Earned Income Limit
diligence in trying to furnish the necessary infor-
The amount of work-related expenses you usemation.
to figure your credit cannot be more than:Employer-Provided Dependent
Care Benefits 1) Your earned income for the year if you are
single at the end of the year, orDependent care benefits include:How To Figure
2) The smaller of your or your spouse’s
1) Amounts your employer pays directly to earned income for the year if you are mar-the Credit either you or your care provider for the ried at the end of the year.
care of your qualifying person while youYour credit is a percentage of your work-related Earned income is defined under Earned In-work, andexpenses. Your expenses are subject to the come Test, earlier.
earned income limit and the dollar limit. The2) The fair market value of care in a day-care
For purposes of item (2), use yourpercentage is based on your adjusted gross facility provided or sponsored by your em-
spouse’s earned income for the entireincome. ployer.
year, even if you were married for only
TIP
Your salary may have been reduced to pay forpart of the year.
Figuring Total these benefits. If you received benefits, they
should be shown on your W–2 form. See State- Separated spouse. If you are legally sepa-Work-Related Expenses ment for employee, later. rated or married and living apart from your
To figure the credit for 2002 work-related ex- spouse (as described under Joint Return Test,Exclusion. If your employer provides depen-penses, count only those you paid by December earlier), you are not considered married for pur-dent care benefits under a qualified plan, you31, 2002. poses of the earned income limit. Use only yourmay be able to exclude these benefits from yourincome in figuring the earned income limit.Expenses prepaid in an earlier year.If you income. Your employer can tell you whether
pay for services before they are provided, you your benefit plan qualifies. If it does, you mustSurviving spouse.If your spouse died during
can count the prepaid expenses only in the year complete Part III of either Form 2441 or Sched- the year and you file a joint return as a surviving
the care is received. Claim the expenses for the ule 2 (Form 1040A) to claim the exclusion even if spouse, you are not considered married for pur-
Page 222 Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 225 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
poses of the earned income limit. Use only your because his dollar limit is reduced as shown to support your claim for the credit are described
income in figuring the earned income limit. next. earlier under Provider Identification Test.
George’s Reduced Dollar LimitCommunity property laws. You should dis-
regard community property laws when you fig-1) Maximum allowable expenses
ure earned income for this credit. for one qualifying person..... $2,400 Employment Taxes2) Minus: Dependent care benefits
George excludes from income −1,000Student-spouse or spouse not able to care for Household3) Reduced dollar limit onfor self.Your spouse who is either a full-time
expenses George can use forstudent or not able to care for himself or herself Employersthe credit............... $1,400is treated as having earned income. His or her
earned income for each month is considered to If you pay someone to come to your home andbe at least $200 if there is one qualifying person care for your dependent or spouse, you may beAmount of Creditin your home, or at least $400 if there are two or a household employer. If you are a householdmore. employer, you will need an employer identifica-To determine the amount of your credit, multiply
Spouse works. If your spouse works during tion number (EIN) and you may have to payyour work-related expenses (after applying the
that month, use the higher of $200 (or $400) or employment taxes. If the individuals who work inearned income and dollar limits) by a percent-
his or her actual earned income for that month. your home are self-employed, you are not liableage. This percentage depends on your adjusted
for any of the taxes discussed in this section.gross income shown on line 36 of Form 1040 orSpouse qualifies for part of month. If Self-employed persons who are in business forline 22 of Form 1040A. The following tableyour spouse is a full-time student or not able to themselves are not household employees. Usu-shows the percentage to use based on adjustedcare for himself or herself for only part of a ally, you are not a household employer if thegross income.month, the full $200 (or $400) still applies for that person who cares for your dependent or spousemonth. IF your adjusted gross THEN the does so at his or her home or place of business.
income is ......... percentage is...Both spouses qualify. If, in the same If you use a placement agency that exercises
month, both you and your spouse are either control over what work is done and how it will beOver But not overfull-time students or not able to care for your- done by a babysitter or companion who works in
$0 $10,000 30%selves, only one spouse can be considered to your home, that person is not your employee.
10,000 12,000 29%have this earned income of $200 (or $400) for This control could include providing rules of con-
12,000 14,000 28%that month. duct and appearance and requiring regular re-
14,000 16,000 27% ports. In this case, you do not have to pay
16,000 18,000 26% employment taxes. But, if an agency merelyDollar Limit 18,000 20,000 25% gives you a list of sitters and you hire one from20,000 22,000 24% that list, the sitter may be your employee.There is a dollar limit on the amount of your22,000 24,000 23% If you have a household employee you maywork-related expenses you can use to figure the24,000 26,000 22% be subject to:credit. This limit is $2,400 for one qualifying26,000 28,000 21%
person, or $4,800 for two or more qualifying28,000 No limit 20% 1) Social security and Medicare taxes,persons.
2) Federal unemployment tax, and
Yearly limit.The dollar limit is a yearly limit. 3) Federal income tax withholding.The amount of the dollar limit remains the same
Social security and Medicare taxes are gener-no matter how long, during the year, you have aHow To Claim
ally withheld from the employee’s pay andqualifying person in your household. Use the
matched by the employer. Federal unemploy-$2,400 limit if you paid work-related expensesthe Credit
ment (FUTA) tax is paid by the employer onlyfor the care of one qualifying person at any time
and provides for payments of unemploymentduring the year. Use $4,800 if you paid work-re-To claim the credit, you can file Form 1040 or
compensation to workers who have lost theirlated expenses for the care of more than oneForm 1040A. You cannot claim the credit on
jobs. Federal income tax is withheld from thequalifying person at any time during the year.Form 1040EZ.
employee’s total pay if the employee asks you to
do so and you agree.Form 1040. You must complete Form 2441
For more information on a householdand attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the creditReduced Dollar Limit
employer’s tax responsibilities, see Publicationon line 46 of your Form 1040. An example of a
If you received dependent care benefits from 926 and Schedule H (Form 1040) and its instruc-filled-in Form 2441 is at the end of this chapter.
your employer that you exclude from your in- tions.
come, you must subtract that amount from theForm 1040A. You must complete Schedule 2 State employment taxes.You may also havedollar limit that applies to you. Your reduced(Form 1040A) and attach it to your Form 1040A.to pay state unemployment tax. Contact yourdollar limit is figured on lines 20 through 24 ofEnter the credit on line 29 of your Form 1040A.state unemployment tax office for information.Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A). See You should also find out whether you need toEmployer-Provided Dependent Care Benefits,Limit on credit.The amount of credit you canpay or collect other state employment taxes orearlier, for information on excluding these bene-claim is limited to the amount of your regular taxcarry workers’ compensation insurance. A list offits. (after reduction by any allowable foreign taxstate employment tax agencies, including ad-credit) plus your alternative minimum tax, if any.dresses and phone numbers, is in PublicationExample. George is a widower with one For more information, see the instructions for926.child and earns $24,000 a year. He pays Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).
work-related expenses of $1,900 for the care ofTax credit not refundable. You cannot gethis 4-year-old child and qualifies to claim thea refund for any part of the credit that is morecredit for child and dependent care expenses.than this limit.His employer pays an additional $1,000 under a Example
dependent care benefit plan. This $1,000 is ex- Recordkeeping. You should keep rec-
cluded from George’s income. ords of your work-related expenses. The following example shows how to figure the
Although the dollar limit for his work-related Also, if your dependent or spouse is credit for child and dependent care expenses forRECORDS
expenses is $2,400 (one qualifying person), not able to care for himself or herself, your rec- two children when employer-provided depen-
George figures his credit on only $1,400 of the ords should show both the nature and the length dent care benefits are involved. The filled-in
$1,900 work-related expenses he paid. This is of the disability. Other records you should keep Form 2441 is shown at the end of this chapter.
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 223

Page 226 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Illustrated example.Joan Thomas is di- Joan figures her credit on Form 2441 as6) Percentage for AGI of $29,000 . . 20%(.20)vorced and has two children, ages 3 and 9. She follows. 7) Multiply the amount by theworks at ACME Computers. Her adjusted gross percentage amount on line 6 . . . $ 3601) Work-related expenses Joanincome (AGI) is $29,000, and the entire amount 8) Enter the amount from Formpaid ................... $2,400is earned income. 1040, line 44.............. $1,4692) Dollar limit (2 or more qualifiedJoan’s younger child (Susan) stays at her 9) Enter any amount from Formindividuals)............... $4,800employer’s on-site child-care center while she 1040, line 45.............. −0−3) Minus: Dependent care benefitsworks. The benefits from this child-care center 10) Subtract line 9 from line 8..... $1,469excluded from Joan’s income . .−3,000qualify to be excluded from her income. Her 11) Credit4) Reduced dollar limit......... $1,800employer reports the value of this service as (Enter the smaller of line 7 or line5) Lesser of expenses paid 1 0 ) .................... $360$3,000 for the year. This $3,000 is shown in box($2,400) or dollar limit ($1,800) $1,80010 of her Form W–2, but is not included in
taxable wages in box 1.
A neighbor cares for Joan’s older child (Seth)
after school, on holidays, and during the sum-
mer. She pays her neighbor $2,400 for this care.
Page 224 Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 227 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Joan Thomas 559 00 3436
P at Green
ACME Computers
12 Ash Avenue
Hometown, TX 75240
(See W-2)
240-00-3811 2,400
1,800
29,000
29,000
1,800
20
360
Seth
Susan
Thomas
Thomas
2,400559 00 1234
559 00 5678
1,469
29,000
360
OMB No. 1545-0068Child and Dependent Care Expenses2441Form
/H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 21/H17075See separate instructions.
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Persons or Organizations Who Provided the Care— You must complete this part. 
(If you need more space, use the bottom of page 2.)
(b) Address
(number, street, apt. no., city, state, and ZIP code)
(d) Amount paid
(see instructions)
(c) Identifying number
(SSN or EIN)1 (a) Care provider’s
name
Credit for Child and Dependent Care Expenses
2
Add the amounts in column (c) of line 2. Do not enter more than $2,400 for one qualifying
person or $4,800 for two or more persons. If you completed Part III, enter the amount
from line 26
Enter your earned income
3
3
If married filing jointly, enter your spouse’s earned income (if your spouse was a student or was
disabled, see the instructions); all others, enter the amount from line 4
4 4
Enter the smallest of line 3, 4, or 5
5
5
6
7Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 367
/H11003
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
But not
overOver
But not
overOver
.24$20,000—22,000.30$0—10,000
.2322,000—24,000.2910,000—12,000
.2224,000—26,000.2812,000—14,000
.2126,000—28,000.2714,000—16,000
.2028,000—No limit.2616,000—18,000
.2518,000—20,000
Multiply line 6 by the decimal amount on line 8. If you paid 2001 expenses in 2002, see
the instructions 
9
Form 2441 (2002)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3 of the instructions.
Before you begin: You need to understand the following terms. See Definitions on page 1 of the instructions.
Cat. No. 11862M
Part I
Part II
Enter on line 8 the decimal amount shown below that applies to the amount on line 7
Did you receive
dependent care benefits? Yes
No
8
Complete only Part II below.
Complete Part III on the back next.
/H17075
/H17075
Caution. If the care was provided in your home, you may owe employment taxes. See the instructions for Form 1040, line 60.
.
(99)
Information about your qualifying person(s). If you have more than two qualifying persons, see the instructions.
(a) Qualifying person’s name
First Last
(b) Qualifying person’s social
security number
(c) Qualified expenses you
incurred and paid in 2002 for the
person listed in column (a)
8
6
● Dependent Care Benefits ● Qualifying Person(s) ● Qualified Expenses ● Earned Income
2002
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 44, minus any amount on Form 1040, line 45 10
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10
here and on Form 1040, line 46
11
9
10
11
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 225

Page 228 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3,000
3,000
-0-
5,400
3,000
29,000
29,000
3,000
3,000
-0-
4,800
3,000
1,800
2,400
1,800
Page 2Form 2441 (2002)
Dependent Care Benefits
Enter the total amount of dependent care benefits you received for 2002. This amount
should be shown in box 10 of your W-2 form(s). Do not include amounts that were
reported to you as wages in box 1 of Form(s) W-2
Enter the amount forfeited, if any (see the instructions)
Subtract line 13 from line 12
Enter the total amount of qualified expenses incurred
in 2002 for the care of the qualifying person(s)
13
15
16Enter the smaller of line 14 or 15
14
Enter your earned income
15
17
Enter the amount shown below that
applies to you.
18
Enter the smallest of line 16, 17, or 18
16
19
Excluded benefits. Enter here the smaller of the following:
17
20
● The amount from line 19 or
● $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately and you
were required to enter your spouse’s earned
income on line 18).
Taxable benefits. Subtract line 20 from line 14. Also, include this amount on Form 1040,
line 7. On the dotted line next to line 7, enter “DCB”
18
21
Part III
/H20854
To claim the child and dependent care
credit, complete lines 22–26 below.
22
23
24
19
20
21
22 Enter $2,400 ($4,800 if two or more qualifying persons)
Subtract line 23 from line 22. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit.
Exception. If you paid 2001 expenses in 2002, see the instructions for line 9
Enter the smaller of line 24 or 25. Also, enter this amount on line 3 on the front of this
form and complete lines 4–11
Enter the amount from line 20
26
23
24
26
13
14
12
12
Complete line 2 on the front of this form. Do not include in column (c) any benefits shown
on line 20 above. Then, add the amounts in column (c) and enter the total here
25
25
Form 2441 (2002)
● If married filing jointly, enter your
spouse’s earned income (if your spouse
was a student or was disabled, see the
instructions for line 5).
● If married filing separately, see the
instructions for the amount to enter.
● All others, enter the amount from line 17.
/H20854
Page 226 Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 229 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
34–B to make sure your income is not too high your spouse lived with you during the first 6
to take the credit. months of the year, if you meet all the tests. See
Head of Household in chapter 2 for the tests youYou can take the credit only if you file34. must meet.Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot
take the credit if you file Form 1040EZ.
TIP
Under Age 65
Credit for the Qualified Individual If you are under age 65, you can qualify for the
credit only if you are retired on permanent andYou are a qualified individual for this credit if youtotal disability. If you retired after January 1,Elderly or the are a U.S. citizen or resident and either of the1977, you are retired on permanent and totalfollowing applies. disability if you were permanently and totallyDisabled disabled when you retired.1) You were age 65 or older at the end of
Even if you do not retire formally, you are2002.
considered retired on disability when you have2) You were under age 65 at the end of 2002stopped working because of your disability.Introduction and all three of the following statements
If you qualify, the law provides a number ofare true.
credits that can reduce the tax you owe for a Permanent and total disability.You are per-
a) You retired on permanent and total dis-year. One of these credits is the credit for the manently and totally disabled if you cannot en-
ability (explained later).elderly or the disabled. gage in any substantial gainful activity because
of your physical or mental condition. A physicianb) You received taxable disability incomeThis chapter explains:
for 2002. must certify that the condition has lasted or can
• Who qualifies for the credit for the elderly be expected to last continuously for 12 monthsc) On January 1, 2002, you had notor the disabled, and or more, or that the condition can be expected toreached mandatory retirement age (de-
result in death. See Physician’s statement, later.• How to figure this credit. fined later under Disability income).
Substantial gainful activity.Substantial
 You may be able to take this credit if you are: gainful activity is the performance of significant
duties over a reasonable period of time whileAge 65. You are considered to be age 65 on• Age 65 or older, or working for pay or profit, or in work generallythe day before your 65th birthday. Therefore,
• Retired on permanent and total disability. done for pay or profit.you are 65 at the end of the year if your 65th
birthday is on January 1 of the following year.Full-time work (or part-time work done at
your employer’s convenience) in a competitiveUseful Items
work situation for at least the minimum wageYou may want to see: U.S. Citizen or Resident conclusively shows that you are able to engage
in substantial gainful activity.You must be a U.S. citizen or resident (or bePublication
Substantial gainful activity is not work you dotreated as a resident) to take the credit. Gener-
❏ 524 Credit for the Elderly or the to take care of yourself or your home. It is notally, you cannot take the credit if you were aDisabled unpaid work on hobbies, institutional therapy ornonresident alien at any time during the tax year.
training, school attendance, clubs, social pro-❏ 554 Older Americans’ Tax Guide
grams, and similar activities. However, doingExceptions. You may be able to take the❏ 967 The IRS Will Figure Your Tax this kind of work may show that you are able tocredit if you are a nonresident alien who is mar-engage in substantial gainful activity.Forms (and Instructions) ried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of the
The fact that you have not worked for sometax year and you and your spouse choose to
❏ Schedule 3 (Form 1040A)Credit for the time is not, of itself, conclusive evidence that youtreat you as a U.S. resident. If you make thatElderly or the Disabled for Form cannot engage in substantial gainful activity.choice, both you and your spouse are taxed on1040A Filers your worldwide income. Sheltered employment. Certain work of-
❏ Schedule R (Form 1040)Credit for the If you were a nonresident alien at the begin-fered at qualified locations to physically or men-
Elderly or the Disabled ning of the year and a resident at the end of thetally impaired persons is considered sheltered
year, and you were married to a U.S. citizen oremployment. These qualified locations are in
resident at the end of the year, you may be ablesheltered workshops, hospitals and similar insti-
to choose to be treated as a U.S. resident for thetutions, homebound programs, and Department
entire year. In that case, you may be allowed toof Veterans Affairs (VA) sponsored homes.
take the credit. For information on theseCan You Take Compared to commercial employment, paychoices, see chapter 1 of Publication 519, U.S. is lower for sheltered employment. Therefore,Tax Guide for Aliens.the Credit? one usually does not look for sheltered employ-
ment if he or she can get other employment. TheYou can take the credit for the elderly or the fact that one has accepted sheltered employ-Married Personsdisabled if you meet both of the following re- ment is not proof of that person’s ability to en-quirements. gage in substantial gainful activity.Generally, if you are married at the end of the tax
year, you and your spouse must file a joint return1) You are a qualified individual. to take the credit. However, if you and yourPhysician’s statement.If you are under age2) Your income is not more than certain lim-spouse did not live in the same household at any65, you must have your physician complete aits. time during the tax year, you can file either jointstatement certifying that you were permanently
or separate returns and still take the credit.You can use Figure 34–A and Figure 34–B as and totally disabled on the date you retired. You
guides to see if you qualify. can use the statement in the instructions for
Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (FormHead of household. You can file as head ofUse Figure 34–A first to see if you are a
1040A).household and qualify to take the credit, even ifqualified individual. If you are, go to Figure
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 227

Page 230 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 34–A. Are You a Qualified Individual?
/H17074
Are you a U.S. citizen or resident?
1
Yes
Yes
No
/H17076
/H17074
Were you 65 or older at the end of the
year?
No
/H17074
Are you retired on permanent and total
disability?
Yes
/H17074
Did you reach mandatory retirement
age before this year?
2
No
Did you receive taxable disability
benefits this year?
You are a qualified
individual and may be
able to take the credit
for the elderly or the
disabled unless your
income exceeds the
limits in Figure 34–B.
/H17076
/H17074
Yes
/H17076
You are not a qualified
individual and cannot
take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled.
/H17074
Yes
/H17073/H17073
No
/H17076
No
1
If you were a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year and were married to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of th e tax year, see U.S. Citizen or
Resident under Qualified Individual. If you and your spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resident, answer “yes” to this question.
2
Mandatory retirement age is the age set by your employer at which you would have been required to retire, had you not become di sabled.
Figure 34–B. Income Limits
IF your filing status is ...
Your adjusted gross income (AGI)*
is equal to or more than ...
Single, Head of household, or
Qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child
$17,500
Married filing a joint return
and both spouses qualify in
Figure 34–A
$25,000
Married filing a joint return
and only one spouse qualifies
in Figure 34–A
$20,000
Married filing a separate return and
you did not live with your spouse
at any time during the year
$12,500
THEN even if you qualify (see Figure 34–A), you CANNOT take the
credit if ...
OR the total of your nontaxable
social security and other nontaxable
pension(s) is equal to or more than ...
$5,000
$7,500
$5,000
$3,750
*AGI is the amount on Form 1040A, line 22, or Form 1040, line 36.
START HERE
Page 228 Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 231 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 34–1. Initial Amounts Figuring the Credit
THEN enter on line 10
You can figure the credit yourself (see the expla-of Schedule R (Form
nation that follows) or the IRS will figure it for1040) or Schedule 3 you. See Credit Figured for You, later.IF your filing status is ... (Form 1040A)...
Figuring the credit yourself.If you figure theSingle, head of household, or a qualifying
credit yourself, fill out the front of either Sched-widow(er) with dependent child and, by the end of
ule R (if you are filing Form 1040) or Schedule 32002, you were (if you are filing Form 1040A). Next, fill out Part• 65 or older................................ $5,000 III of either Schedule R or Schedule 3.• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $5,000
There are four steps in Part III to deter-
Married filing a joint return and by the end of mine the amount of your credit:
2002
• both of you were 65 or older................... $7,500
1) Determine your initial amount (lines• both of you were under 65 and one of you retired on$5,000 10–12).permanent and total disability1 ...................
2) Total any nontaxable social security• both of you were under 65 and both of you retired on$7,500 and certain other nontaxable pensionspermanent and total disability2 ...................
and disability benefits you received• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under$7,500 (lines 13a, 13b, and 13c).65 and retired on permanent and total disability3 ......
3) Determine your excess adjusted gross• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under$5,000 income ( lines 14–17).65 and not retired on permanent and total disability . . .
4) Determine your credit (lines 18–24 ofMarried filing a separate return and you did not
Schedule R or lines 18–22 of Schedulelive with your spouse at any time during the year 3).and, by the end of 2002, you were
These steps are discussed in more detail next.• 65 or older................................ $3,750
• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $3,750
1Amount cannot be more than the taxable disability income. Step 1. Determine Initial2Amount cannot be more than your combined taxable disability income.
3Amount is $5,000 plus the taxable disability income of the spouse under age 65, but not more than $7,500.Amount
To figure the credit, you must first determineYou do not have to file this statement with 2) It must be included in your income asyour initial amount. See Table 34–1.your Form 1040 or Form 1040A, but you must wages (or payments instead of wages) for
keep it for your records. the time you are absent from work be-Initial amounts for persons under age 65.If
cause of permanent and total disability.you are a qualified individual under age 65, yourVeterans. If the Department of Veterans Af-
initial amount cannot be more than your taxablefairs (VA) certifies that you are permanently and
Payments that are not disability income.disability income.totally disabled, you can substitute VA Form
Any payment you receive from a plan that does21–0172, Certification of Permanent and Total
not provide for disability retirement is not disabil-Disability, for the physician’s statement you are Step 2. Total Certainity income. Any lump-sum payment for accruedrequired to keep. VA Form 21–0172 must be
Nontaxable Pensions andannual leave that you receive when you retire onsigned by a person authorized by the VA to do
so. You can get this form from your local VA disability is a salary payment and is not disabilityBenefits
regional office. income.
Step 2 is to figure the total amount of nontaxableFor purposes of the credit for the elderly orPhysician’s statement obtained in earlier social security and certain other nontaxable pay-the disabled, disability income does not includeyear. If you got a physician’s statement in an ments you received during the year. (See Non-earlier year and, due to your continued disabledamounts you receive after you reach mandatorytaxable payments, later.)condition, you were unable to engage in anyretirement age. Mandatory retirement age is Enter these nontaxable payments on linessubstantial gainful activity during 2002, you maythe age set by your employer at which you would13a or 13b, and total them on line 13c. If you arenot need to get another physician’s statementhave had to retire, had you not become dis-married filing a joint return, you must enter thefor 2002. For a detailed explanation of the condi-abled. combined amount of nontaxable payments bothtions you must meet, see the instructions for you and your spouse receive.Part II of Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3
Income Limits(Form 1040A). If you meet the required condi- Worksheets are provided in the Form
tions, check the box on line 2 of Part II of Sched- 1040 or Form 1040A instructions toTo determine if you can claim the credit, youule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (Form 1040A). help you determine if any part of your
TIP
must consider two income limits. The first limit issocial security benefits (or equivalent railroadIf you checked box 4, 5, or 6 in Part I of eitherthe amount of your adjusted gross income retirement benefits) is taxable.Schedule R or Schedule 3, print in the space(AGI). The second limit is the amount of nontax-above the box on line 2 in Part II, the firstable social security and other nontaxable pen-name(s) of the spouse(s) for whom the box is Nontaxable payments. Include the followingsions you received. The limits are shown inchecked. nontaxable payments in the amounts you enterFigure 34–B, earlier. on lines 13a and 13b.
If both your AGI and nontaxable pensionsDisability income.If you are under age 65, • Nontaxable social security payments. Thisare less than the income limits, you may be ableyou can qualify for the credit only if you have is the nontaxable part of the amount ofto claim the credit. See Figuring the Credit, next.taxable disability income. Disability income must benefits shown in box 5 of Form
meet both of the following requirements. If either your AGI or your nontaxable SSA–1099, which includes disability bene-
pensions are equal to or more than thefits, before deducting any amounts withheld
income limits, you cannot take the1) It must be paid under your employer’s ac- to pay premiums on supplementary Medi-CAUTION
!
credit.cident or health plan or pension plan. care insurance, and before any reduction
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 229

Page 232 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
because of receipt of a benefit under work- (Form 1040 or 1040A). If you want the IRS toStep 4. Determine Your figure your tax, see chapter 31.ers’ compensation.
CreditDo not include a lump-sum death benefit Form 1040. If you want the IRS to figure your
credit, see Form 1040 Line Entries under Taxpayment you may receive as a survivingTo determine if you can take the credit, you must
Figured by IRS in chapter 31.spouse, or a surviving child’s insuranceadd the amounts you figured in Step 2 and Step
3.benefit payment you may receive as a Form 1040A. If you want the IRS to figure yourguardian. credit, see Form 1040A Line Entries under TaxIF the total of Steps THEN ... Figured by IRS in chapter 31.• Social security equivalent part of tier 1 rail-2 and 3 is ...
road retirement pension payments that isEqual to or more You cannot take thenot taxed. This is the nontaxable part of Examplesthan the amount in credit.the amount of benefits shown in box 5 ofStep 1 The following examples illustrate the credit forForm RRB–1099.
the elderly or the disabled. The initial amountsLess than the You can take the
• Nontaxable pension or annuity payments oramount in Step 1 credit. are taken from Table 34–1, shown earlier.
disability benefits that are paid under a law
administered by the Department of Veter- Example 1. James Davis is 58 years old,
single, and files Form 1040A. In 1998 he retiredFiguring the credit.If you can take the credit,ans Affairs (VA).
on permanent and total disability, and he is stillsubtract the total of Step 2 and Step 3 from theDo not include amounts received as a pen- permanently and totally disabled. He got theamount in Step 1 and multiply the result by 15%.sion, annuity, or similar allowance for per- required physician’s statement in 1998, and keptThis is your credit.
sonal injuries or sickness resulting from it with his records. His physician signed on line BIn certain cases, the amount of your credit
active service in the armed forces of any of the statement. This year James checks themay be limited. See Limit on credit, later.
country or in the National Oceanic and At- box in Part II of Schedule 3. He does not need to
mospheric Administration or the Public get another statement for 2002.Example. You are 66 years old and your
He received the following income for thespouse is 64. Your spouse is not disabled. YouHealth Service, or as a disability annuity
year:file a joint return on Form 1040. Your adjustedunder section 808 of the Foreign Service
gross income is $14,630. Together you receivedAct of 1980. Nontaxable social security........ $1,500$3,200 from social security, which was nontax-
• Pension or annuity payments or disability Interest (taxable).............. 1 0 0able. You figure the credit as follows:
Taxable disability pension........ 11,400benefits that are excluded from income
under any provision of federal law other1)  Initial amount............... $5,000
James’ adjusted gross income is $11,5002)  Subtract the total of:than the Internal Revenue Code.
($11,400 + $100). He figures the credit ona) Nontaxable social securityDo not include amounts that are a return of Schedule 3 as follows:and other nontaxable
your cost of a pension or annuity. Thesepensions.............. $3,200
amounts do not reduce your initial amount. 1)  Initial amount............ $5,000b) Excess adjusted gross
income 2)  Taxable disability pension .... 11,400
[($14,630 − $10,000) ÷ 2] . . . 2,315 5,5153)  Smaller of (1) or (2)........ 5,000You should be sure to take into ac-3)  Balance (Not less than –0–) ..... – 0 – 4)  Subtract the total of:count all of the nontaxable amounts4)Credit .................... – 0 – a) Nontaxable disabilityyou receive. These amounts are veri-CAUTION
!
benefits (social security) . . $1,500You cannot take the credit since your non-fied by the IRS through information supplied by b) Excess adjusted grosstaxable social security (line 2a) plus your excessother government agencies. income
adjusted gross income (line 2b) is more than[($11,500 − $7,500) ÷ 2] . . 2,000 3,500
your amount on line 1. 5) Balance (Not less than 0)..... 1,500
Step 3. Determine Excess 6) Multiply line 5 × 15%(.15)).... 2 2 5
Limit on credit.The amount of credit you can7) Enter the amount fromAdjusted Gross Income claim may be limited if any of the following apply.Form 1040A, line 28..... 3 8 3
8) Enter any amounts fromYou also must reduce your initial amount by your1) You file Form 1040A and the credit you Form 1040A, line 29..... 0
excess adjusted gross income. Figure your ex-figured on line 20 of Schedule 3 is more9)  Subtract line 8 from line 7 383
than the tax on Form 1040A, line 28.cess adjusted gross income on lines 14 through 10)Credit
(Enter the smaller of line 617. 2) You file Form 1040 and the credit you fig-or line 9)............ $225ured on line 20 of Schedule R is more thanYou figure your excess adjusted gross in-
the amount on Form 1040, line 44 (regularHis credit is $225. He enters $225 on line 30come as follows:
tax plus any alternative minimum tax), mi-of Form 1040A. The Schedule 3 for James Davis
nus any foreign tax credit on Form 1040,is not shown.1) Subtract from your adjusted gross incomeline 45.(line 36 of Form 1040 or line 22 of Form Example 2. William White is 53. His wife3) You are claiming the credit for child and1040A) the amount shown for your filing Helen is 49. William had a stroke 3 years agodependent care expenses on:status in the following list: and retired on permanent and total disability. He
is still permanently and totally disabled becausea) Form 1040A, line 29, ora) $7,500 if you are single, a head of of the stroke. In November of last year, Helenhousehold, or a qualifying widow(er) b) Form 1040, line 46. was injured in an accident at work and retired onwith a dependent child, permanent and total disability.Figure any limit on your credit on lines William received nontaxable social securityb) $10,000 if you are married filing a joint21–24 of Schedule R or lines 21–22 of Sched-disability benefits of $3,000 during the year andreturn, or ule 3. a taxable disability pension of $6,000. Helen
c) $5,000 if you are married filing a sepa- earned $9,200 from her job and received a taxa-
rate return and you and your spouse ble disability pension of $1,000. Their joint returnCredit Figured for You
did not live in the same household at on Form 1040 shows adjusted gross income of
any time during the tax year. If you choose to have the Internal Revenue $16,200 ($6,000 + $9,200 + $1,000).
Service (IRS) figure the credit for you, read theHelen got her doctor to complete the
2) Divide the result of (1) by 2. following discussion for the form you will file physician’s statement in the instructions for
Page 230 Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 233 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule R. Helen is not required to include the William has kept the physicians’s statement with They attach Schedule R to their joint return and
statement with her return, but she must keep it his records. He checks the box in Part II of enter $135 on line 47 of Form 1040. See their
for her records. Schedule R and writes his first name in the filled-in Schedule R and Helen’s filled-in
William got a physician’s statement for the space above line 2. physician’s statement on the next three pages.
year he had the stroke. His doctor had signed on William and Helen use Schedule R to figure
line B of that physician’s statement to certify that their $135 credit for the elderly or the disabled.
William was permanently and totally disabled.
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 231

Page 234 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
William M. White and Helen A. White 220 00 3333
/H12011
/H12011
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled(Form 1040)
Attachment
Sequence No. 16/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule R (Form 1040).
Your social security number
You may be able to take this credit and reduce your tax if by the end of 2002:
● You were age 65 or older or
You filed a physician’s statement for this disability for 1983 or an earlier year, or you filed or got a
statement for tax years after 1983 and your physician signed line B on the statement, and
If:
Due to your continued disabled condition, you were unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity
in 2002, check this box /H17075
● If you checked this box, you do not have to get another statement for 2002.
OMB No. 1545-0074Schedule R
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Name(s) shown on Form 1040
But you must also meet other tests. See page R-1.
In most cases, the IRS can figure the credit for you. See page R-1.
Check the Box for Your Filing Status and Age
Statement of Permanent and Total Disability (Complete only if you checked box 2, 4, 5, 6, or 9 above.)
1
Schedule R (Form 1040) 2002
2
If your filing status is:
You were 65 or older1 1
You were under 65 and you retired on permanent and total disability2 2
3 3Both spouses were 65 or older
4 Both spouses were under 65, but only one spouse retired on
permanent and total disability 4
5 Both spouses were under 65, and both retired on permanent and total
disability 5
Married filing
jointly
6 One spouse was 65 or older, and the other spouse was under 65 and
retired on permanent and total disability 6
7 One spouse was 65 or older, and the other spouse was under 65 and
not retired on permanent and total disability 7
8 You were 65 or older and you lived apart from your spouse for all of
2002 8Married filing
separately
9 You were under 65, you retired on permanent and total disability, and
you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2002 9
Did you check
box 1, 3, 7,
or 8?
Single,
Head of household, or 
Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child
And by the end of 2002: Check only one box:
Cat. No. 11359K
Part I
Part II
● You were under age 65, you retired on permanent and total disability, and
you received taxable disability income.
Yes Skip Part II and complete Part III on back.
No Complete Parts II and III.
/H17075
/H17075
● If you did not check this box, have your physician complete the statement on page R-4. You must
keep the statement for your records.
(99)
2002
William
Page 232 Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 235 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
7,500
7,000
7,000
3,000
3,000
16,200
10,000
6,200
3,100
6,100
900
135
236
236
135
-0-
Page 2Schedule R (Form 1040) 2002
Figure Your Credit
Box 1, 2, 4, or 7 $5,000
Enter:10
10
● Box 6, add $5,000 to the taxable disability income of the
spouse who was under age 65. Enter the total.
11
If you completed line 11, enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11; all others, enter the
amount from line 10
12
12
Enter the following pensions, annuities, or disability income
that you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) received in
2002.
13
a Nontaxable part of social security benefits and
13aNontaxable part of railroad retirement benefits
treated as social security. See page R-3.
Nontaxable veterans’ pensions andb
13bAny other pension, annuity, or disability benefit that
is excluded from income under any other provision
of law. See page R-3.
Add lines 13a and 13b. (Even though these income items are
not taxable, they must be included here to figure your credit.)
If you did not receive any of the types of nontaxable income
listed on line 13a or 13b, enter -0- on line 13c
c
13c
14
Enter the amount from Form 1040,
line 36
14
15
15
Subtract line 15 from line 14. If zero or
less, enter -0-
16
16
17Enter one-half of line 1617
18Add lines 13c and 1718
Subtract line 18 from line 12. If zero or less, stop; you cannot take the credit. Otherwise,
go to line 20
19
19
24
20 Multiply line 19 by 15% (.15)
Did you check
box 2, 4, 5, 6,
or 9 in Part I?
Box 3, 5, or 6
$7,500
Box 8 or 9 $3,750
If you checked (in Part I):
Box 1 or 2 $7,500
Enter:
Box 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 $10,000
Box 8 or 9 $5,000
If you checked (in Part I):
Part III
/H20854
/H20854
/H20854
● Box 2, 4, or 9, enter your taxable disability income.
● Box 5, add your taxable disability income to your spouse’s
taxable disability income. Enter the total.
For more details on what to include on line 11, see page R-3.
11
If you checked (in Part I):
/H20854
You must complete line 11.Yes
No Enter the amount from line 10
on line 12 and go to line 13.
/H17075
/H17075
/H20854
Schedule R (Form 1040) 2002
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 4421
Subtract line 22 from line 2123
Add the amounts from Form 1040, lines 45 and 46, and enter
the total
22
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Enter the smaller of line 20 or line 23 here and
on Form 1040, line 47
24
22
21
20
23
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 233

Page 236 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Instructions for Physician’s Statement
If you retired after 1976, enter the date you retired in
the space provided on the statement below. 2. A physician determines that the disability has
lasted or can be expected to last continuously for at
least a year or can lead to death.
Taxpayer
Physician
A person is permanently and totally disabled if both of
the following apply:
1. He or she cannot engage in any substantial
gainful activity because of a physical or mental
condition, and
I certify that
was permanently and totally disabled on January 1, 1976, or January 1, 1977, OR was permanently and totally disabled
on the date he or she retired. If retired after 1976, enter the date retired. /H17075
Physician: Sign your name on either line A or B below.
Physician’s signature
Physician’s signature Date
Physician’s Statement (keep for your records)
Name of disabled person
The disability has lasted or can be expected
to last continuously for at least a year
Date
There is no reasonable probability that the
disabled condition will ever improve
Physician’s addressPhysician’s name
A
B
Helen A. White
November 30, 2002
2/7/2003
Juanita D. Doctor 1900 Green St., Hometown, MD 20000
Juanita D. Doctor
Page 234 Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 237 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
d) Grandchild, or 2) Your modified adjusted gross income
(AGI) is above the amount shown belowe) Eligible foster child. for your filing status.
35.
• Married filing jointly – $110,000.Example. Your son turned 17 on December
30, 2002. He is a citizen of the United States and• Single, head of household, or qualifying
you claimed him as a dependent on your return.widow(er) – $75,000.Child Tax Credit
He is not a qualifying child for the child tax credit• Married filing separately – $55,000.because he was not under age 17 at the end of
2002.
Introduction Modified AGI. For purposes of the child tax
Adopted child. A child placed with you by ancredit, your modified AGI is your AGI plus theThe child tax credit is a credit that you may beauthorized placement agency for legal adoptionfollowing amounts that may apply to you.able to take on your tax return. It may reduceis an adopted child even if the adoption is notyour tax by as much as $600 for each of your • Any amount excluded from income be-final.qualifying children. cause of the exclusion of income from
The additional child tax credit is a creditGrandchild. A grandchild is any descendant Puerto Rico.
you may be able to take if you are not able toof your son, daughter, stepson, stepdaughter, or• Any amount on line 43 or line 48 of Formclaim the full amount of the child tax credit.adopted child and includes your 2555, Foreign Earned Income.This chapter explains: great-grandchild, great-great-grandchild, etc.
• Any amount on line 18 of Form 2555–EZ,• Who is a qualifying child. Eligible foster child.For the child tax credit, aForeign Earned Income Exclusion.person is your eligible foster child if both of the• How much is the credit.
• Any amount on line 15 of Form 4563, Ex-following are true.• How to claim the credit. clusion of Income for Bona Fide Residents
1) The child is placed with you by an author-of American Samoa.• Why you should check your tax withhold- ized placement agency.ing.
If you do not have any of the above, modified2) You cared for that child as you would yourAGI is the AGI amount on line 36 (Form 1040) orown child.The child tax credit and the additional line 21 (Form 1040A).
child tax credit should not be confusedIn addition, the child must have lived with you for
with the child and dependent care all of 2002. A child who was born or died in 2002CAUTION
!
credit discussed in chapter 33. is considered to have lived with you for all of
2002 if your home was the child’s home for theClaiming the Creditentire time he or she was alive.If you have no tax.Credits, such as the child
tax credit, the adoption credit, or the credit for To claim the child tax credit, you must file FormKidnapped child.A kidnapped child is treatedchild and dependent care expenses, are used to 1040 or Form 1040A. You must provide theas a qualifying child for the child tax credit if bothreduce tax. If your tax on line 44 (Form 1040) or name and identification number (usually a socialof the following statements are true.line 28 (Form 1040A) is zero, do not figure the security number) on your tax return for each
child tax credit because there is no tax to re-1) The child is presumed by law enforcementqualifying child.
duce. However, you may qualify for the addi-authorities to have been kidnapped by Answer the Questions in your form instruc-tional child tax credit on line 66 (Form 1040) orsomeone who is not a member of your tions for line 50 (Form 1040) or line 33 (Formline 42 (Form 1040A). family or the child’s family. 1040A) to find out which child tax credit work-
sheet you can use to figure the credit.2) The child qualified as your dependent for
Useful Items If you answer “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 3 inthe part of the year before the kidnapping.
You may want to see: your Form 1040 instructions or question 1 or 2 inThis treatment applies for all years until the childyour Form 1040A instructions, you must com-is returned. However, the last year this treat-Form (and Instructions) plete the child tax credit worksheet in Publica-ment can apply is the earlier of: tion 972, Child Tax Credit. Otherwise, you can❏ 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit
use the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in your1) The year there is a determination that the❏ W–4 Employee’s Withholding Allowance Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions. (See thechild is dead, orCertificate filled-in example, later.)
2) The year the child would have reached
age 16.
Example
Amy Brown files as head of household and hasQualifying Child two dependent children under age 17. The chil-
dren are qualifying children for purposes of the
Amount of CreditA qualifying child for purposes of the child tax child tax credit. Amy’s only income is her salarycredit must be all of the following. of $23,500. Amy chooses to itemize her deduc-The maximum credit you can claim is $600 for
tions and files Form 1040. Her AGI, shown on1) Under age 17 at the end of 2002. each qualifying child.
line 36 of her Form 1040, is $23,500. This is her2) A citizen or resident of the United States. taxable earned income.
Limits on the Credit Amy does not file Form 2555, 2555–EZ, or3) Claimed as your dependent.
4563. She does not exclude income from PuertoYou must reduce your child tax credit if either (1)4) Your: Rico. Her modified AGI is $23,500.or (2) applies. Amy’s tax, shown on line 44 of her Forma) Son, daughter, stepson, or stepdaugh-
1040, is $763. She claims a $497 credit for child1) The amount on line 44 (Form 1040) or lineter,
and dependent care expenses on line 46. She28 (Form 1040A) is less than the credit. Ifb) Brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsis- claims a $2,033 earned income credit on line 64.this amount is zero, you cannot take thister (or his or her child or grandchild) if She has no other credits.credit because there is no tax to reduce.you care for the individual as you wouldBut you may be able to take the addi-  After answering the Questions in the Formyour own child, tional child tax credit. See Additional 1040 instructions for line 50, she completes the
c) Adopted child, Child Tax Credit, later. child tax credit worksheet to figure her child tax
Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit Page 235

Page 238 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
credit of $266. Amy’s completed questions and
1) Make sure you figured the amount, if any,child tax credit worksheet are shown later. Checking Yourof your child tax credit. See Claiming theAmy reads the TIP in the worksheet and
Credit, earlier.finds that she may be able to take the additional Withholdingchild tax credit. See Additional Child Tax Credit2) If you answered “Yes” on line 4 or line 5 ofand Amy’s completed Form 8812, later. The child tax credit decreases your tax. You canthe Child Tax Credit Worksheet, use Form
check your tax withholding by using Publication8812 to see if you can take the additional
919, How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding.child tax credit. If you are having too much tax withheld, and
3) If you have an additional child tax credit onyou prefer to have the money during the year,Additional Child Tax
line 13 of Form 8812, carry it to line 66you may be able to decrease your withholding.
You do this by completing a new Form W–4 andCredit (Form 1040) or line 42 (Form 1040A).
giving it to your employer.
This credit is for certain individuals who get less
than the full amount of the child tax credit. TheTaxable earned income. Generally, for pur-
additional child tax credit may give you a refundposes of the additional child tax credit, your
even if you do not owe any tax. taxable earned income is the amount on line 7 of
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. See the instructionsHow to claim the additional child tax credit.
for Form 8812 to figure your taxable earnedTo claim the additional child tax credit, follow the
income.steps below.
Page 236 Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit

Page 239 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filled-in Questions for Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
/H12011
Who Must Use Pub. 972
1. Are you excluding income from Puerto Rico or are you
filing any of the following forms?
● Form 2555 or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned
income)
● Form 4563 (exclusion of income for residents of
American Samoa)
No. Continue Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
2. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 36, more than the amount
shown below for your filing status?
● Married filing jointly – $110,000
● Single, head of household, or qualifying widow(er) –
$75,000
● Married filing separately – $55,000
3. Are you claiming any of the following credits?
● Adoption credit, Form 8839 (see the instructions for
Form 1040, line 51, on page 41)
● Mortgage interest credit, Form 8396 (see the instructions
for Form 1040, line 52, on page 41)
● District of Columbia first-time homebuyer credit,
Form 8859
No. Use the
worksheet on
page 40 to figure
your child tax credit.
Yes. Y ou must use
Pub. 972 to figure your
child tax credit. Y ou will
also need the form(s)
listed above for any
credit(s) you are claiming.
/H17074
STOP
No. Continue Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
/H17074
STOP
Questions Pub.
972
/H12011
/H12011
Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit Page 237

Page 240 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2
1,200
763
497
266
266
497
Filled-in Child Tax Credit Worksheet—Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
Child Tax Credit Worksheet—Line 50
1040
Yes. STOP
Keep for Y our Records
● Do not use this worksheet if you answered “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 3 on page 39.
Instead, use Pub. 972.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1
2
Number of qualifying children: /H11003$600. Enter the result.
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 44.
Add the amounts from Form 1040:
Line 45
Line 47
Line 49 + Enter the total.
Are the amounts on lines 2 and 3 the same?
Y ou cannot take this credit because there is no tax to reduce. However, you
may be able to take the additional child tax credit. See the TIP below before
completing the rest of your Form 1040.
No. Subtract line 3 from line 2.
Is the amount on line 1 more than the amount on line 4?
Yes. Enter the amount from line 4.
Also, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the
TIP below .
No. Enter the amount from line 1.
This is your child tax
credit.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 50.
You may be able to take the additional child tax credit
on Form 1040, line 66, if you answered “Yes” on line 4
or line 5 above.
● First, complete your Form 1040 through line 65.
● Then, use Form 8812 to figure any additional child
tax credit.
+
3
4
/H20854
5
/H17076
Line 46 +
Line 48 +
● To be a qualifying child for the child tax credit, the child must be under age 17 at the
end of 2002 and meet the other requirements listed in the instructions for line 6c,
column (4), on page 22.
/H12011
/H12011
Page 238 Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit

Page 241 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1,200
266
934
23,500
13,150
1,315
934
1040
1040A
. . . . . . . . . .
8812
1040
1040A
. . . . . . . . . .
OMB No. 1545-1620
Additional Child Tax Credit8812Form
Complete and attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 47
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Form 8812 (2002)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form. Cat. No. 10644E
3
2
4
6
Enter the total of the withheld social security and Medicare taxes from Form(s)
W -2, boxes 4 and 6. If married filing jointly , include your spouse’s amounts
with yours. If you worked for a railroad, see the instructions on back
Add lines 7 and 8
1
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
29 and 57, plus any uncollected social security and
Medicare or tier 1 RRTA taxes included on line 61.
Enter -0-.
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
64 and 65.
Enter the total of the amount from Form 1040A, line
41, plus any excess social security and tier 1 RRTA
taxes withheld that you entered to the left of line 43
(see the instructions on back).
Enter the amount from line 1 of your Child T ax Credit W orksheet on page 40 of the Form 1040 instructions
or page 39 of the Form 1040A instructions. If you used Pub. 972, enter the amount from line 8 of the
worksheet on page 3 of the publication
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 50, or Form 1040A, line 33
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero, stop; you cannot take this credit
8
9
/H20854
6
/H208541040A filers:
1040 filers:
1040 filers:
1040A filers:
1
2
13
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 66, or
Form 1040A, line 42.
/H17076
/H17076
3
Enter your total taxable earned income. See the instructions on back
5 Is the amount on line 4 more than $10,350?
No.
Ye s .Subtract $10,350 from the amount on line 4. Enter the result
Leave line 5 blank and enter -0- on line 6.
4
5
Multiply the amount on line 5 by 10% (.10) and enter the result
7
Next. Do you have three or more qualifying children?
No. If line 6 is zero, stop; you cannot take this credit. Otherwise, skip Part II and enter the
smaller of line 3 or line 6 on line 13.
Ye s .
7
8
9
10
10
11 Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0-
11
12 12Enter the larger of line 6 or line 11 here
Next, enter the smaller of line 3 or line 12 on line 13.
13 This is your additional child tax credit
Part III
Part I
Part II
All Filers
Certain Filers Who Have Three or More Qualifying Children
Your Additional Child Tax Credit
If line 6 is equal to or more than line 3, skip Part II and enter the amount from line 3 on
line 13. Otherwise, go to line 7.
2002
Amy Brown 012 00 5678
/H12011
/H12011
Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit Page 239

Page 242 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Give you specific information about eachCan You Claim anof the credits,
Education Credit?• Help you choose which of the credits to36.
claim, and The following rules will help you determine if you
are eligible to claim an education credit on your• Show you how to figure the credit you
tax return.choose.Education
Table 36–1 compares the Hope and lifetime
Who Cannot Claim a Credit?learning credits. In 2002, if you are eligible toCredits
claim both credits based on the higher educationYou cannot claim an education credit if any ofexpenses of one student, it will generally be tothe following apply.your benefit to claim the Hope credit.Important Changes for • Your filing status is married filing sepa-Higher education.This term refers to edu- rately.cation beyond the high school level. Higher edu-2002
cation is also called “postsecondary education.”• You are listed as a dependent in the Ex-
emptions section on another person’s taxEducation credit and distribution from Cov-
return (such as your parents’). See WhoUseful Itemserdell ESA or QTP. Beginning in 2002, you
Can Claim a Dependent’s Expenses, later.You may want to see:may be able to claim an education credit in the
same year in which you receive a distribution • Your modified adjusted gross income isPublicationfrom a Coverdell education savings account $51,000 or more ($102,000 or more in the
(ESA) or a qualified tuition program (QTP). How- case of a joint return). Modified adjusted❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Educationever, you cannot use the same expenses to gross income is explained later under
figure both the education credit and the taxable Does the Amount of Your Income AffectForm (and Instructions)portion of a Coverdell ESA or QTP distribution. the Amount of Your Credit.❏ 8863 Education Credits (Hope andSee No Double Benefit Allowed under What
• You (or your spouse) were a nonresidentLifetime Learning Credits)Expenses Qualify, later.
alien for any part of 2002 and the nonresi-
Income limits for credit reduction increased. dent alien did not elect to be treated as a
For 2002, the amount of your education credit is resident alien for tax purposes. More infor-
gradually reduced (phased out) if your modified mation on nonresident aliens can be found
adjusted gross income (MAGI) is between in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide forRules That Apply to
$41,000 and $51,000 ($82,000 and $102,000 if Aliens.
you file a joint return). You cannot claim anBoth Credits
education credit if your MAGI is $51,000 or more
Who Can Claim a Credit?($102,000 or more if you file a joint return). TheThe amount of each credit is determined by the
2001 limits were $40,000 and $50,000 ($80,000amount you pay for qualified tuition and relatedGenerally, you can claim an education credit ifand $100,000 if filing a joint return). See Does expenses for students, the amount of your modi-all three of the following requirements are met.the Amount of Your Income Affect the Amount offied adjusted gross income (MAGI), and the
Your Credit, later, for more information. amount of your tax. 1) You pay qualified tuition and related ex-
Education credits are nonrefundable. You penses of higher education.
subtract them directly from your tax and they2) You pay the tuition and related expensesmay reduce your tax to zero. However, if thefor an eligible student.credits are more than your tax, the excess is notImportant Change for refunded to you. 3) The eligible student is either yourself, your
spouse, or a dependent for whom you2003
claim an exemption on your tax return.
Lifetime learning credit.Beginning in 2003,
the amount of qualified tuition and related ex-
penses you may take into account in figuring
Table 36–1. Comparison of Education Credits
your lifetime learning credit increases from
Hope Credit Lifetime Learning Credit$5,000 to $10,000. The credit will equal 20% of
these qualified expenses, with the maximumUp to $1,500 credit per eligible Up to $1,000 credit per returncredit being $2,000. student
Available ONLY  until the first 2 years Available for all years of postsecondary
of postsecondary education are education and for courses to acquire or
Introduction completed improve job skills
This chapter discusses two tax credits (referredAvailable ONLY  for 2 years per eligible Available for an unlimited number of years
to here as education credits) available to per-student
sons who pay expenses for higher education.
Student must be pursuing an Student does not need to be pursuing a• The Hope credit. undergraduate degree or other degree or other recognized educational
• The lifetime learning credit. recognized educational credential credential
The chapter will: Student must be enrolled at least half Available for one or more courses
time for at least one academic period• Give you general information that applies
beginning during the yearto both of the credits,
No felony drug conviction on student’s Felony drug conviction rule does not apply
record
Page 240 Chapter 36 Education Credits

Page 243 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified tuition and related expenses are de-Example 2. Donna and Charles, both Do not reduce the qualified expenses by
fined below under What Expenses Qualify. Eligi- first-year students at College W, are required toamounts paid with the student’s:
ble students are defined later under Hope Credit have certain books and other reading materials
• Earnings,and Lifetime Learning Credit. to use in their mandatory first-year classes. The
college has no policy about how students should• Loans,
obtain these materials, but any student whoWhat Expenses Qualify? • Gifts,purchases them from College W’s bookstore will
receive a bill directly from the college. Charles• Inheritances, andThe credits are based on qualified tuition andbought his books from a friend, so what he paidrelated expenses you pay for yourself, your • Personal savings.for them is not a qualified expense. Donnaspouse, or a dependent for whom you claim anbought hers at College W’s bookstore. Althoughexemption on your tax return. Generally, the Also, do not reduce the qualified expenses byDonna paid College W directly for her first-yearcredits are allowed for qualified tuition and re- any scholarship reported as income on thebooks and materials, her payment is not a quali-lated expenses paid for an academic period student’s return or any scholarship which, by itsfied related expense because the books andbeginning in the same year as the year the terms, cannot be applied to qualified tuition andmaterials are not required to be purchasedpayment is made or in the first 3 months of the related expenses.from College W for enrollment or attendance atfollowing year. the institution.For example, if you paid $2,000 in December Example 1. In 2002, Jackie paid $3,000 for2002 for qualified tuition for the Spring 2003 tuition and $5,000 for room and board at Univer-Example 3. When Marci enrolled at Collegesemester beginning in January 2003, you may sity X. The university did not require her to payX for her freshman year, she had to pay a sepa-be able to use that $2,000 in figuring your 2002rate student activity fee in addition to her tuition. any fees in addition to her tuition in order tocredit. This activity fee is required of all students, and isenroll in or attend classes. To help pay these
used solely to fund on-campus organizationscosts, she was awarded a $2,000 scholarshipAcademic period. An academic period in-
and activities run by students, such as the stu-and a $4,000 student loan.cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or other
dent newspaper and the student government.period of study (such as a summer school ses- The scholarship is a qualified scholarship
No portion of the fee covers personal expenses.sion) as reasonably determined by an educa- that is excludable from Jackie’s income, and, forAlthough labeled as a student activity fee, thetional institution. purposes of figuring an education credit (eitherfee is required for Marci’s enrollment and attend-Hope or lifetime learning), she must first use it toance at College X. Therefore, it is a qualifiedPayments with borrowed funds. You can reduce her tuition (her only “qualified expense”).related expense.claim an education credit for qualified tuition and The student loan is not considered “tax-free ed-
related expenses paid with the proceeds of a ucational assistance,” so she does not use it toloan. You claim the credit in the year in which the reduce the qualified expenses. Therefore,No Double Benefit Allowedexpenses are paid, not in the year in which the Jackie is treated as having paid only $1,000 inloan is repaid. qualified expenses ($3,000 tuition – $2,000 You cannot do any of the following.
scholarship) to University X in 2002.
• Deduct higher education expenses onQualified Tuition and Related Example 2. The facts are the same as inyour income tax return (for example, as a
Expenses Example 1, except that Jackie reports her entirebusiness expense or a tuition and fees
deduction) and also claim an educationscholarship as income on her tax return. In thisIn general, qualified tuition and related ex-credit based on those same expenses. case, the scholarship is not treated as a qualifiedpenses are tuition and fees required for enroll- scholarship. Therefore, it is allocated to ex-ment or attendance at an eligible educational • Claim a Hope credit and a lifetime learningpenses other than qualified expenses. Jackie isinstitution. credit based on the same qualified educa-
treated as paying the entire $3,000 tuition totion expenses.
University X with other funds and can figure herEligible educational institution.An eligible • Claim an education credit based on theeducation credit on the entire $3,000.educational institution is any college, university,same expenses used to figure the taxablevocational school, or other postsecondary edu- Refunds. Qualified tuition and related ex-portion of a Coverdell ESA or QTP distri-cational institution eligible to participate in a stu- penses do not include expenses for which youbution.dent aid program administered by the receive a refund. If you paid expenses in 2002,Department of Education. It includes virtually all• Claim a credit based on expenses paidand you receive a refund of those expensesaccredited, public, nonprofit, and proprietarywith tax-free scholarship, grant, or before you file your tax return for 2002, simply(privately owned profit-making) postsecondaryemployer-provided educational assis- reduce the amount of the expenses paid by theinstitutions. The educational institution shouldtance. See Adjustments to qualified ex-amount of the refund received. If you receive thebe able to tell you if it is an eligible educationalpenses, next. refund after you file your 2002 tax return, seeinstitution.
When Must the Credit Be Repaid (Recaptured),
Adjustments to qualified expenses.If you later.Related expenses. Student-activity fees andpay qualified higher education expenses withfees for course-related books, supplies, andcertain tax-free funds, you cannot claim a creditequipment are included in qualified tuition andfor those amounts. You must reduce the quali-Expenses That Do Not Qualifyrelated expenses only if the fees must be paidfied expenses by the amount of any tax-freeto the institution as a condition of enrollment oreducational assistance you received. Qualified tuition and related expenses do notattendance.
include the cost of:In the following examples, assume that eachTax-free educational assistance could in-
student is an eligible student at an eligible edu-clude: • Insurance,cational institution.
• Medical expenses (including student• Scholarships,
health fees),Example 1. Jackson is a sophomore in Uni-• Pell grants,versity V’s degree program in dentistry. This • Room and board,year, in addition to tuition, he is required to pay a• Employer-provided educational assis-
• Transportation, orfee to the university for the rental of the dentaltance,
equipment he will use in this program. Because • Similar personal, living or family expenses.• Veterans’ educational assistance, andthe equipment rental fee must be paid to Univer-
This is true even if the fee must be paid to thesity V for enrollment and attendance, Jackson’s• Any other nontaxable payments (other
institution as a condition of enrollment or attend-equipment rental fee is a qualified related ex- than gifts, bequests, or inheritances) re-
ance.pense. ceived for education expenses.
Chapter 36 Education Credits Page 241

Page 244 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified tuition and related expenses gener- the money as a gift from his grandmother and, in 3) Was enrolled at least half-time in a pro-
ally do not include expenses that relate to any turn, paying his qualified tuition and related ex- gram that leads to a degree, certificate, or
course of instruction or other education that in- penses himself. other recognized educational credential for
volves sports, games, or hobbies, or any non- Unless an exemption for Todd is claimed on at least one academic period beginning in
credit course. However, if the course of someone else’s return, only Todd can use the 2002.
instruction or other education is part of the payment to claim an education credit.4) Was free of any federal or state felonystudent’s degree program or, in the case of the If Todd’s parents, or anyone else, claims anconviction for possessing or distributing alifetime learning credit, is taken by the student to exemption for him on their tax return, whoevercontrolled substance as of the end ofacquire or improve job skills, these expenses claims the exemption may be able to use the2002.can qualify. expenses to claim an education credit. In this
case, Todd cannot claim an education credit.
Completion of first 2 years.A student who
Who Can Claim a was awarded 2 years of academic credit forDoes the Amount of Your postsecondary work completed before 2002 hasDependent’s Expenses?
completed the first 2 years of postsecondaryIncome Affect the Amount
If there are qualified higher education costs for education. This student would not be an eligibleof Your Credit?your dependent for a year, either you or your student for purposes of the Hope credit.
dependent, but not both of you, can claim an Any academic credit awarded solely on theThe amount of your education credit is phasededucation credit for that dependent’s expenses basis of the student’s performance on profi-out (gradually reduced) if your modified adjustedfor that year. ciency examinations is disregarded in determin-gross income (MAGI) is between $41,000 andFor you to claim an education credit for your ing whether the student has completed 2 years$51,000 ($82,000 and $102,000 if you file a jointdependent’s expenses, you must also claim an of postsecondary education.return). You cannot claim any education credit ifexemption for that person. You do this by listingyour MAGI is $51,000 or more ($102,000 orhis or her name and other required information Enrolled at least half-time.A student wasmore if you file a joint return).on line 6c, Form 1040 (or Form 1040A). (See enrolled at least half-time if the student was
chapter 3 for details on exemptions for depen-How the phaseout works. The phaseout (re-taking at least half the normal full-time work load
dents.) duction) works on a sliding scale. The higherfor his or her course of study.
your MAGI, the more your credit is reduced. YouThe standard for what is half of the normal
figure the reduction, if any, in Part III of Formfull-time work load is determined by each eligibleIF you... THEN only... 8863. educational institution. However, the standards
claim an you can claim a may not be lower than those established by theModified adjusted gross income (MAGI).exemption on your credit based on that Department of Education under the Higher Edu-For most taxpayers, MAGI is the adjusted grosstax return for a student’s expenses. cation Act of 1965.income (AGI) as figured on their federal incomedependent who is The student cannot tax return.an eligible student claim the credit. Amount of CreditMAGI when using Form 1040A. If you filedo not claim an the student can Form 1040A, your MAGI is the AGI on line 22 ofThe amount of the Hope credit (per eligible stu-exemption on your claim a credit. Youthat form. dent) is the sum of:tax return for a cannot claim the
MAGI when using Form 1040. If you filedependent who is credit based on this 1) 100% of the first $1,000 of qualified tuitionForm 1040, your MAGI is the AGI on line 36 ofan eligible student student’s expenses. and related expenses you paid for the eli-that form. If you excluded income earned abroad(even if entitled to gible student, andor from certain U.S. territories or possessions,the exemption)
you must increase your AGI by the following2) 50% of the next $1,000 of qualified tuition
amounts. and related expenses you paid for that stu-
Expenses paid by dependent. If you claim dent.1) Foreign earned income exclusion,an exemption on your tax return for an eligible
The maximum amount of Hope credit youstudent who is your dependent, treat any ex-2) Foreign housing exclusion, can claim in 2002 is $1,500 times the number ofpenses paid by the student as if you had paid
eligible students. You can claim the full $1,5003) Exclusion of income for bona fide re-them. Include these expenses when figuring the
for each eligible student for whom you paid atsidents of American Samoa, andamount of your Hope or lifetime learning credit.
least $2,000 of qualified expenses. However,4) Exclusion of income from Puerto Rico.Qualified tuition and related expenses the credit may be reduced based on your modi-
paid directly to an eligible educational fied adjusted gross income (MAGI). See Does
institution for your dependent under a the Amount of Your Income Affect the Amount of
TIP
court-approved divorce decree are treated as Your Credit, earlier.
paid by your dependent. Hope Credit Example. Jon and Karen are married and
Expenses paid by others.If someone other file a joint tax return. For 2002, they claim anYou may be able to claim a Hope credit of up tothan you, your spouse, or your dependent (such exemption for their dependent daughter on their$1,500 for qualified tuition and related expensesas a relative or former spouse) makes a pay- tax return. Their MAGI is $70,000. Their daugh-paid for each eligible student.ment directly to an eligible educational institution ter is in her sophomore (second) year of studies
to pay for an eligible student’s qualified tuition at the local university. Jon and Karen paid quali-
Eligible Studentand related expenses, the student is treated as fied tuition and related expenses of $4,300 in
receiving the payment from the other person. 2002.
For purposes of the Hope credit, an eligibleThe student is treated as paying the qualified Jon and Karen, their daughter, and the local
student is a student who meets all of the follow-tuition and related expenses to the institution. If university meet all of the requirements for the
ing requirements. you claim an exemption on your tax return for Hope credit. Jon and Karen can claim a $1,500
the student, you are considered to have paid the Hope credit in 2002. This is 100% of the first1) Did not have expenses that were used toexpenses. $1,000 of qualified tuition and related expenses,figure a Hope credit in any 2 earlier taxplus 50% of the next $1,000.years.Example. Ms. Allen makes a payment di-
rectly to an eligible educational institution in 2) Had not completed the first 2 years of How to figure the credit.The Hope credit is
2002 for her grandson Todd’s qualified tuition postsecondary education (generally, the figured in Parts I and III of Form 8863. An illus-
and related expenses. For purposes of claiming freshman and sophomore years of college) trated example using Form 8863 appears at the
an education credit, Todd is treated as receiving before 2002. end of this chapter.
Page 242 Chapter 36 Education Credits

Page 245 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How to figure the credit.The lifetime learning
credit is figured in Parts II and III of Form 8863.Lifetime Learning When Must the CreditAn illustrated example using Form 8863 ap-
pears at the end of this chapter.
Be RepaidCredit
(Recaptured)?You may be able to claim a lifetime learning
credit of up to $1,000 for qualified tuition and
Choosing Which Credit If, after you file your 2002 tax return, you receiverelated expenses paid for all eligible students
tax-free educational assistance for, or a refundenrolled in eligible educational institutions.
To Claim of, an expense you used to figure an educationThe lifetime learning credit is different from
credit on that return, you may have to repay allthe Hope credit in the following ways. For each student, you can elect for any tax yearor part of the credit. You must refigure your
only one of the credits. For example, if you electeducation credit(s) as if the assistance or refund1) The lifetime learning credit is not based onto take the Hope credit for a child on your 2002was received in 2002. Subtract the amount ofthe student’s work load. It is allowed fortax return, you cannot, for that same child, alsothe refigured credit from the amount of the creditone or more courses. claim the lifetime learning credit for 2002.you claimed. The result is the amount you must
2) Expenses for undergraduate- and repay. You add the repayment (recapture) toTax credit for one student.You can claim thegraduate-level degree work are eligible. your tax liability for the year you receive theHope credit for a student only if that student hasAlso eligible for the lifetime learning credit assistance or refund (see the instructions fornot completed the first 2 years of postsecondaryare nondegree courses taken to acquire or your tax return for that year). Your original 2002education. In the case where it takes the studentimprove job skills. tax return does not change.longer than 2 calendar years to complete these
first 2 years, you can claim the Hope credit3) Expenses related to a course of instruction
based on the tuition and expenses of the sameor other education that involves sports,
student only twice during that longer period. Ifgames, hobbies, or other noncredit
the student qualifies, you can claim the lifetimecourses are eligible for the lifetime learning Illustrated Examplelearning credit for years you do not claim thecredit if they are part of a course of in-
Hope credit.struction to acquire or improve job skills. Dave and Valerie Jones are married and file a
joint tax return. For 2002, they claim exemptionsTax credits for more than one student.If4) There is no limit on the number of years for their two dependent children on their taxyou pay qualified expenses for more than onefor which the lifetime learning credit can be return. Their modified adjusted gross income isstudent in the same year, you can choose toclaimed for each student. It is not limited to $84,000. Their tax before credits is $10,625.take credits on a per-student, per-year basis.students in the first 2 years of postsecon- Their son, Sean, will receive his bachelor’s de-This means that, for example, you can claim thedary education. gree in psychology from the state college in MayHope credit for one student and the lifetime
5) The amount you can claim as a lifetime 2003. Their daughter, Corey, enrolled full-timelearning credit for another student in the same
learning credit does not change based on at that same college in August 2001 to begintax year.
the number of students for whom you pay working on her bachelor’s degree in physical
education. In December 2001, Dave and Valeriequalified expenses.
paid $2,000 for each child’s tuition for the winter
2002 semester. In July 2002, they paid $2,200 inHow Is the CreditAmount of Credit tuition costs for each of them for the fall 2002
semester. 
Claimed?The amount of the lifetime learning credit is 20% Dave and Valerie, their children, and theof the first $5,000 of qualified tuition and related college meet all of the requirements for theYou claim education credits by completing Formexpenses you paid for all eligible students. The higher education credits. Because Sean is be-8863 and submitting it with your Form 1040 ormaximum amount of lifetime learning credit you yond the second (sophomore) year of his post-1040A. Enter the credit on Form 1040, line 48, orcan claim for 2002 is $1,000 (20% × $5,000). secondary education, his expenses do notForm 1040A, line 31. A filled-in Form 8863 isHowever, that amount may be reduced based qualify for the Hope credit. But, amounts paid forshown in the Illustrated Example at the end ofon your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI). Sean’s expenses in 2002 for academic periodsthis chapter.See Does the Amount of Your Income Affect the beginning after 2001 and before April 1, 2003,An eligible educational institution (such as a
Amount of Your Credit, earlier. qualify for the lifetime learning credit. Corey is incollege or university) that received payment of
her first (freshman) year of postsecondary edu-qualified tuition and related expenses in 2002,
Example. Bruce and Toni are married and cation and expenses paid for her in 2002 forgenerally must issue Form 1098–T , Tuition
file a joint tax return. For 2002, their MAGI is academic periods beginning after 2001 andPayments Statement, to each student by Janu-
$50,000. Toni is attending the community col- before April 1, 2003, qualify for the Hope credit.ary 31, 2003. The information on Form 1098–T
lege (an eligible educational institution) to earn Dave and Valerie figure their tentative edu-will help you determine whether you can claim
credits toward an associate’s degree in nursing. cation credits for 2002, $1,940, as shown on linean education tax credit for 2002. The eligible
She already has a bachelor’s degree in history 8 of the completed Form 8863. They cannoteducational institution may ask for a completed
and wants to become a nurse. In August 2002, claim the full amount because their modifiedForm W–9S , Request for Student’s or
Toni paid $4,000 for her fall 2002 semester. adjusted gross income is more than $82,000.Borrower’s Social Security Number and Certifi-
Bruce and Toni can claim an $800 (20% × They carry the amount from line 18 of Formcation, or similar statement, to obtain the
$4,000) lifetime learning credit on their 2002 8863 to line 48 of Form 1040, and they attachstudent’s name, address, and taxpayer identifi-
the Form 8863 to their return.joint tax return. cation number.
Chapter 36 Education Credits Page 243

Page 246 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jones 137 00 9642 2,000 1,000 500
1,500
5001,000
Sean Jones 246 00 9731 2,200
2,200
2,200
440
1,940
1,746
10,625
1,746
-0-
10,625
Corey
1,000
900
102,000
84,000
18,000
20,000
Dave and Valerie Jones 987 00 6543
OMB No. 1545-1618Education Credits
Form 8863
/H17075See instructions.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 50
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Hope Credit. Caution: The Hope credit may be claimed for no more than 2 tax years for the same student.
1
2
3
Lifetime Learning Credit
Form 8863 (2002)
Part I
Part II
3
(a) Student’s name
(as shown on page 1
of your tax return)
Cat. No. 25379M
Add the amounts in columns (d) and (f)
Tentative Hope credit. Add the amounts on line 2, columns (d) and (f). If you are claiming
the lifetime learning credit, go to Part II; otherwise, go to Part III /H17075
8
Add the amounts on line 4, column (c), and enter the total
9
9
Enter the smaller of line 5 or $5,000
10
Subtract line 10 from line 9. If line 10 is equal to or more than
line 9, stop; you cannot take any education credits
10
12
16
17
4
11
11
15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3.
(f) Enter one-half
of the amount in
column (e)
(e) Subtract
column (d) from
column (c)
(d) Enter the
smaller of the
amount in
column (c) or
$1,000
(c) Qualified
expenses
(but do not
enter more than
$2,000 for each
student). See
instructions
2
Caution: You
cannot take the
Hope credit and
the lifetime learning
credit for the same
student.
(a) Student’s name (as shown on page 1
of your tax return)
First name Last name
(c) Qualified
expenses. See
instructions
Tentative lifetime learning credit. Multiply line 6 by 20% (.20) and go to Part III /H17075
5
6
7
5
6
7
Part III Allowable Education Credits
Tentative education credits. Add lines 3 and 78
Enter: $102,000 if married filing jointly; $51,000 if single, head of
household, or qualifying widow(er)
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 36
* 
, or Form 1040A, line 22
If line 11 is equal to or more than line 12, enter the amount from line 8 on line 14 and
go to line 15. If line 11 is less than line 12, divide line 11 by line 12. Enter the result as
a decimal (rounded to at least three places)
13
Multiply line 8 by line 13 /H1707514
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040A, line 28 15
Enter the total, if any, of your credits from Form 1040, lines 45 through 47, or 
Form 1040A, lines 29 and 30
16
Subtract line 16 from line 15. If line 16 is equal to or more than line 15, stop; you cannot
take any education credits /H17075
17
18 Education credits. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 17 here and on Form 1040,
line 48, or Form 1040A, line 31 /H1707518
14
13 /H11003.
(Hope and Lifetime Learning Credits)
(b) Student’s
social security
number (as
shown on page 1
of your tax return)
(b) Student’s social security
number (as shown on page
1 of your tax return)
Enter: $20,000 if married filing jointly; $10,000 if single, head of
household, or qualifying widow(er) 12
*See Pub. 970 for the amount to enter if you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ, or 4563 or you are excluding income from Puerto Ric o.
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
2002
Last name
First name
Page 244 Chapter 36 Education Credits

Page 247 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How do you get the earned income credit?• The amount on Form 1040, line 21, in-To claim the EIC, you must:cludes an amount from Form 8814,
Parent’s Election To Report Child’s Inter-37. 1) Qualify by meeting certain rules, andest and Dividends.
2) File a tax return, even if you:• Your investment income (Rule 5) is $2,550
or more and you are filing Form 4797, a) Do not owe any tax,Earned Income Sales of Business Property. b) Did not earn enough money to file a
• You are filing Schedule E, Supplemental return, or
Credit Income and Loss (Form 1040). c) Did not have income taxes withheld
• You are reporting income or a loss from from your pay.
the rental of personal property not used in
When you complete your return, you cana trade or business.Important Changes for
figure your EIC by using a worksheet in the
instructions for Form 1040, Form 1040A, orFor information on how you can get Publica-2002
Form 1040EZ. Or, if you prefer, you can let thetion 596, Earned Income Credit, or other free
IRS figure the credit for you.IRS publications, see How To Get Tax Help inNew definition of earned income. Earned
the back of this publication.income no longer includes nontaxable em-
ployee compensation. See Rule 6 and Rule 14. How will this chapter help you?Advance payment of the earned income
This chapter will explain the following:credit in your paycheck.If you qualify for theElimination of modified adjusted gross in-
earned income credit in 2003, you can receivecome (AGI).  You no longer need to figure • What rules you must meet to qualify forpart of it in each paycheck throughout the year.modified AGI. Your EIC is figured using your the EIC,See Advance Earned Income Credit, later, forAGI, not modified AGI. See Rule 15.
more information. • How to figure the EIC, andNew rules for persons with same qualifying
• How to get advance payment of the EIC inchild.  New rules determine which person canEarned income credit has no effect on cer-
your paycheck.claim the EIC on the basis of a qualifying childtain welfare benefits.Any refund you receive
when two or more persons have the same quali-because of the EIC and any advance EIC pay-
To learn about the rules you must meet, firstfying child and both claim the credit using thatments you receive generally will not be used to
read Do You Qualify for the Credit, later.child. See Rule 8. determine whether you are eligible for the fol-
lowing benefit programs, or how much you canNew definition of eligible foster child.There Useful Itemsreceive from these programs.is a new definition of an eligible foster child in
You may want to see:Rule 7. The child has to live with you only for• Medicaid and supplemental security in-
more than half of the year, instead of the wholecome (SSI). Publicationyear.
• Food stamps. ❏ 533 Self-Employment TaxReduction of EIC by alternative minimum tax• Low-income housing. ❏ 596 Earned Income Crediteliminated.Your EIC is no longer reduced by
Temporary assistance for needy familiesthe amount of alternative minimum tax shown on
Form (and Instructions)your return. (TANF) benefits may be affected. Please check
with your state. ❏ Schedule EIC Earned Income CreditEarned income amount is more. The
(Qualifying Child Information)amount you can earn and still get the credit hasSocial security numbers.To claim the EIC,
increased for 2002. The amount you earn mustyou must have a valid social security number❏ Schedule SE (Form 1040)
be less than: (SSN) for you and your spouse (if filing a joint Self-Employment Tax
return) and any qualifying children. If an SSN is• $29,201 ($30,201 for married filing jointly) ❏ W–5 Earned Income Credit Advancemissing or incorrect, you may not get the credit.with one qualifying child, Payment CertificateSee Rule 1, later.
• $33,178 ($34,178 for married filing jointly) ❏ 8862 Information To Claim Earned
Form 8862 to claim EIC after disallowance.with more than one qualifying child, or Income Credit After Disallowance
If your EIC for any year after 1996 was denied or• $11,060 ($12,060 for married filing jointly)reduced for any reason other than a mathemati-if you do not have a qualifying child.cal or clerical error, you must attach a completed
Form 8862, Information To Claim Earned In-
Investment income amount is more. The come Credit After Disallowance,  to your next Do You Qualify for themaximum amount of investment income you canreturn if you wish to claim the EIC. The date onhave and still get the credit has increased forwhich your EIC was denied and the date onCredit?2002. You can have investment income up towhich you file your 2002 return affect whether$2,550. For most people, investment income isyou need to attach Form 8862 to your 2002To see if you can claim the EIC, you must firsttaxable interest and dividends, tax-exempt inter- meet all of the rules explained in Part A, Rulesreturn or to a later return. See chapter 5 inest, and capital gain net income. To get more for Everyone. Then you must meet the rules inPublication 596 for more information.detailed information, see Rule 5. Part B, Rules If you Have a Qualifying Child, or
Part C, Rules If You Do Not Have a Qualifying
Child. There are two final rules you must meet in
Part D, Figuring and Claiming the EIC. YouIntroduction qualify for the credit if you meet all the rules inImportant Reminders
each part that applies to you. For example:The earned income credit (EIC) is a tax credit for
certain people who work and have earned in-Certain people must use Publication 596. • If you have a qualifying child, the rules income under $34,178. A tax credit usually meansCertain people must use Publication 596 to see Parts A, B, and D apply to you, ormore money in your pocket. It reduces theif they meet the rules to take the EIC. You must
amount of tax you owe. The EIC may also give• If you do not have a qualifying child, theuse Publication 596 if any of the following situa-
rules in Parts A, C, and D apply to you.tions applies to you. you a refund.
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 245

Page 248 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 37–1, Earned Income Credit in a Nut- If you meet all six rules in this part, then readRule 2. Your Filing Statusshell. Use Table 37–1 as a guide to Parts A, either Part B or Part C (whichever applies) for
Cannot Be Married FilingB, C, and D. The table is a summary list of all the more rules you must meet.
rules in each part. Each rule listed has a rule Separatelynumber. Use the rule number to find a discus-Rule 1. You Must Have asion of that rule in this chapter. If you are married, you usually must file a jointValid Social Security return to claim the EIC. Your filing status cannotDo you have a qualifying child?Basically, a be “Married filing separately.”Number (SSN)qualifying child is a child who meets all of the
following qualifications. Spouse did not live with you.If you are mar-To claim the EIC, you (and your spouse if filing a
ried and your spouse did not live in your home atjoint return) must have a valid SSN. Any qualify-1) Must be your son, daughter, adopted child, any time during the last 6 months of the year,ing child listed on Schedule EIC must also havegrandchild, stepchild, or eligible foster you may be able to file as head of household,a valid SSN. (See Rule 7 if you have a qualifyingchild. Your brother, sister, stepbrother, or instead of married filing separately. In that case,child.)stepsister (or the child or grandchild of you may be able to claim the EIC. For detailedyour brother, sister, stepbrother, or step-Valid SSN. A valid SSN is one that has beeninformation about filing as head of household,sister) may also be a qualifying child if youissued by the Social Security Administrationsee chapter 2.care for this individual as you would your(SSA). However, if your social security card (or
own child. your spouse’s if filing a joint return) says “NotRule 3. You Must Be avalid for employment,” and your SSN was is-2) Must (at the end of 2002) be under age 19,
sued so that you (or your spouse) could get aU.S. Citizen or Residentunder age 24 and a full-time student, or
federally funded benefit, you cannot get the EIC.any age and permanently and totally dis- Alien All YearAn example of a federally funded benefit isabled during the year.
Medicaid. You cannot claim the earned income credit if you3) Must have lived with you in the United If you have a card with the legend “Not validare a nonresident alien for any part of the year,States for more than half of 2002. for employment,” and your immigration statusunless:has changed so that you are now a U.S. citizenSee Rule 7 for more detailed information.
or permanent resident, ask the SSA for a new1) You are married to a U.S. citizen or a resi-social security card without the legend. dent alien, andIf Improper Claim
U. S. citizen.If you were a U. S. citizen when2) You choose to be treated as a resident forMade in Prior Year you received your SSN, you have a valid SSN.all of 2002 by filing a joint return. If you
need more information on making thisIf your EIC for any year after 1996 was denied orValid for work only with INS authorization. choice, get Publication 519, U.S. Taxreduced for any reason other than a mathemati-If your social security card reads “Valid for workGuide for Aliens.cal or clerical error, you must attach a completedonly with INS authorization,” you have a validForm 8862 to your next tax return if you wish toSSN.claim the EIC. The date on which your EIC was Note. If you make the choice in (2) above,
denied and the date on which you file your 2002SSN missing or incorrect.If an SSN for youyou and your spouse are taxed on your world-
return affect whether you need to attach Formor your spouse is missing from your tax return orwide income. You cannot claim any tax treaty
8862 to your 2002 return or to a later return.is incorrect, you may not get the EIC. benefits as a resident of a foreign country during
a tax year in which the choice is in effect.If your EIC was denied or reduced as a result
Other taxpayer identification number.Youof a mathematical or clerical error, do not attach
cannot get the EIC if, instead of an SSN, you (orForm 8862 to your next tax return. For example, Rule 4. You Cannot Fileyour spouse if filing a joint return) have an indi-if your arithmetic is incorrect, the IRS can correct
vidual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).Form 2555 or Formit. If you do not provide a correct social security
ITINs are issued by the Internal Revenue Serv-number, the IRS can deny the EIC. These kinds 2555–EZice to noncitizens who cannot get an SSN.of errors are called mathematical or clerical er-
rors. You cannot claim the earned income credit if youNo SSN. If you do not have a valid SSN, put
If your EIC for any year after 1996 was de- file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or Form“No” directly to the right of line 64 (Form 1040),
nied and it was determined that your error was 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.line 41 (Form 1040A), or on line 8 (Form
due to reckless or intentional disregard of the You file these forms to exclude income earned in1040EZ). You cannot claim the EIC.
EIC rules, then you cannot claim the EIC for the foreign countries from your gross income, or to
Getting an SSN. If you (or your spouse ifnext 2 years. If your error was due to fraud, then deduct or exclude a foreign housing amount.
filing a joint return) do not have an SSN, you canyou cannot claim the EIC for the next 10 years. U.S. possessions are not foreign countries. See
apply for one by filing Form SS–5, ApplicationThe date on which your EIC was denied and the Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
for a Social Security Card, with the Social Secur-date on which you file your 2002 return affect the Resident Aliens Abroad, for more detailed infor-
ity Administration.years for which you are prohibited from claiming mation.
the EIC. Filing deadline approaching and still no
SSN. If the filing deadline is approaching andRule 5. Your InvestmentMore information.See chapter 5 in Publica-you still do not have an SSN, you have twotion 596 for more detailed information about the Income Must Be $2,550 orchoices.disallowance period and Form 8862. Less1) Request an automatic 4-month extension
of time to file your return. You can get thisYou cannot claim the earned income credit un-extension by filing Form 4868, Application less your investment income is $2,550 or less. Iffor Automatic Extension of Time to Fileyour investment income is more than $2,550,Part A. Rules for U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.  For you cannot claim the credit. For most people,more information, see chapter 1. investment income is the total of the followingEveryone
amounts.2) File the return on time without claiming the
This part of the chapter discusses Rules 1 EIC. After receiving the SSN, file an • Taxable interest (line 8a of Form 1040 orthrough 6. You must meet all six rules to qualifyamended return (Form 1040X, Amended 1040A).for the earned income credit. If you do not meetU.S. Individual Income Tax Return) claim-
all six rules, you cannot get the credit and you doing the EIC. Attach a filled-in Schedule EIC• Tax-exempt interest (line 8b of Form 1040
not need to read the rest of the chapter. if you have a qualifying child. or 1040A).
Page 246 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 249 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 37–1. Earned Income Credit in a Nutshell
Part B Part CPart A Rules If You Have Rules If You Do NotRules for Everyone a Qualifying Child Have a Qualifying Child
Rule 1. You must have a valid socialRule 7. Your child must meet the relationship,Rule 10. You must be at least age 25 but
security number. age, and residency tests. under age 65.
Rule 2. Your filing status cannot beRule 8. Your qualifying child cannot be usedRule 11. You cannot be the dependent of
“Married filing separately.” by more than one person to claim the EIC. another person.
Rule 3. You must be a U.S. citizen orRule 9. You cannot be a qualifying child ofRule 12. You cannot be a qualifying child
resident alien all year. another person. of another person.
Rule 4. You cannot file Form 2555 or Rule 13. You must have lived in the
Form 2555–EZ (relating to foreign United States more than half the year.
earned income).
Rule 5. Your investment income must
be $2,550 or less.
Rule 6. You must have earned income.
Part D
Figuring and Claiming the EIC
Rule 14. Your earned income must be less than:
• $33,178 ($34,178 for married filing jointly) if you have
more than one qualifying child,
• $29,201 ($30,201 for married filing jointly) if you have
one qualifying child, or
• $11,060 ($12,060 for married filing jointly) if you do not
have a qualifying child.
Rule 15. Your AGI must be less than:
• $33,178 ($34,178 for married filing jointly) if you have
more than one qualifying child,
• $29,201 ($30,201 for married filing jointly) if you have
one qualifying child, or
• $11,060 ($12,060 for married filing jointly) if you do not
have a qualifying child.
• Dividend income (line 9 of Form 1040 or • Form 4029, Application for ExemptionEarned Income
1040A). from Social Security and Medicare Taxes
Earned income includes: and Waiver of Benefits.• Capital gain net income (line 13 of Form
1040, if more than zero, or line 10 of Form1) Wages, salaries, and tips, Each approved form exempts certain income1040A). from social security taxes. Each form is dis-2) Net earnings from self-employment, and
If you file Form 1040EZ, your investment income cussed in this section in terms of what is or is not3) Gross income received as a statutory em-is the total of the amount of line 2 and the earned income for purposes of the EIC.ployee.amount of any tax-exempt interest you wrote to Form 4361. Even if you have an approvedthe right of the words “Form 1040EZ” on line 2. Form 4361, amounts you received for perform-Wages, salaries, and tips.Wages, salaries,However, if you are reporting income from the ing ministerial duties as an employee count asand tips you receive for working are reported torental of personal property on Form 1040, line earned income. This includes wages, salaries,you on Form W–2, box 1. You should report21, or are filing Schedule E (Form 1040), or tips, and other taxable employee compensation.these on line 1 (Form 1040EZ) or line 7 (FormsForm 8814, or are reporting a gain on Form Amounts you received for performing ministerial1040A and 1040).4797, see Rule 5 in chapter 1 of Publication 596 duties, but not as an employee, do not count as
for more information. earned income. Examples include fees for per-Self-employed persons and statutory em- forming marriages and honoraria for deliveringployees. If you are self-employed or receivedspeeches.Rule 6. You Must Have income as a statutory employee, you must use
the Form 1040 instructions or Publication 596 toEarned Income Form 4029. Even if you have an approvedsee if you qualify to get the EIC. Form 4029, all wages, salaries, tips, and other
This credit is called the “earned income” credit taxable employee compensation count as
because, to qualify, you must work and have earned income. However, amounts you re-Approved Form 4361 or Form 4029earned income. If you are married and file a joint ceived as a self-employed individual do not
return, you meet this rule if at least one spouse count as earned income. Also, in figuring earnedThis section is for persons who have an ap-works and has earned income. If you are an income, do not subtract losses on Schedule C,proved:employee, earned income includes all the taxa- C–EZ, or F from wages on line 7 of Form 1040.
ble income you get from your employer. If you• Form 4361, Application for Exemption
are self-employed or a statutory employee, youfrom Self-Employment Tax for Use by Min-
will figure your earned income on EIC Work- isters, Members of Religious Orders, and
sheet B in the instructions of Form 1040. Christian Science Practitioners, or
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 247

Page 250 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
rules for married taxpayers living apart (see An authorized placement agency includesDisability Benefits
Rule 2), and live in a state that has communityany person or court authorized by state law to
If you retired on disability, benefits you receiveproperty laws, your earned income for the EICplace children for legal adoption.
under your employer’s disability retirement plandoes not include any amount earned by your
are considered earned income until you reach Grandchild. For the EIC, this means any de-spouse that is treated as belonging to you under
minimum retirement age. Minimum retirement scendant of a son, daughter, stepchild, orthose laws. That amount is not earned income
age generally is the earliest age at which you adopted child. For example, a grandchild in-for the EIC, even though you must include it in
could have received a pension or annuity if you cludes your great-grandchild, great-your gross income on your income tax return.
were not disabled. You must report your taxable great-grandchild, etc.Your earned income includes the entire amount
disability payments on line 7 of either Form 1040you earned, even if part of it is treated as belong-
Child not a dependent.Your child does notor Form 1040A until you reach minimum retire-ing to your spouse under your state’s community
have to be your dependent to be a qualifyingment age. property laws.
child, unless he or she is married.Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
mum retirement age, payments you receive are Married child.If your child was married attaxable as a pension and are not considered the end of the year, he or she does not meet theearned income. Report taxable pension pay-Part B. Rules relationship test unless either of these two situa-ments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b (or tions applies to you: Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b). If You Have a
1) You can claim the child’s exemption, orDisability insurance payments.Payments
Qualifying Childyou received from a disability insurance policy 2) The reason you cannot claim the child’s
that you paid the premiums for are not earned exemption is that you gave that right toUse Part B if you:income. It does not matter whether you have your child’s other parent:
reached minimum retirement age. If this policy is1) Have a qualifying child, and a) When you completed Form 8332 or athrough your employer, the amount may be
similar written statement, or2) Have met all the rules in Part A.shown in box 12 of your Form W–2 with code
“J.” b) In a pre-1985 agreement (such as aThis part of the chapter discusses Rules 7
separation agreement or divorce de-through 9. You must meet all three of these
cree).rules, in addition to the rules in Parts A and D, toIncome That Is Not Earned Income qualify for the earned income credit with a quali-
fying child.Examples of items that are NOT earned income Eligible foster child.For the EIC, a person isYou must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A toinclude interest and dividends, pensions and your eligible foster child if both of the followingclaim the EIC with a qualifying child. (You cannotannuities, social security and railroad retirement are true.file Form 1040EZ). You must also completebenefits (including disability benefits), alimonySchedule EIC and attach it to your return. If youand child support, welfare benefits, workers’ 1) The child is placed with you by an author-meet all the rules in Part A and this part, readcompensation benefits, unemployment com- ized placement agency. An authorizedPart D to find out what to do next.pensation (insurance), nontaxable foster care placement agency includes a state or localpayments, and veterans’ benefits, including VA If you do not meet Rule 7, you do not government agency or court. It also in-rehabilitation payments. Do NOT include any of have a qualifying child. Read Part C to cludes a tax-exempt organization licensedthese items in your earned income. find out if you can get the earned in-CAUTION
!
by a state.
come credit without a qualifying child.Earnings while an inmate.Amounts received 2) You cared for that child as you would your
for work performed while an inmate in a penal own child.
institution are not earned income when figuringRule 7. Your Child Mustthe earned income credit. This includes
Example. Debbie, who is 12 years old, wasMeet the Relationship,amounts received through a work release pro-
placed in your care two years ago by an author-gram or while in a halfway house. Age, and Residency Tests ized agency responsible for placing children in
Nonqualified deferred compensation plan or foster homes. You care for her as you wouldYour child is a qualifying child if your child meetsa section 457 plan pension or annuity. your own child. Debbie is your eligible fosterthree tests. The three tests are:Amounts you received as a pension or annuity child.
from a nonqualified deferred compensation plan1) Relationship,or a nongovernmental section 457 plan and that
2) Age, andwere included in the total on line 7 (Form 1040 or Age Test
Form 1040A) or line 1 (Form 1040EZ) are not3) Residency.earned income. (This amount may be reported Your child must be:
The three tests are illustrated in Figurein box 11 of your Form W–2. If you received
37–1. The paragraphs that follow contain more1) Under age 19 at the end of 2002,such an amount, but box 11 is blank, contact
information about each test.your employer for the amount of the pension or 2) A full-time student under age 24 at the endannuity.) of 2002, or
Workfare payments. Nontaxable workfare 3) Permanently and totally disabled at anyRelationship Test
payments are not earned income for the EIC. time during 2002, regardless of age.
These are cash payments certain people re-Your child must be either your son, daughter,
The following example and definitions clarify theceive from a state or local agency that adminis-adopted child, stepchild, grandchild, or eligible
age test.ters public assistance programs funded underfoster child. Your brother, sister, stepbrother, or
the federal Temporary Assistance for Needystepsister (or the child or grandchild of yourExample. Your son turned 19 on DecemberFamilies (TANF) program in return for certainbrother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister) may10. Unless he was disabled or a full-time stu-work activities such as (1) work experience ac-also be a qualifying child if you care for thisdent, he is not a qualifying child because, at thetivities (including remodeling or repairing publicindividual as you would your own child. Theend of the year, he was not under age 19.housing) if sufficient private sector employmentfollowing definitions clarify the relationship test.
is not available, or (2) community service pro- Full-time student.A full-time student is a stu-Adopted child. Your adopted child includes agram activities. dent who is enrolled for the number of hours orchild placed with you for adoption by an author-
courses the school considers to be full-time at-Community property. If you are married, but ized placement agency, even if the adoption is
tendance.qualify to file as head of household under special not final.
Page 248 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 251 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
AND
AND
A qualifying child is a child who is your ...
Son
Daughter
Stepchild
Adopted child
Grandchild
Sister*
was at the end of 2002...
Under age 19
OR
Under age 24 and a student
Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year regardless of age.
who...
Lived with you in the United States
for more than half of 2002.
OR
Relationship
Age
Residency
Figure 37–1. Tests for Qualifying Child
Foster child (See Eligible foster child.)
Brother*
Stepsister*
Stepbrother*
* This relative (or his or her child or
grandchild) qualifies if you care for the
individual as you would your own child.
Student defined.To qualify as a student,Permanently and totally disabled. Your Extended active duty. Extended active
your child must be, during some part of each of child is permanently and totally disabled if both duty means you are called or ordered to duty for
any 5 calendar months during the calendar year: of the following apply. an indefinite period or for a period of more than
90 days. Once you begin serving your extended
1) A full-time student at a school that has a 1) He or she cannot engage in any substan-active duty, you are still considered to have been
regular teaching staff, course of study, and tial gainful activity because of a physical oron extended active duty even if you do not serve
regularly enrolled student body, or mental condition. more than 90 days.
2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm train- 2) A doctor determines the condition hasBirth or death of a child.A child who wasing course given by a school described in lasted or can be expected to last continu-born or died in 2002 is treated as having lived(1), or a state, county, or local govern- ously for at least a year or can lead towith you for all of 2002 if your home was thement. death. child’s home the entire time he or she was alive
in 2002.The 5 calendar months need not be consecu-
tive. Temporary absences. Count time that you orResidency TestSchool defined. A school can be an ele- your child is away from home on a temporary
mentary school, junior or senior high school, absence due to a special circumstance as timeYour child must have lived with you in the Unitedcollege, university, or technical, trade, or lived at home. Examples of a special circum-States for more than half of 2002. The followingmechanical school. However, on-the-job train- stance include:definitions clarify the residency test.ing courses, correspondence schools, and night • Illness,schools do not count as schools for the EIC. (ButUnited States.This means the 50 states and
• School attendance,see Night school, later.) the District of Columbia. It does not include U.S.
possessions, such as Guam and Puerto Rico. • Detention in a juvenile facility,Vocational high school students. Stu-
dents who work on co-op jobs in private industryHomeless shelter. Your home can be any • Business,as a part of a school’s regular course of class-location where you regularly live. You do not
• Vacation, androom and practical training are consideredneed a traditional home. For example, if your
full-time students. child lived with you for more than half the year in• Military service.
one or more homeless shelters, your childNight school. Your child is not a full-time
meets the residency test.student if he or she attends school only at night. Kidnapped child.A kidnapped child is treatedHowever, full-time attendance at a school mayMilitary personnel stationed outside the as living with you for more than half of the year ifinclude some attendance at night as part of aUnited States. U.S. military personnel sta- the child lived with you for more than half thefull-time course of study. tioned outside the United States on extended part of the year before the date of the kidnap-
active duty are considered to live in the United ping. The child must be presumed by law en-
States during that duty period for purposes of forcement authorities to have been kidnapped
the EIC. by someone who is not a member of your family
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 249

Page 252 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or your child’s family. This treatment applies for year, if two of the persons are parents of EIC, only your ex-husband will be allowed to
all years until the child is returned. However, the the child, claim the credit using this child. This is because,
last year this treatment can apply is the earlier during 2002, the child lived with him longer than3) The parent with the highest AGI if the childof: with you. You cannot claim the EIC for personslived with each parent for the same either with or without a qualifying child.amount of time during the tax year, or1) The year there is a determination that the
child is dead, or 4) The person with the highest AGI, if none ofExample 5. You, your 5-year-old son, and
the persons is the child’s parent. your son’s father lived together all year. You and2) The year the child would have reached
your son’s father are not married. Your son is aage 18.
qualifying child of both you and his father be-
If your qualifying child has been kidnapped cause he meets the relationship, age, and resi-If another person claims the EIC using this
and meets these requirements, enter “KC,” in- dency tests for both you and his father. Youchild. If your qualifying child is treated under
stead of a number, on line 6 of Schedule EIC. earned $8,000 and your son’s father earnedthis rule as the qualifying child of another person
$18,000. Neither of you had any other income.for 2002, you cannot take the EIC using thisSocial security number.Your qualifying child You and your son’s father may choose which ofqualifying child. You may be able to take the EICmust have a valid social security number (SSN) you will treat the child as a qualifying child tousing a different qualifying child, but you cannotunless the child was born and died in 2002. You claim the EIC. However, if you and he are una-take the EIC for people who do not have acannot claim the EIC on the basis of a qualifying ble to agree and both use the child to claim thequalifying child. If you do not have another quali-child if: EIC, only the father will be allowed to claim thefying child, STOP ; you cannot take the EIC. Put
credit using this child. This is because his AGI“No” beside line 64 (Form 1040) or line 41 (Form1) Your qualifying child’s SSN is missing from
($18,000) was more than your AGI ($8,000).1040A).your tax return or is incorrect,
You cannot claim the EIC for persons either with2) Your qualifying child’s social security cardExample 1.  You and your 2-year-old son or without a qualifying child.says “Not valid for employment” and waslived with your mother all year. You are 25 yearsissued only for use in getting a federally Example 6. You and your 7-year-old nieceold. Your only income was $9,000 from afunded benefit, or lived with your mother all year. You care for yourpart-time job. Your mother’s only income was
niece as you would your own child. You are 25$20,000 from her job. Your son is a qualifying3) Instead of an SSN, your qualifying child
years old, and your only income was $9,300child of both you and your mother because hehas:
from a part-time job. Your mother’s only incomemeets the relationship, age, and residency tests
a) An individual taxpayer identification was $15,000 from her job. Your niece is a quali-for both you and your mother. However, only
number (ITIN), which is issued to a fying child of both you and your mother becauseone of you can use him to claim the EIC. You
noncitizen who cannot get an SSN, or she meets the relationship, age, and residencyand your mother may choose which of you will
tests for both you and your mother. However,treat the child as a qualifying child to claim theb) An adoption taxpayer identification only one of you can treat her as a qualifying childEIC. However, if you and she disagree and bothnumber (ATIN), which is issued to to claim the EIC. You and your mother mayuse him to claim the EIC, you as the child’sadopting parents who cannot get an choose which of you will use the child to claimparent will be the only one allowed to claim theSSN for the child being adopted until the EIC. However, if you and she are unable tocredit using this child.the adoption is final. agree and both use the child to claim the EIC,
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in only your mother will be allowed to claim theIf you have two qualifying children and onlyExample 1, except that you also have two other credit using this child. This is because her AGIone has a valid SSN, you can claim the EIC onlyyoung children who lived with you and your ($15,000) is higher than your AGI ($9,300).on the basis of that child. For more informationmother and are qualifying children of both youabout SSNs, see  Rule 1. and your mother. Only one of you can use each
Rule 9. You Cannot Be achild to claim the EIC. However, you and your
Rule 8. Your Qualifying Qualifying Child ofmother can split the three qualifying children
between you. For example, you can use oneChild Cannot Be Used By Another Personchild to claim the EIC and your mother can use
More Than One Person To the other two. You are a qualifying child of another person
Claim the EIC (your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if all
Example 3. The facts are the same as inof the following statements are true.
Example 1, except that you are only 18 yearsSometimes a child meets the rules to be a quali-
old. This means you are a qualifying child of your• You are that person’s son, daughter,fying child of more than one person. However,
mother. Because of Rule 9, you cannot claim the adopted child, stepchild, grandchild, or eli-only one person can treat that child as a qualify-
EIC. Only your mother may be able to treat yourgible foster child. Or, you are that person’sing child and claim the EIC using that child. The
son as a qualifying child to claim the EIC. brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsisterparagraphs that follow will help you decide who
(or the child or grandchild of that person’scan claim the EIC when more than one person
Example 4. You, your husband, and your brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister)has the same qualifying child.
10-year-old son lived together until July 1, 2002,for whom that person cares as his or her
You can choose which person will claim thewhen your husband moved out of the house- own child.
EIC.  If you and someone else have the same hold. In July and August, your son lived with your• At the end of the year you were under agequalifying child, you and the other person(s) canhusband. In September and October, the boy 19, under age 24 and a full-time student,decide who will claim the credit using that quali-lived with you. On November 1, 2002, you andor any age if you were permanently andfying child. But if you and the other person(s)your husband were divorced. For the rest of thetotally disabled at any time during thecannot agree and more than one person claimsyear, your son lived with your ex-husband, whoyear.the credit using the same child, the tie-breakerwas given custody. Your son is a qualifying child
rule (explained in the next paragraph) applies. Ifof both you and your ex-husband because your• You lived with that person in the United
the other person is your spouse and you file ason lived with each of you for more than half theStates for more than half of the year.
joint return, this rule does not apply. year and because he met the relationship andFor more details about the tests to be a qualify-Under the tie-breaker rule, the child can beage tests for both of you. You earned $11,000ing child, see Rule 7.treated as a qualifying child only by: during the year and your ex-husband earned
$25,000. Neither of you had any other income.If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) are1) The parent, if only one of the persons isYou and your ex-husband may choose which a qualifying child of another person, you cannotthe child’s parent, of you will treat the child as a qualifying child to claim the EIC. This is true even if the person for
2) The parent with whom the child lived for claim the EIC. However, if you and he are una- whom you are a qualifying child does not claim
the longest period of time during the tax ble to agree and both use the child to claim the the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim the EIC.
Page 250 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 253 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Put “No” beside line 64 (Form 1040) or line 41• You checked the “No” box on line 5 of community center where you went twice a week
(Form 1040A). to answer telephones. You earned $1,500 forForm 1040EZ.
the year. Because you meet the relationship,
Example. You and your daughter lived with age, and residency tests, you are a qualifyingIf you are filing a joint return, you meet this
your mother all year. You are 22 years old and child of your mother. She can claim the EIC ifrule if:
attended a trade school full time. You had a she meets all the other requirements. Because
• You checked both box 6a and box 6b onpart-time job and earned $5,700. You had no you are a qualifying child of your mother, you
Form 1040 or 1040A, orother income. Because you meet the relation- cannot claim the EIC. This is so even if your
ship, age, and residency tests, you are a qualify- mother cannot or does not claim the EIC.• You and your spouse checked the “No”
ing child of your mother. She can claim the EIC ifbox on line 5 of Form 1040EZ.
she meets all the other requirements. Because Rule 13. You Must Haveyou are your mother’s qualifying child, you can-If you are not sure whether someone else can
Lived in the United Statesnot claim the EIC. This is so even if your motherclaim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)
cannot or does not claim the EIC. as a dependent, read the rules for claiming aMore Than Half of the Year
dependent in chapter 3.
Your home (and your spouse’s if filing a jointIf someone else can claim you (or your
return) must have been in the United States forspouse if filing a joint return) as a dependent on
more than half the year.his or her return, but does not, you still cannotPart C. Rules
If not, put “No” directly to the right of line 64claim the credit.
(Form 1040), line 41 (Form 1040A), or on line 8If You Do Not Have
(Form 1040EZ).Example 1. In 2002, you were age 25, sin-
gle, and living at home with your parents. Youa Qualifying Child United States.This means the 50 states andworked and were not a student. You earned
the District of Columbia. It does not include U.S.$7,500. Your parents cannot claim you as aUse Part C if you: possessions, such as Guam and Puerto Rico.dependent. When you file your return, you claim
1) Do not have a qualifying child, and an exemption for yourself by checking the “No”Homeless shelter. Your home can be anybox on line 5 of your Form 1040EZ. You meet2) Have met all the rules in Part A. location where you regularly live. You do notthis rule. need a traditional home. If you lived in one orThis part of the chapter discusses Rules 10 more homeless shelters in the United States forthrough 13. You must meet all four of these Example 2. The facts are the same as inmore than half the year, you meet this rule.rules, in addition to the rules in Parts A and D, to Example 1, except that you earned $2,000. Your
qualify for the earned income credit without aparents can claim you as a dependent but de-Military personnel stationed outside thequalifying child. cide not to. You do not meet this rule. YouUnited States. U.S. military personnel sta-cannot claim the credit because your parentsIf you have a qualifying child, the rules tioned outside the United States on extendedcould have claimed you as a dependent.in this part do not apply to you. You can active duty (defined in Rule 7) are considered to
claim the credit only if you meet all the live in the United States during that duty period
CAUTION
!
rules in Parts A, B, and D. See Rule 7 to find outRule 12. You Cannot Be a for the EIC.
if you have a qualifying child. Qualifying Child of
Another PersonRule 10. You Must Be at Part D. Figuring andYou are a qualifying child of another personLeast Age 25 but Under (your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if allClaiming the EICAge 65 of the following statements are true.
Use this part if you have met all the rules in Parts• You are that person’s son, daughter,You must be at least age 25 but under age 65 at
A and B, or all the rules in Parts A and C.adopted child, stepchild, grandchild, or eli-the end of 2002. If you are married filing a joint
This part of the chapter discusses Rules 14gible foster child. Or, you are that person’sreturn, either you or your spouse must be at
and 15. You must meet both rules, in addition tobrother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsisterleast age 25 but under age 65 at the end of
the rules in Parts A and B, or Parts A and C, to2002. It does not matter which spouse meets the (or the child or grandchild of that person’s
qualify for the earned income credit.age test, as long as one of the spouses does.brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister)
This part of the chapter also explains how tofor whom that person cares as his or herIf neither you nor your spouse meets the age figure the amount of your credit. You have twoown child.test, you cannot claim the EIC. Put “No” directly choices.to the right of line 64 (Form 1040), line 41 (Form• At the end of the year you were under age
1040A), or on line 8 (Form 1040EZ). 1) Have the IRS figure the EIC for you. If you19, under age 24 and a full-time student,
want to do this, see  IRS Will Figure theor any age if you were permanently andExample 1. You are age 28 and unmarried. EIC for You.totally disabled at any time during theYou meet the age test. year. 2) Figure the EIC yourself. If you want to do
this, see How To Figure the EIC Yourself.• You lived with that person in the UnitedExample 2. You are married and filing a
States for more than half of the year.joint return. You are age 23 and your spouse is
age 27. You meet the age test because your
Rule 14. Your EarnedIf you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) arespouse is at least age 25 but under age 65.
a qualifying child of another person, you cannotIncome Must Be Less
claim the EIC. This is true even if the person forRule 11. You Cannot Be Than:whom you are a qualifying child does not claim
the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim the EIC.the Dependent of Another
Put “No” directly to the right of line 64 (Form• $33,178 ($34,178 for married filing jointly)Person 1040), line 41 (Form 1040A), or on line 8 (Formif you have more than one qualifying child,
1040EZ).If you are not filing a joint return, you meet this • $29,201 ($30,201 for married filing jointly)
rule if: if you have one qualifying child, orExample. You lived with your mother all
year. You are age 26 and permanently and to-• You checked box 6a on Form 1040 or • $11,060 ($12,060 for married filing jointly)
tally disabled. Your only income was from a1040A, or if you do not have a qualifying child.
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 251

Page 254 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Earned income generally means wages, sala- not claim the EIC because your AGI is not less number on line 2 of that schedule. If you
ries, tips, other taxable employee compensa- do not, your credit may be reduced or dis-than $29,201. However, if your filing status was
tion, and net earnings from self-employment. allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-married filing jointly, you might be able to claim
Earned income is explained in detail in Rule 6. turn.the EIC because your AGI is less than $30,201.
Community property. If you are married,Self-employed persons and statutory em- but qualify to file as head of household underployees. If you are self-employed, a statutory Form 1040EZspecial rules for married taxpayers living apartemployee, or a member of the clergy or church(see Rule 2), and live in a state that has commu-employee who files Schedule SE (Form 1040), If you file Form 1040EZ and want the IRS tonity property laws, your AGI includes that portionyou must use the Form 1040 instructions or figure your credit for you, follow these steps.of both your and your spouse’s wages that youPublication 596 to see if you qualify to get the
are required to include in gross income. This is1) Print EIC on line 8. Then, If you have anyEIC and to figure the amount of your total earned
different from the community property rules thatof the situations listed later under Specialincome and the amount of EIC.
apply under Rule 6. Instructions, follow those instructions.
Church employee. In this chapter, this term 2) Complete all other parts of your return thatmeans an employee (other than a minister orIRS Will Figure apply to you, but do not fill in lines 9, 11a,member of a religious order) of a church or or 12.the EIC for Youqualified church-controlled organization that is
exempt from employer social security and Medi-The IRS will figure the amount of your EIC forcare taxes. you if you follow the steps explained in thisSpecial Instructions
section. If you have a qualifying child, completeTaxable earned income. If you are an em- Use the following special instructions, if the situ-and attach Schedule EIC.ployee, you figure your taxable earned income ation applies to you.by starting with the amount on the Wages line on Please do not ask the IRS to figure
your tax return (line 7, Forms 1040 and 1040A, your EIC unless you are eligible for it.Qualifying child information (Schedule EIC).or line 1, Form 1040EZ). You then subtract the Read the rules in Parts A, B, C, and DCAUTION
!
Whether the IRS figures your credit or you figurefollowing amounts from the amount on the to see if you qualify. it yourself, you must give the IRS informationWages line on your tax return. about your qualifying child. To do this, completeIf you want the IRS to also figure the• Any taxable scholarship or fellowship Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 oramount of your income tax, see chap-grant not reported on a Form W–2 but Form 1040A.ter 31.
TIP
included in the total on line 7 (Form 1040 The information you enter on Schedule EIC
or 1040A) or line 1 (Form 1040EZ). must show that the child meets all the tests for a
qualifying child. (See Rule 7.) The schedule has• Any amount you received for work done space for information about only two qualifyingForm 1040while an inmate in a penal institution that children because the amount of your credit is theis included in the total on line 7 (Form same whether you have two, three, or moreIf you file Form 1040 and want the IRS to figure1040 or Form 1040A) or line 1 (Form qualifying children.your credit for you, follow these steps.1040EZ).
Do not file Form 1040EZ if you have a• Any amount you received as a pension or1) Print EIC directly to the right of line 64. qualifying child and qualify for theannuity from a nonqualified deferred com-Then, if you have any of the situations credit. You must file Form 1040 orCAUTION
!
pensation plan or a nongovernmental sec- listed later under Special Instructions, fol- Form 1040A.tion 457 plan and that is included in thelow those instructions.
total on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A)
2) Complete all other parts of your return thator line 1 (Form 1040EZ). Minister or member of a religious order.Ifapply to you (including line 59), but do notyou are filing Schedule SE and line 2 of the• Any amount on line 2 of Schedule SE that fill in lines 69, 70, 71a, and 73. If you doschedule includes an amount that is also in-was also reported on line 7 (Form 1040), ifnot have a qualifying child, stop here.cluded on Form 1040, line 7, print “Clergy” di-you are a member of the clergy.
rectly to the right of line 64 (Form 1040). Also3) If you have a qualifying child, complete• Any amount you included on both line 5a show the amount included on both lines (forSchedule EIC according to its instructions.of Schedule SE and line 7 (Form 1040), if example, “Clergy $800”).Be sure to enter the child’s social securityyou received wages as a church em- number on line 2 of that schedule. If youployee. Inmates. If you were an inmate in a penaldo not, your credit may be reduced or dis-institution and the total on line 7 (Form 1040 orallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-Form 1040A) or line 1 (Form 1040EZ) includesturn.Rule 15. Your AGI Must Be an amount paid to you for work performed while
an inmate, print “PRI” and the amount paid onLess Than:
the dotted line next to line 7 (Form 1040), in the
Form 1040A space to the left of line 7 (Form 1040A), or in the• $33,178 ($34,178 for married filing jointly) space to the right of the words “W–2 form(s)” onif you have more than one qualifying child,If you file Form 1040A and want the IRS to figureline 1 (Form 1040EZ).
your credit for you, follow these steps.• $29,201 ($30,201 for married filing jointly)
Deferred compensation plans.If the total onif you have one qualifying child, or 1) Print EIC directly to the right of line 41.line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or line 1• $11,060 ($12,060 for married filing jointly)Then, if you have any of the situations(Form 1040EZ) includes a pension or annuityif you do not have a qualifying child. listed later under Special Instructions, fol- you received from a nonqualified deferred com-
low those instructions. pensation plan or a nongovernmental section
457 plan, put “DFC” and the amount on theAdjusted gross income (AGI). AGI is the 2) Complete all other parts of your return that
dotted line next to line 7 (Form 1040), in theamount on line 35 (Form 1040), line 21 (Formapply to you (including line 37), but do notspace to the left of line 7 (Form 1040A), or to the1040A), or line 4 (Form 1040EZ). If your AGI isfill in lines 43, 44, 45a, and 47. If you doright of the words “W–2 Forms” on line 1 (Formequal to or more than the applicable limit listednot have a qualifying child, stop here.1040EZ). This amount may be reported in boxabove, you cannot claim the EIC.
3) If you have a qualifying child, complete11 of your Form W–2. If you received such an
Schedule EIC according to its instructions.Example. Your AGI is $29,500, you are sin- amount but box 11 is blank, contact your em-
gle, and you have one qualifying child. You can- Be sure to enter the child’s social security ployer for the amount of the pension or annuity.
Page 252 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 255 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
They took the following steps to completeHow To Figure the 1) Go to your form instruction booklet andSchedule EIC and the EIC Worksheet.
turn to the instructions for Line 41 andEIC Yourself
look for the EIC Worksheet.
This part of this chapter explains how to use the Completing Schedule EIC2) Complete the EIC Worksheet according toEIC Worksheet and how to report the credit onits instructions. Find the amount of youryour return. To figure the amount of your earned The Smiths complete Schedule EIC becausecredit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-income credit, you can use the Earned Income they have a qualifying child. They enter “Johntion booklet.Credit Worksheet (EIC Worksheet) in the in- and Janet Smith” and John’s SSN (the SSN that
struction booklet for Form 1040, Form 1040A, or3) Enter the amount of your earned incomeappears first on their Form 1040A) on the line at
Form 1040EZ, and the Earned Income Credit credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet onthe top of Schedule EIC. The Smiths fill out(EIC) Table in the tax form instruction booklet.Form 1040A, line 41. Qualifying Child Information (lines 1–6).However, certain people must use Publication4) Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.Line 1. The Smiths enter the first name and596 to see if they meet the rules to take the EIC.Do not attach it to your income tax return.You must use Publication 596 if any of the fol- last name for Amy in the column “Child 1.”If you do not have a qualifying child, stoplowing situations applies to you. Line 2. They enter Amy’s SSN. (See Rule 7,here.
• The amount on Form 1040, line 21, in- earlier.)5) If you have a qualifying child, completecludes an amount from Form 8814 (relat- Line 3. They enter the year of birth for AmySchedule EIC according to its instructions.ing to a child’s interest and dividends).Be sure to enter the child’s social security(1999).
• Your investment income (Rule 5) is $2,550number on line 2 of that schedule. If youLines 4a and 4b. The Smiths skip theseor more and you are filing Form 4797 (re- do not, your credit may be reduced or dis-lines because Amy was born after January 1,lating to the sale of business property).allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-1984.turn.• You are filing Schedule E, Supplemental
Line 5. The Smiths enter “Daughter” forIncome and Loss (Form 1040).
Amy. This column shows Amy’s relationship toForm 1040EZ and EIC Worksheet. If you file• You are reporting income or a loss from John and Janet.Form 1040EZ and want to figure the credit your-the rental of personal property not used in
self, follow these steps. Line 6. The Smiths enter “12” for Amy. Thisa trade or business.
is how many months Amy lived with them in
1) Go to your form instruction booklet andThe amount of your earned income credit de- 2002.
turn to the instructions for Line 8 and lookpends on:
for the EIC Worksheet.• The amount of your earned income (de-
Completing the EIC Worksheet2) Complete the EIC Worksheet according tofined in Rule 6) and AGI (defined in Rule
its instructions. Find the amount of your15). Next, the Smiths will complete the EIC Work-credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-• Whether you have no qualifying child, one sheet to figure their earned income credittion booklet.qualifying child, or two or more qualifying amount.
3) Enter the amount of your earned incomechildren. Line 1. The Smiths enter $11,000 (their totalcredit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet on
earned income).Form 1040EZ, line 8.Form 1040 and EIC Worksheet. If you file
Line 2. The Smiths go to the Earned In-4) Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.Form 1040 and want to figure the credit yourself,
come Credit Table in the Form 1040A instruc-Do not attach it to your income tax return.follow these steps.
tions. The Smiths find their income of $11,000
1) Go to your form instruction booklet and within the range of $11,000 to $11,050. They
turn to the instructions for Line 64 and follow this line across to the column that de-
look for Worksheet A or Worksheet B. scribes their filing status and number of children,
Examples and find $2,506 and enter it on this line 2.2) Complete the EIC Worksheet that applies
to your situation according to its instruc- Line 3. The Smiths enter their AGI ofThe following two comprehensive examplestions. Complete Worksheet B if you were $11,000.(complete with filled-in forms) may be helpfulself-employed, a member of the clergy or a
when figuring the earned income credit. The twoLine 4. The Smiths check the “Yes” boxchurch employee who files Schedule SE,
examples are:or a statutory employee, filing Schedule C because lines 1 and 3 are the same ($11,000).
or C-EZ. Find the amount of your credit in They skip line 5 and enter the amount from line 21) John and Janet Smith with one qualifyingthe EIC Table in your instruction booklet. ($2,506) on line 6.child and using Form 1040A, and
3) Enter the amount of your earned income Line 6. The Smiths’ EIC is $2,506.2) Kelly Green, age 30, a student, with nocredit from Worksheet A or B on Form qualifying child and using Form 1040EZ.1040, line 64. Example 2. Kelly Green
4) Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.
(Form 1040EZ)Do not attach it to your income tax return.Example 1. John and Janet
If you do not have a qualifying child, stop Kelly Green is age 30 and a full-time student.Smith (Form 1040A)here. She lived with her parents in the United States
John and Janet Smith are married and will file a5) If you have a qualifying child, complete for all of 2002. She had a part-time job and
joint return. They have one child—Amy, who isSchedule EIC according to its instructions. earned $6,240. She earned $20 interest on a
3 years old. Amy lived with John and Janet for allBe sure to enter the child’s social security savings account. She is not eligible to beof 2002. John worked and earned $9,500. Janetnumber on line 2 of that schedule. If you claimed as a dependent on her parents’ return.do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- worked part of the year and earned $1,500.Although she lived with her parents, she is notallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-Their total earned income and AGI is $11,000.their qualifying child because she does not meetturn. John and Janet qualify for the earned incomethe age test. She does not have any children.credit and fill out the EIC Worksheet and Sched-
Kelly qualifies for the earned income credit.ule EIC. The Smiths will attach Schedule EIC toForm 1040A and EIC Worksheet. If you file
Kelly will file Form 1040EZ and complete theForm 1040A when they send their completedForm 1040A and want to figure the credit your-
return to the IRS.self, follow these steps. EIC Worksheet.
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 253

Page 256 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
only available if you have at least one qualifyingIf you receive advance earned incomeCompleting the EIC Worksheet
child. credit payments in 2003, you must file
Kelly figures the amount of her earned income Form 1040 or Form 1040A for tax yearCAUTION
!
Who can get the advance payment of thecredit on the EIC Worksheet as follows. 2003. You must file a return to report what you
earned income credit? To get part of the already received and to take advantage of anyLine 1. She enters $6,240 (her total earnedearned income credit paid to you throughout theadditional earned income credit that you mayincome). year in your paycheck, you must meet all thequalify for.
following rules.Line 2. Kelly goes to the Earned Income
Credit Table in the forms instruction booklet.1) You must expect that your earned incomeShe finds her earned income of $6,240 in the Receipt of advance payments you do notand AGI will each be less than a certainrange of $6,200 to $6,250. Kelly follows this line qualify for.If you receive advance paymentsamount. The amount in 2002 was $29,201across to the column that describes her filing and later find out that you do not qualify for the($30,201 if you expected to file marriedstatus and number of children and finds $370. EIC, you will have to pay back any advancefiling jointly). The amount for 2003 will beShe enters $370 on this line 2. payment you are not entitled to when you filehigher. (See the 2003 Form W–5 for the
your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.Line 3. Kelly enters $6,260 (her AGI). 2003 amount.)
Line 4. Kelly checks the “No” box because2) You must have a qualifying child.
When to give your employer a new Formlines 1 and 3 are not the same ($6,240 and3) You must expect to meet all the rules inW–5. The 2003 Form W–5 you give to your$6,260). Parts A, B, and D of this chapter or in theemployer is valid until December 31, 2003. If youLine 5. Kelly checks the “No” box because instructions for Form W–5. expect to qualify for the earned income credit inthe amount on line 3 ($6,260) is not less than 2004 and you want to receive advance pay-$6,150. She goes to the Earned Income Credit Persons who are not entitled to receive ad-ments, you must give your employer a newTable in the forms instruction booklet. She findsvance payments.  Under certain circum- Form W–5 in 2004. Do this each year you thinkher adjusted gross income of $6,260 in thestances, even if you meet these rules, you mayyou are eligible for the credit.range of $6,250 to $6,300. Kelly follows this linenot be entitled to get EIC. If your wages are notIf you no longer want to get advance pay-across to the column that describes her filingsubject to federal income tax, social security tax,ments or if your situation changes and you nostatus and number of children and finds $366.or Medicare tax withholding, you cannot get thelonger qualify for the earned income credit, youShe enters $366 on line 5. She looks at theadvance payment of the earned income credit. Ifmust give your employer a new Form W–5.amounts on lines 5 and 2. $366 is the smalleryou are a farm worker and are paid on a dailyCheck the No box on line 1 of the new form.amount. basis, your employer is not required to pay you
If your spouse files a Form W–5 with his orthe advance amount of the credit.Line 6. She enters $366 here and on Form
her employer, you must file a new Form W–51040EZ, line 8. The $366 is Kelly’s earned in-
with your employer. Check the Yes box on linecome credit. How To Get Advance 3.
Payments for 2003
Advance PaymentsTo get part of the credit in advance, you must fill
Advance Earned out a 2003 Form W–5. After you have read theReceived in 2002
instructions and answered the questions on
Income Credit If you received advance payments of the earnedForm W–5, give the lower part of the form to
income credit in 2002, you must file a tax returnyour employer. Keep the top part for your rec-
Would you like to get part of your earned income to report the payments. Report the amount onords.
credit now instead of waiting until after the end of line 59 (Form 1040), or line 37 (Form 1040A).
the year? If you work for someone and expect toMore than one employer. If you have more Your Form W–2, box 9, will show the amount
qualify for the earned income credit in 2003, you than one employer, give a certificate to only oneyou received.
can choose to get part of the credit in advance. of them. If you are married and both you and
You cannot use Form 1040EZ to reportGive your employer a 2003 Form W–5,  Earned your spouse are employed and expect to qualify
your advance payments.Income Credit Advance Payment Certificate,for the credit, you may give a Form W–5 to your
CAUTION
!
and your employer will include part of the credit employer and your spouse may give one to his
regularly in your pay. The advance payment is or her employer.
Page 254 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 257 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
John and Janet Smith 00
Amy
99
1
Smith
2
04 22200 00
222 2222
91
Daughter
Filled-in Schedule EIC — John and Janet Smith (Page references are to the Schedule EIC Instructions.)
/H17076 OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE EIC Earned Income Credit(Form 1040A or 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 43
Qualifying Child Information
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040A
or 1040 instructions.
Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040) 2002Cat. No. 13339M
Before you begin: See the instructions for Form 1040A, line 41, or Form 1040, line 64, to make sure that
(a) you can take the EIC and (b) you have a qualifying child.
Qualifying Child Information
● It will take us longer to process your return and issue your refund if you do not fill in all lines that apply
for each qualifying child.
3
4
2
5
6
1 Child’s name
Child’s year of birth
Child’s SSN
If the child was born before
January 2, 1984—
Child’s relationship to you
Number of months child lived with
you in the United States during 2002
months
Yes.
months
Was the child under age 24 at the end
of 2002 and a student?
Was the child permanently and totally
disabled during any part of 2002?
a
b
Yes.
First name Last name First name Last name
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
(99)
EIC
1040A
1040
Complete and attach to Form 1040A or 1040
only if you have a qualifying child.
● Be sure the child’s name on line 1 and social security number (SSN) on line 2 agree with the child’s
social security card. Otherwise, at the time we process your return, we may reduce or disallow your
EIC. If the name or SSN on the child’s social security card is not correct, call the Social Security
Administration at 1-800-772-1213.
Child 1 Child 2
If you have more than two qualifying children, you
only have to list two to get the maximum credit.
The child must have an SSN as defined on page 44
of the Form 1040A instructions or page 46 of the
Form 1040 instructions unless the child was born and
died in 2002. If your child was born and died in 2002
and did not have an SSN, enter “Died” on this line
and attach a copy of the child’s birth certificate.
Year
If born after January 1, 1984,
skip lines 4a and 4b; go to line 5.
Year
No. No.
Go to line 5. Go to line 5.Continue Continue
Yes. Yes. No. No.
Continue ContinueThe child is not a
qualifying child.
The child is not a
qualifying child.
● If the child lived with you for more than half of
2002 but less than 7 months, enter “7”.
● If the child was born or died in 2002 and your
home was the child’s home for the entire time he
or she was alive during 2002, enter “12”.
Do not enter more than 12 months. Do not enter more than 12 months.
Y ou may also be able to take the additional child tax credit if your child (a) was under age 17 at the end of 2002, (b) is
claimed as your dependent on line 6c of Form 1040A or Form 1040, and (c) is a U.S. citizen or resident alien. For more
details, see the instructions for line 42 of Form 1040A or line 66 of Form 1040.
. . . . . . . . . .
● If you take the EIC even though you are not eligible, you may not be allowed to take the credit for up
to 10 years. See back of schedule for details.
If born after January 1, 1984,
skip lines 4a and 4b; go to line 5.
(for example, son, daughter, grandchild,
niece, nephew, foster child, etc.)
2002
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 255

Page 258 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Line 41
1040A
Yes. Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your earned income from Step 5,
on page 43.
Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC T able on pages 46–51
to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status and the number of children you have. Enter the credit here.
Enter the amount from Form 1040A, line 22.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
No. Go to line 5.
Is the amount on line 3 less than:
Yes. Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC T able on pages 46–51 to
find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status and the number of children you have. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040A, line 41.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
If line 2 is zero, Y ou cannot take the credit.
Put “No” to the left of the entry space for line 41.
● $6,150 ($7,150 for married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child, or
● $13,550 ($14,550 for married filing jointly) if you have one or more qualifying children?
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2. Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
Reminder—
If you have a qualifying child, complete and attach Schedule EIC.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see
page 44 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the
credit for 2002.
/H12011
/H17076
/H17076
EIC
1040A
/H12011
11,000
2,506
11,000
2,506
Filled-in EIC Worksheet—John and Janet Smith (Page references are to the Form 1040A Instructions.)
Page 256 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 259 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6,240
6,260
370
366
366
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Line 8
1040EZ
Yes. Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your total earned income from Step 2,
on page 18.
Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC T able on page 20 to find
the credit. Use the column for your filing status. Enter the credit here.
Enter the amount from Form 1040EZ, line 4.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
No. Go to line 5.
Is the amount on line 3 less than $6,150 (or $7,150 if married filing jointly)?
Yes. Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC T able on page 20 to find
the credit. Use the column for your filing status. Enter the credit
here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040EZ, line 8.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
If line 2 is zero, Y ou cannot take the credit.
Enter “No” in the space to the left of line 8.
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2. Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see page 18
to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the credit for 2002.
/H17076
Filled-in EIC Worksheet—Kelly Green (Page references are to the Form 1040EZ Instructions)
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 257

Page 260 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EIC Eligibility Checklist
You may claim the EIC if you answer YES to all the following questions.*
YES NO
1. Do you, your spouse, and your qualifying child each have a valid SSN? (See Rule 1.)❏❏
2. Is your filing status married filing jointly, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or single? (See
Rule 2.)
Caution: If you are a nonresident alien, answer YES  only if your filing status is married filing
jointly and you are married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien. (See Rule 3.) ❏❏
3. Answer YES  if you are not filing Form 2555 or Form 2555–EZ. Otherwise, answer NO . (See
Rule 4.) ❏❏
4. Is your investment income $2,550 or less? (See Rule 5.) ❏❏
5. Is your AGI less than:
• $11,060 ($12,060 if married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $29,201 ($30,201 if married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child, or
• $33,178 ($34,178 if married filing jointly) if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rule 15.) ❏❏
6. Is your total earned income at least $1 but less than:
• $11,060 ($12,060 if married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $29,201 ($30,201 if married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child, or
• $33,178 ($34,178 if married filing jointly) if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rules 6 and 14.) ❏❏
7. Answer YES  if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) are not a qualifying child of another
person. Otherwise, answer NO . (See Rules 9 and 12.) ❏❏
STOP If you have a qualifying child, answer questions 8 and 9 and skip 10–12. If you
do not have a qualifying child, skip answers 8 and 9 and answer 10–12.*
8. Does your child meet the age, residency, and relationship tests for a qualifying child? (See Rule
7.) ❏❏
9. Is your child a qualifying child only for you? Answer YES if your qualifying child also meets the
tests to be a qualifying child of another person, but either (a) the other person is not claiming the
EIC using that child, or (b) if the other person is claiming the EIC using that child, Rule 8 allows
you and not the other person to treat the child as a qualifying child. (See Rule 8.)❏❏
10. Was your main home (and your spouse’s if filing a joint return) in the United States for more
than half the year? (See Rule 13.) ❏❏
11. Were you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of 2002?
(See Rule 10.) ❏❏
12. Answer YES  if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) cannot be claimed as a dependent on
anyone else’s return. Answer NO  if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) can be claimed
as a dependent on someone else’s return. (See Rule 11.) ❏❏
*PERSONS WITH A QUALIFYING CHILD:  If you answered YES  to questions 1 through 9, you can claim the
EIC. Remember to fill out Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use Form
1040EZ.
PERSONS WITHOUT A QUALIFYING CHILD:  If you answered YES  to questions 1 through 7, and 10 through
12, you can claim the EIC.
If you answered NO to any question that applies to you: You cannot claim the EIC.
Page 258 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 261 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Several other credits are discussed in other• Adoption credit.chapters in this publication.
• Foreign tax credit.• Child and dependent care credit (chapter38. • Mortgage interest credit.33).
• Retirement savings contributions credit.• Credit for the elderly or the disabled
(chapter 34). • Credit for prior year minimum tax.Other Credits • Child tax credit (chapter 35). • Credit for electric vehicles.
• Education credits (chapter 36).
• Earned income credit (chapter 37).Important Changes Adoption Credit
You may be able to take a tax credit of up toAdoption credit.This credit, part of whichNonrefundable credits.The first part of this
$10,000 for qualifying expenses paid to adoptwas scheduled to end after 2001, has beenchapter, Nonrefundable Credits, covers six
an eligible child.permanently extended. In addition, beginning incredits that you subtract directly from your tax.
If your modified adjusted gross income (AGI)2002, the maximum adoption credit has beenThese credits may reduce your tax to zero. If
is more than $150,000, your credit is reduced. Ifthese credits are more than your tax, the excessincreased to $10,000. The income limit based
is not refunded to you. your modified AGI is $190,000 or more, youon modified adjusted gross income (AGI) has
cannot claim the credit.also increased. A modified AGI of more than
Refundable credits.The second part of this$150,000 will reduce your credit. No credit will Prior-law dollar limits of $5,000 ($6,000chapter, Refundable Credits, covers three cred-be available if your modified AGI is $190,000 or for special needs child) continue to ap-its that are treated as payments and are refund-more. See Adoption Credit, later. ply to expenses paid or incurred beforeCAUTION
!
able to you. These credits are added to the2002, even if you are determining the credit for afederal income tax withheld and any estimatedRetirement savings contributions credit.If year after 2001.tax payments you made. If this total is more thanyou contribute to an individual retirement ar-
your total tax, the excess will be refunded to you.rangement (IRA) or to a retirement plan spon-
sored by your employer, you may qualify for a Qualifying expenses.Qualifying adoption ex-
penses are reasonable and necessary adoptiontax credit of up to $1,000 ($2,000 if married filingUseful Items
fees, court costs, attorney fees, traveling ex-jointly). This credit begins in 2002 and will be inYou may want to see:
penses (including amounts spent for meals andeffect through 2006. See Retirement Savings
lodging) while away from home, and other ex-PublicationContributions Credit, later.
penses directly related to, and whose principal❏ 502 Medical and Dental ExpensesExcess withholding of social security tax purpose is for, the legal adoption of an eligible
and tier 1 railroad retirement tax.Social se- child.❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for
curity and tier 1 railroad retirement tax (RRTA) Individuals Nonqualifying expenses.Qualifying adop-are both withheld at a rate of 6.2% of wages. tion expenses do not include expenses:❏ 530 Tax Information for First-TimeThe maximum wages subject to this tax in- Homeownerscreased to $84,900 in 2002. If you had two or • That violate state or federal law,
more employers and they withheld too much ❏ 535 Business Expenses • For carrying out any surrogate parentingsocial security or RRTA tax during 2002, you❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions arrangement,may be entitled to a credit of the excess with-
❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements• For the adoption of your spouse’s child,holding. For more information about the credit,
(IRAs)see Credit for Excess Social Security Tax or • Paid using funds received from any fed-Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld under Re- ❏ 968 Tax Benefits for Adoption eral, state, or local program,fundable Credits, later.
• Allowed as a credit or deduction under anyForm (and Instructions)Health insurance credit.Beginning Decem- other federal income tax rule, or
ber 2002, there is a new credit based on health❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit (Individual, • Paid or reimbursed by your employer orinsurance premiums paid by certain workers Estate, or Trust) any other person or organization.who are displaced by foreign trade or who are❏ 2439 Notice to Shareholder ofreceiving a pension from the Pension Benefit Undistributed Long-Term Capital Eligible child.The term “eligible child” meansGuarantee Corporation. See Health Insurance Gains any individual:Credit at the end of this chapter.
❏ 8396 Mortgage Interest Credit
1) Under 18 years old, or❏ 8801 Credit For Prior Year Minimum Tax
2) Physically or mentally incapable of caring— Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
for himself or herself.Introduction ❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage
SubsidyThis chapter discusses the following credits. Child with special needs.An eligible child
is a child with special needs if:❏ 8834 Qualified Electric Vehicle Credit• Adoption credit.
❏ 8839 Qualified Adoption Expenses• Foreign tax credit. 1) He or she is a citizen or resident of the
United States (including the District of Co-❏ 8880 Credit for Qualified Retirement• Mortgage interest credit. lumbia and U.S. possessions) andSavings Contributions
• Retirement savings contributions credit. 2) A state determines that the child cannot or❏ 8885 Health Insurance Credit for Eligible
• Credit for prior year minimum tax. should not be returned to his or her par-Recipients
ents’ home and probably will not be• Credit for electric vehicles. adopted unless adoption assistance is pro-
• Credit for excess social security tax or rail- vided to the adoptive parents.
road retirement tax withheld. Factors used by states to determine if a childNonrefundable Credits• Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain. has special needs could include:
• Health insurance credit. • The child’s ethnic background,The following credits are discussed in this part.
Chapter 38 Other Credits Page 259

Page 262 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The child’s age, If you make this election, you cannotafter the date you closed your mortgage loan.
carry back or carry over any unusedSee Publication 523, Selling Your Home, for• Whether the child is a member of a minor- foreign tax to or from this tax year.more information.CAUTION
!
ity or sibling group, or
• Whether the child has a medical condition Retirement Savingsor physical, mental, or emotional handi-Mortgage Interest Credit Contributions Creditcap.
Mortgage credit certificates issued by state and
Beginning in 2002, you may be able to take a taxlocal governments may entitle a certificateA foreign child cannot be treated as a credit of up to $1,000 ($2,000 if married filingholder to a mortgage interest credit. The certifi-child with special needs. jointly) for making eligible contributions to ancate must be used in connection with theCAUTION
!
employer-sponsored retirement plan or to anpurchase, qualified rehabilitation, or qualified
individual retirement arrangement (IRA). Thehome improvement of the certificate holder’sForeign child.If the child is not a U.S. citizen credit is a percentage of the qualifying contribu-main home.or resident, you cannot take the credit unless the tions, with the highest rate for taxpayers with the
Who qualifies. You may be able to claim aadoption becomes final. least income.
mortgage interest credit if you were issued aYou cannot claim this credit if any of theWhen to claim the credit.Generally, for anymortgage credit certificate (MCC) under a following apply.year before the adoption becomes final, youqualified MCC program. The MCC must relate totake the credit in the year after your qualified 1) The amount of your 2002 adjusted grossyour main home.expenses are paid or incurred. See Publication income (discussed next) is more thanAmount of credit.If your mortgage is equal to968 for more specific information on when to $25,000 ($37,500 if head of household,(or smaller than) the certified indebtednessclaim the credit. $50,000 if married filing jointly).amount (loan) shown on your MCC, you multiplyHow to claim the credit.To claim the credit, 2) You were born after January 1, 1985.the certified credit rate, shown on your MCC, byyou must complete Form 8839 and attach it toall the interest you paid on your mortgage during3) You are claimed as a dependent on an-your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Enter the creditthe year. other person’s 2002 tax return.on line 51, Form 1040, or line 34, Form 1040A.If your mortgage is larger than the certified
4) You were a full-time student in 2002.indebtedness amount shown on your MCC, you
multiply the certified credit rate (shown on yourForeign Tax Credit The amount of credit you can take dependsMCC) by only the interest allocated to the certi-on your filing status, your adjusted gross incomeYou generally can choose to claim income taxesfied indebtedness amount shown on your MCC.(AGI), and your eligible contributions.you paid or accrued during the year to a foreignIf someone else (other than your spouse if
Adjusted gross income (AGI).This is gen-country or U.S. possession as a credit againstfiling jointly) also holds an interest in your home,
erally the amount on Form 1040, line 36, oryour U.S. income tax. Or, you can deduct themyou must divide the credit based on each
Form 1040A, line 22. However, you must add toas an itemized deduction (see chapter 24).person’s interest. See Publication 530 for further
that amount any exclusion or deduction claimedYou cannot take a credit (or deduction) forinformation.
for the year for:foreign income taxes paid on income that is If the certificate credit rate is more thanexempt from U.S. tax under the foreign earned • Foreign earned income,20%, the credit cannot be more thanincome exclusion or the foreign housing exclu- $2,000.CAUTION
!
• Foreign housing costs,sion.
• Income for residents of American Samoa,Limit on the credit.Your foreign tax creditCarryforward. If your allowable credit is more
andcannot be more than your U.S. tax liability (linethan your tax liability reduced by certain credits,
42, Form 1040) multiplied by a fraction. Theyou can carry forward the unused portion of the• Income from Puerto Rico.numerator of the fraction is your taxable incomecredit to your next 3 tax years or until used,
from sources outside the United States. Thewhichever comes first. You can use Table 38–1 to find the percent-denominator is your total taxable income fromIf you are subject to the $2,000 limit becauseage of your eligible contributions you qualify toU.S. and foreign sources. See Publication 514your certificate credit rate is more than 20%, nouse. For example, if you are single with an AGIfor more information. amount over the $2,000 (or your prorated shareof $15,000, you may be entitled to a credit equal
of the $2,000 if you must allocate the credit) mayto 50% of your eligible contributions (definedHow to claim the credit. Complete Form
be carried forward. next).1116 and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the
credit on line 45, Form 1040. How to claim the credit.Figure your 2002 Eligible contributions.These include contri-
credit and any carryforward to 2003 on Formbutions to a traditional or Roth IRA and salaryElection not to file Form 1116.You will not
8396, and attach it to your Form 1040. Be surereduction contributions to most employer-spon-be subject to the limit and may be able to claim
to include any credit carryforward from 1999,sored retirement plans. They also include cer-the credit without using Form 1116 if all the
2000, and 2001. tain voluntary after-tax employee contributions.following requirements are met.
Include the credit in your total for line 52,
Contributions reduced.Your eligible con-1) You are an individual. Form 1040, and check box a.
tributions must be reduced by certain taxable
2) Your only foreign source income for theReduced home mortgage interest deduction.and nontaxable distributions made after 1999
tax year is passive income (dividends, in-If you claim the credit and itemize your deduc-and before the due date (including extensions)
terest, royalties, etc.) that is reported totions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you mustof your 2002 tax return.
you on a payee statement (such as a Formreduce your home mortgage interest deduction.See Publication 590, chapter 5, for more
1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, or Reduce your deduction by the amount on line 3specific information on eligible contributions and
1099–INT, Interest Income). of Form 8396, even if part of that amount is to bethe reductions you must make.
carried forward to 2003. For more information3) Your qualified foreign taxes for the tax Limit on the credit.After your contributionsabout the home mortgage interest deduction,year are not more than $300 ($600 if filing are reduced, the maximum annual contributionssee chapter 25.a joint return) and are reported on a payee on which you can base the credit is $2,000 per
statement. Recapture of federal mortgage subsidy.If person. This makes the maximum possible
you received an MCC with your mortgage loan,credit $1,000 per return ($2,000 if married filing4) You elect this procedure for the tax year.you may be subject to a recapture rule. Thejointly).
If you qualify and elect not to file Form 1116,recapture may be required if you sell or dispose
enter the amount of your foreign taxes paid onof your home at a gain during the first 9 years
line 45, Form 1040.
Page 260 Chapter 38 Other Credits

Page 263 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6) Is used predominately in the UnitedTable 38–1. Applicable Percentage for Retirement Savings Contributions Credit
States.THEN your
applicable
Amount of credit. If you placed a qualifiedpercentage
electric vehicle in service during 2002, the creditIF your filing status is ... AND your AGI is ... is ...
is generally 10% of the cost of the vehicle. How-
Not over $30,000 50% ever, if the vehicle is a depreciable business
asset, you must reduce the cost of the vehicle byOver $30,000, but not over $32,500 20%
any section 179 deduction before figuring themarried filing jointly
Over $32,500, but not over $50,000 10% credit. Get Publication 463, Travel, Entertain-
ment, Gift, and Car Expenses, for information onOver $50,000 0% the section 179 deduction.
The credit is limited to $4,000 for each vehi-Not over $22,500 50%
cle placed in service in 2002.Over $22,500, but not over $24,375 20%
head of household Recapture. The credit will be subject to recap-Over $24,375, but not over $37,500 10% ture if, within 3 years after the date you place the
vehicle in service, the vehicle is used predomi-Over $37,500 0%
nately outside the United States or is modifiedNot over $15,000 50% (or its use is modified) so that it is no longersingle, eligible for the credit. You recapture the credit byOver $15,000, but not over $16,250 20%qualifying widow(er), adding part or all of it to your income tax for theor Over $16,250, but not over $25,000 10% year in which the recapture event occurs. Seemarried filing separately chapter 12 of Publication 535 for more informa-Over $25,000 0% tion.
How to claim the credit.To claim the credit,
Example. During 2002, you contributed 2) Had an unused minimum tax credit thatcomplete Form 8834 and attach it to your Form
$3,000 to your 401(k) plan and made a $500 IRA you are carrying forward from 2001 to1040. Include the credit in your total for line 53,
withdrawal. You also took a $900 IRA with- 2002, or Form 1040. Check box c, and print “8834” on the
drawal in 2001. Neither of your withdrawals was line next to box c.3) Had unallowed qualified electric vehiclerolled over. The amount of your 2002 plan contri-credits in 2001. Do not confuse this credit with the De-butions eligible for the credit is $1,600 ($3,000 −
duction for clean-fuel vehicles that is$500 − $900). If you are single and your AGI is
reported on Form 1040, line 34.How to claim the credit.Figure your 2002 CAUTION
!
$24,500, your applicable percentage from Table
credit and any carryforward to 2003 on Form38–1  is 10%. Therefore, your retirement sav-
8801, and attach it to your Form 1040. Includeings contributions credit is $160 ($1,600 × 10%).
the credit in your total for line 53, Form 1040,
and check box b. You can carry forward anyHow to claim the credit.To claim the credit,
unused credit for prior year minimum tax to laterRefundable Creditscomplete Form 8880 and attach it to your Form
years until it is completely used.1040 or 1040A. Enter the credit on line 49, Form
The following credits are refundable and areFor additional information about the credit,1040, or line 32, Form 1040A.
treated as payments of tax.see the instructions for Form 8801.The credit you compute on Form 8880 will
take into account any nonrefundable credits that • Credit for excess social security tax or rail-have already reduced your tax (such as theCredit for Electric Vehiclesroad retirement tax withheld.credit for child and dependent care expenses). If
• Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain.your tax liability is reduced to zero because ofYou may be allowed a tax credit if you placed a
other nonrefundable credits, you will not be enti-qualified electric vehicle in service during the• Health insurance credit.tled to the credit for retirement savings contribu-year.
tions.
Congress is considering legislationCredit for Excess Socialthat would expand the definition of
Credit for Prior Year qualified electric vehicle, vary theSecurity Tax or RailroadCAUTION
!
amount of credit allowed according to the vehi-Minimum Tax Retirement Tax Withheldcle type, and allow any unused credit to be used
to reduce federal income tax in other years. IfThe tax laws give special treatment to some Most employers must withhold social securitypassed, the information will be included in Publi-kinds of income and allow special deductions tax from your wages. If you work for a railroadcation 553, Highlights of 2002 Tax Changes.and credits for some kinds of expenses. If you employer, that employer must withhold tier 1
benefit from these laws, you may have to pay at railroad retirement (RRTA) tax and tier 2 RRTA
least a minimum amount of tax in addition to anyQualified electric vehicle.This is a motor ve-tax.
other tax on these items. This is called the alter-hicle that: If you worked for two or more employers in
native minimum tax. 2002, you may have had too much social secur-1) Has at least four wheels and is manufac-The special treatment of some items of in- ity or RRTA tax withheld from your pay. You cantured primarily for use on public streets,come and expenses only allows you to postpone claim the excess social security or RRTA tier 1roads, and highways,paying tax until a later year. If in prior years you tax as a credit against your income tax. The
paid alternative minimum tax because of these following table shows the maximum amount of2) Is powered primarily by an electric motortax postponement items, you may be able to wages subject to tax and the maximum amountdrawing current from rechargeable batter-claim a credit for prior year minimum tax against of tax that should have been withheld in 2002.ies, fuel cells, or other portable sources ofyour current year’s regular tax. The amount ofelectrical current, Maximum Maximum taxthe credit cannot reduce your current year’s tax
wages that should have3) Is originally used by you,below your current year’s tentative alternative
Type of tax subject to tax been withheldminimum tax. 4) Is acquired for your own use, not for re-Social securityYou may be able to take a credit against yoursale, orregular tax if you: RRTA tier 1 $84,900 $5,263.805) Has never been used as a nonelectric ve-
1) Paid alternative minimum tax in 2001, RRTA tier 2 $63,000 $3,087.00hicle, and
Chapter 38 Other Credits Page 261

Page 264 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
All wages are subject to Medicare tax Long-Term Capital Gains, showing the undis-1. Add all social security tax withheld
withholding. tributed capital gains and the tax paid, if any.(but not more than $5,263.80 for
Claim the credit for the tax paid by entering theeach employer). Enter the total
CAUTION
!
amount on line 68, Form 1040, and checkinghere.................... $5,456.00
box a. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to yourUse Form 843, Claim for Refund and 2. Enter any uncollected social return. See Capital Gain Distributions in chapterRequest for Abatement, to claim a re- security tax on tips or group-term
9 for more information on undistributed capitallife insurance included in the totalfund of excess RRTA tier 2 tax. See
TIP
gains.on Form 1040, line 61........ – 0 –Publication 505, Tax Withholding and Estimated
Tax, for details. 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $5,263.80 or
less, stop here. You cannot claim Health Insurance Credit
the credit................. 5,456.00One employer. If any one employer withheld
social security or RRTA tax that exceeded the Beginning December 2002, if you are an eligible4. Social security tax limit........ 5,263.80
amounts in the preceding table, you cannot individual, you can claim a tax credit equal to5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.claim the extra amount withheld by that em- 65% of the amount you pay for qualifying healthEnter the result here and on Formployer as a credit against your income tax. Your insurance for yourself, your spouse, and your1040, line 65 (or Form 1040A, lineemployer must adjust this for you. dependents for whom you can claim an exemp-4 3 ) .................... $ 192.20
tion on your tax return. Eligibility for the credit isJoint return.If you are filing a joint return, you determined on a monthly basis, as of the firstHow to figure the credit if you worked for acannot add the social security or RRTA tax with- day of each month.railroad.If you were a railroad employee dur-held from your spouse’s wages to the amount You are an eligible individual for any monthing 2002, figure the credit as follows:withheld from your wages. Figure the credit sep- you are one of the following recipients.arately for you and your spouse to determine if
either of you has excess withholding. 1. Add all social security and tier 1 • Eligible TAA recipient — You receive a
RRTA tax withheld (but not more trade adjustment allowance (TAA) for indi-How to claim the credit.If you file Form 1040,than $5,263.80 for each employer). viduals for at least one day in the month,enter the credit on line 65. If you file FormEnter the total here.......... or would receive a TAA but do not be-1040A, include the credit in the total on line 432. Enter any uncollected social cause you have not yet exhausted yourand put “Excess SST” and the amount of the security and tier 1 RRTA tax on unemployment benefits and you are cov-credit in the space to the left of the line.tips or group-term life insurance ered under a TAA certification.
included in the total on Form 1040,How to figure the credit if you did not work • Eligible alternative TAA recipient — Youline 61..................for a railroad.If you did not work for a railroad receive a supplemental wage allowanceduring 2002, figure the credit as follows:3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $5,263.80 or under section 246(a)(1) of the Trade Act ofless, stop here. You cannot claim
1974.the credit.................1. Add all social security tax withheld
• Eligible PBGC pension recipient — You(but not more than $5,263.80 for 4. Social security and tier 1 RRTA
each employer). Enter the total tax limit.................. 5,263.80 are at least 55 years old and are receiving
here.................... pension benefits from the Pension Benefit5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.
Guarantee Corporation (PBGC).2. Enter any uncollected social Enter the result here and on Form
security tax on tips or group-term 1040, line 65 (or Form 1040A, line For specific information about qualifying healthlife insurance included in the total 4 3 ) .................... insurance and eligibility requirements, see Pub-on Form 1040, line 61........
lication 502, Medical and Dental Expenses.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $5,263.80 or
Credit for Tax on To claim the credit, complete Form 8885 andless, stop here. You cannot claim
the credit................. attach it to your Form 1040 (or Form 1040NR).Undistributed Capital GainInclude your credit in the total for line 68, Form4. Social security tax limit........ 5,263.80
1040 (line 63, Form 1040NR), and check box c.You must include in your income any amounts5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If you claim this credit, you cannot take thethat regulated investment companies (com-Enter the result here and on Form same expenses into account in determiningmonly called mutual funds) or real estate invest-1040, line 65 (or Form 1040A, line your:ment trusts (REITs) allocated to you as capital4 3 ) ....................
gain distributions, even if you did not actually• Medical and dental expenses on Schedule
receive them. If the mutual fund or REIT paid aExample. You are married and file a joint A (Form 1040),
tax on the capital gain, you are allowed a creditreturn with your spouse who had no gross in- • Self-employed health insurance deduction,for the tax since it is considered paid by you. Thecome in 2002. During 2002, you worked for the ormutual fund or REIT will send you Form 2439,Brown Shoe Company and earned $48,000 in
Notice to Shareholder of Undistributedwages. Social security tax of $2,976 was with- • Archer MSA distribution.
held. You also worked for another employer in
2002 and earned $40,000 in wages. $2,480 of
social security tax was withheld from these
wages. Because you worked for more than one
employer and your total wages were more than
$84,900, you can claim a credit of $192.20 for
the excess social security tax withheld.
Page 262 Chapter 38 Other Credits

Page 265 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002
Tax Table
Use if your taxable income is less than $100,000.
If $100,000 or more, use the Tax Rate Schedules.
Example. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are filing a joint return. Their
taxable income on line 41 of Form 1040 is $25,300. First,
they find the $25,300–25,350 income line. Next, they find
the column for married filing jointly and read down the
column. The amount shown where the income line and filing
status column meet is $3,199. This is the tax amount they
should enter on line 42 of their Form 1040.
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
(Continued on next page)
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
3,484
3,491
3,499
3,506
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
3,184
3,191
3,199
3,206
3,709
3,722
3,736
3,749
3,284
3,291
3,299
3,306
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
05 00 0 0
51 5 11 1 1
15 25 22 2 2
25 50 44 4 4
50 75 66 6 6
75 100 99 9 9
100 125 11 11 11 11
125 150 14 14 14 14
150 175 16 16 16 16
175 200 19 19 19 19
200 225 21 21 21 21
225 250 24 24 24 24
250 275 26 26 26 26
275 300 29 29 29 29
300 325 31 31 31 31
325 350 34 34 34 34
350 375 36 36 36 36
375 400 39 39 39 39
400 425 41 41 41 41
425 450 44 44 44 44
450 475 46 46 46 46
475 500 49 49 49 49
500 525 51 51 51 51
525 550 54 54 54 54
550 575 56 56 56 56
575 600 59 59 59 59
600 625 61 61 61 61
625 650 64 64 64 64
650 675 66 66 66 66
675 700 69 69 69 69
700 725 71 71 71 71
725 750 74 74 74 74
750 775 76 76 76 76
775 800 79 79 79 79
800 825 81 81 81 81
825 850 84 84 84 84
850 875 86 86 86 86
875 900 89 89 89 89
900 925 91 91 91 91
925 950 94 94 94 94
950 975 96 96 96 96
975 1,000 99 99 99 99
1,000 1,025 101 101 101 101
1,025 1,050 104 104 104 104
1,050 1,075 106 106 106 106
1,075 1,100 109 109 109 109
1,100 1,125 111 111 111 111
1,125 1,150 114 114 114 114
1,150 1,175 116 116 116 116
1,175 1,200 119 119 119 119
1,200 1,225 121 121 121 121
1,225 1,250 124 124 124 124
1,250 1,275 126 126 126 126
1,275 1,300 129 129 129 129
1,300 1,325 131 131 131 131
1,325 1,350 134 134 134 134
1,350 1,375 136 136 136 136
1,375 1,400 139 139 139 139
1,400 1,425 141 141 141 141
1,425 1,450 144 144 144 144
1,450 1,475 146 146 146 146
1,475 1,500 149 149 149 149
1,500 1,525 151 151 151 151
1,525 1,550 154 154 154 154
1,550 1,575 156 156 156 156
1,575 1,600 159 159 159 159
1,600 1,625 161 161 161 161
1,625 1,650 164 164 164 164
1,650 1,675 166 166 166 166
1,675 1,700 169 169 169 169
1,700 1,725 171 171 171 171
1,725 1,750 174 174 174 174
1,750 1,775 176 176 176 176
1,775 1,800 179 179 179 179
1,800 1,825 181 181 181 181
1,825 1,850 184 184 184 184
1,850 1,875 186 186 186 186
1,875 1,900 189 189 189 189
1,900 1,925 191 191 191 191
1,925 1,950 194 194 194 194
1,950 1,975 196 196 196 196
1,975 2,000 199 199 199 199
2,000 2,025 201 201 201 201
2,025 2,050 204 204 204 204
2,050 2,075 206 206 206 206
2,075 2,100 209 209 209 209
2,100 2,125 211 211 211 211
2,125 2,150 214 214 214 214
2,150 2,175 216 216 216 216
2,175 2,200 219 219 219 219
2,200 2,225 221 221 221 221
2,225 2,250 224 224 224 224
2,250 2,275 226 226 226 226
2,275 2,300 229 229 229 229
2,300 2,325 231 231 231 231
2,325 2,350 234 234 234 234
2,350 2,375 236 236 236 236
2,375 2,400 239 239 239 239
2,400 2,425 241 241 241 241
2,425 2,450 244 244 244 244
2,450 2,475 246 246 246 246
2,475 2,500 249 249 249 249
2,500 2,525 251 251 251 251
2,525 2,550 254 254 254 254
2,550 2,575 256 256 256 256
2,575 2,600 259 259 259 259
2,600 2,625 261 261 261 261
2,625 2,650 264 264 264 264
2,650 2,675 266 266 266 266
2,675 2,700 269 269 269 269
2,700 2,725 271 271 271 271
2,725 2,750 274 274 274 274
2,750 2,775 276 276 276 276
2,775 2,800 279 279 279 279
2,800 2,825 281 281 281 281
2,825 2,850 284 284 284 284
2,850 2,875 286 286 286 286
2,875 2,900 289 289 289 289
2,900 2,925 291 291 291 291
2,925 2,950 294 294 294 294
2,950 2,975 296 296 296 296
2,975 3,000 299 299 299 299
3,000 3,050 303 303 303 303
3,050 3,100 308 308 308 308
3,100 3,150 313 313 313 313
3,150 3,200 318 318 318 318
3,200 3,250 323 323 323 323
3,250 3,300 328 328 328 328
3,300 3,350 333 333 333 333
3,350 3,400 338 338 338 338
3,400 3,450 343 343 343 343
3,450 3,500 348 348 348 348
3,500 3,550 353 353 353 353
3,550 3,600 358 358 358 358
3,600 3,650 363 363 363 363
3,650 3,700 368 368 368 368
3,700 3,750 373 373 373 373
3,750 3,800 378 378 378 378
3,800 3,850 383 383 383 383
3,850 3,900 388 388 388 388
3,900 3,950 393 393 393 393
3,950 4,000 398 398 398 398
4,000 4,050 403 403 403 403
4,050 4,100 408 408 408 408
4,100 4,150 413 413 413 413
4,150 4,200 418 418 418 418
4,200 4,250 423 423 423 423
4,250 4,300 428 428 428 428
4,300 4,350 433 433 433 433
4,350 4,400 438 438 438 438
4,400 4,450 443 443 443 443
4,450 4,500 448 448 448 448
4,500 4,550 453 453 453 453
4,550 4,600 458 458 458 458
4,600 4,650 463 463 463 463
4,650 4,700 468 468 468 468
4,700 4,750 473 473 473 473
4,750 4,800 478 478 478 478
4,800 4,850 483 483 483 483
4,850 4,900 488 488 488 488
4,900 4,950 493 493 493 493
4,950 5,000 498 498 498 498
Page 263

Page 266 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
11,000
12,000
13,000
5,000 5,050 503 503 503 503
5,050 5,100 508 508 508 508
5,100 5,150 513 513 513 513
5,150 5,200 518 518 518 518
5,200 5,250 523 523 523 523
5,250 5,300 528 528 528 528
5,300 5,350 533 533 533 533
5,350 5,400 538 538 538 538
5,400 5,450 543 543 543 543
5,450 5,500 548 548 548 548
5,500 5,550 553 553 553 553
5,550 5,600 558 558 558 558
5,600 5,650 563 563 563 563
5,650 5,700 568 568 568 568
5,700 5,750 573 573 573 573
5,750 5,800 578 578 578 578
5,800 5,850 583 583 583 583
5,850 5,900 588 588 588 588
5,900 5,950 593 593 593 593
5,950 6,000 598 598 598 598
6,000 6,050 604 603 604 603
6,050 6,100 611 608 611 608
6,100 6,150 619 613 619 613
6,150 6,200 626 618 626 618
6,200 6,250 634 623 634 623
6,250 6,300 641 628 641 628
6,300 6,350 649 633 649 633
6,350 6,400 656 638 656 638
6,400 6,450 664 643 664 643
6,450 6,500 671 648 671 648
6,500 6,550 679 653 679 653
6,550 6,600 686 658 686 658
6,600 6,650 694 663 694 663
6,650 6,700 701 668 701 668
6,700 6,750 709 673 709 673
6,750 6,800 716 678 716 678
6,800 6,850 724 683 724 683
6,850 6,900 731 688 731 688
6,900 6,950 739 693 739 693
6,950 7,000 746 698 746 698
7,000 7,050 754 703 754 703
7,050 7,100 761 708 761 708
7,100 7,150 769 713 769 713
7,150 7,200 776 718 776 718
7,200 7,250 784 723 784 723
7,250 7,300 791 728 791 728
7,300 7,350 799 733 799 733
7,350 7,400 806 738 806 738
7,400 7,450 814 743 814 743
7,450 7,500 821 748 821 748
7,500 7,550 829 753 829 753
7,550 7,600 836 758 836 758
7,600 7,650 844 763 844 763
7,650 7,700 851 768 851 768
7,700 7,750 859 773 859 773
7,750 7,800 866 778 866 778
7,800 7,850 874 783 874 783
7,850 7,900 881 788 881 788
7,900 7,950 889 793 889 793
7,950 8,000 896 798 896 798
8,000 8,050 904 803 904 803
8,050 8,100 911 808 911 808
8,100 8,150 919 813 919 813
8,150 8,200 926 818 926 818
8,200 8,250 934 823 934 823
8,250 8,300 941 828 941 828
8,300 8,350 949 833 949 833
8,350 8,400 956 838 956 838
8,400 8,450 964 843 964 843
8,450 8,500 971 848 971 848
8,500 8,550 979 853 979 853
8,550 8,600 986 858 986 858
8,600 8,650 994 863 994 863
8,650 8,700 1,001 868 1,001 868
8,700 8,750 1,009 873 1,009 873
8,750 8,800 1,016 878 1,016 878
8,800 8,850 1,024 883 1,024 883
8,850 8,900 1,031 888 1,031 888
8,900 8,950 1,039 893 1,039 893
8,950 9,000 1,046 898 1,046 898
9,000 9,050 1,054 903 1,054 903
9,050 9,100 1,061 908 1,061 908
9,100 9,150 1,069 913 1,069 913
9,150 9,200 1,076 918 1,076 918
9,200 9,250 1,084 923 1,084 923
9,250 9,300 1,091 928 1,091 928
9,300 9,350 1,099 933 1,099 933
9,350 9,400 1,106 938 1,106 938
9,400 9,450 1,114 943 1,114 943
9,450 9,500 1,121 948 1,121 948
9,500 9,550 1,129 953 1,129 953
9,550 9,600 1,136 958 1,136 958
9,600 9,650 1,144 963 1,144 963
9,650 9,700 1,151 968 1,151 968
9,700 9,750 1,159 973 1,159 973
9,750 9,800 1,166 978 1,166 978
9,800 9,850 1,174 983 1,174 983
9,850 9,900 1,181 988 1,181 988
9,900 9,950 1,189 993 1,189 993
9,950 10,000 1,196 998 1,196 998
10,000 10,050 1,204 1,003 1,204 1,004
10,050 10,100 1,211 1,008 1,211 1,011
10,100 10,150 1,219 1,013 1,219 1,019
10,150 10,200 1,226 1,018 1,226 1,026
10,200 10,250 1,234 1,023 1,234 1,034
10,250 10,300 1,241 1,028 1,241 1,041
10,300 10,350 1,249 1,033 1,249 1,049
10,350 10,400 1,256 1,038 1,256 1,056
10,400 10,450 1,264 1,043 1,264 1,064
10,450 10,500 1,271 1,048 1,271 1,071
10,500 10,550 1,279 1,053 1,279 1,079
10,550 10,600 1,286 1,058 1,286 1,086
10,600 10,650 1,294 1,063 1,294 1,094
10,650 10,700 1,301 1,068 1,301 1,101
10,700 10,750 1,309 1,073 1,309 1,109
10,750 10,800 1,316 1,078 1,316 1,116
10,800 10,850 1,324 1,083 1,324 1,124
10,850 10,900 1,331 1,088 1,331 1,131
10,900 10,950 1,339 1,093 1,339 1,139
10,950 11,000 1,346 1,098 1,346 1,146
11,000 11,050 1,354 1,103 1,354 1,154
11,050 11,100 1,361 1,108 1,361 1,161
11,100 11,150 1,369 1,113 1,369 1,169
11,150 11,200 1,376 1,118 1,376 1,176
11,200 11,250 1,384 1,123 1,384 1,184
11,250 11,300 1,391 1,128 1,391 1,191
11,300 11,350 1,399 1,133 1,399 1,199
11,350 11,400 1,406 1,138 1,406 1,206
11,400 11,450 1,414 1,143 1,414 1,214
11,450 11,500 1,421 1,148 1,421 1,221
11,500 11,550 1,429 1,153 1,429 1,229
11,550 11,600 1,436 1,158 1,436 1,236
11,600 11,650 1,444 1,163 1,444 1,244
11,650 11,700 1,451 1,168 1,451 1,251
11,700 11,750 1,459 1,173 1,459 1,259
11,750 11,800 1,466 1,178 1,466 1,266
11,800 11,850 1,474 1,183 1,474 1,274
11,850 11,900 1,481 1,188 1,481 1,281
11,900 11,950 1,489 1,193 1,489 1,289
11,950 12,000 1,496 1,198 1,496 1,296
12,000 12,050 1,504 1,204 1,504 1,304
12,050 12,100 1,511 1,211 1,511 1,311
12,100 12,150 1,519 1,219 1,519 1,319
12,150 12,200 1,526 1,226 1,526 1,326
12,200 12,250 1,534 1,234 1,534 1,334
12,250 12,300 1,541 1,241 1,541 1,341
12,300 12,350 1,549 1,249 1,549 1,349
12,350 12,400 1,556 1,256 1,556 1,356
12,400 12,450 1,564 1,264 1,564 1,364
12,450 12,500 1,571 1,271 1,571 1,371
12,500 12,550 1,579 1,279 1,579 1,379
12,550 12,600 1,586 1,286 1,586 1,386
12,600 12,650 1,594 1,294 1,594 1,394
12,650 12,700 1,601 1,301 1,601 1,401
12,700 12,750 1,609 1,309 1,609 1,409
12,750 12,800 1,616 1,316 1,616 1,416
12,800 12,850 1,624 1,324 1,624 1,424
12,850 12,900 1,631 1,331 1,631 1,431
12,900 12,950 1,639 1,339 1,639 1,439
12,950 13,000 1,646 1,346 1,646 1,446
13,000 13,050 1,654 1,354 1,654 1,454
13,050 13,100 1,661 1,361 1,661 1,461
13,100 13,150 1,669 1,369 1,669 1,469
13,150 13,200 1,676 1,376 1,676 1,476
13,200 13,250 1,684 1,384 1,684 1,484
13,250 13,300 1,691 1,391 1,691 1,491
13,300 13,350 1,699 1,399 1,699 1,499
13,350 13,400 1,706 1,406 1,706 1,506
13,400 13,450 1,714 1,414 1,714 1,514
13,450 13,500 1,721 1,421 1,721 1,521
13,500 13,550 1,729 1,429 1,729 1,529
13,550 13,600 1,736 1,436 1,736 1,536
13,600 13,650 1,744 1,444 1,744 1,544
13,650 13,700 1,751 1,451 1,751 1,551
13,700 13,750 1,759 1,459 1,759 1,559
13,750 13,800 1,766 1,466 1,766 1,566
13,800 13,850 1,774 1,474 1,774 1,574
13,850 13,900 1,781 1,481 1,781 1,581
13,900 13,950 1,789 1,489 1,789 1,589
13,950 14,000 1,796 1,496 1,796 1,596
Page 264

Page 267 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
14,000
15,000
16,000
17,000
18,000
19,000
20,000
21,000
22,000
14,000 14,050 1,804 1,504 1,804 1,604
14,050 14,100 1,811 1,511 1,811 1,611
14,100 14,150 1,819 1,519 1,819 1,619
14,150 14,200 1,826 1,526 1,826 1,626
14,200 14,250 1,834 1,534 1,834 1,634
14,250 14,300 1,841 1,541 1,841 1,641
14,300 14,350 1,849 1,549 1,849 1,649
14,350 14,400 1,856 1,556 1,856 1,656
14,400 14,450 1,864 1,564 1,864 1,664
14,450 14,500 1,871 1,571 1,871 1,671
14,500 14,550 1,879 1,579 1,879 1,679
14,550 14,600 1,886 1,586 1,886 1,686
14,600 14,650 1,894 1,594 1,894 1,694
14,650 14,700 1,901 1,601 1,901 1,701
14,700 14,750 1,909 1,609 1,909 1,709
14,750 14,800 1,916 1,616 1,916 1,716
14,800 14,850 1,924 1,624 1,924 1,724
14,850 14,900 1,931 1,631 1,931 1,731
14,900 14,950 1,939 1,639 1,939 1,739
14,950 15,000 1,946 1,646 1,946 1,746
15,000 15,050 1,954 1,654 1,954 1,754
15,050 15,100 1,961 1,661 1,961 1,761
15,100 15,150 1,969 1,669 1,969 1,769
15,150 15,200 1,976 1,676 1,976 1,776
15,200 15,250 1,984 1,684 1,984 1,784
15,250 15,300 1,991 1,691 1,991 1,791
15,300 15,350 1,999 1,699 1,999 1,799
15,350 15,400 2,006 1,706 2,006 1,806
15,400 15,450 2,014 1,714 2,014 1,814
15,450 15,500 2,021 1,721 2,021 1,821
15,500 15,550 2,029 1,729 2,029 1,829
15,550 15,600 2,036 1,736 2,036 1,836
15,600 15,650 2,044 1,744 2,044 1,844
15,650 15,700 2,051 1,751 2,051 1,851
15,700 15,750 2,059 1,759 2,059 1,859
15,750 15,800 2,066 1,766 2,066 1,866
15,800 15,850 2,074 1,774 2,074 1,874
15,850 15,900 2,081 1,781 2,081 1,881
15,900 15,950 2,089 1,789 2,089 1,889
15,950 16,000 2,096 1,796 2,096 1,896
16,000 16,050 2,104 1,804 2,104 1,904
16,050 16,100 2,111 1,811 2,111 1,911
16,100 16,150 2,119 1,819 2,119 1,919
16,150 16,200 2,126 1,826 2,126 1,926
16,200 16,250 2,134 1,834 2,134 1,934
16,250 16,300 2,141 1,841 2,141 1,941
16,300 16,350 2,149 1,849 2,149 1,949
16,350 16,400 2,156 1,856 2,156 1,956
16,400 16,450 2,164 1,864 2,164 1,964
16,450 16,500 2,171 1,871 2,171 1,971
16,500 16,550 2,179 1,879 2,179 1,979
16,550 16,600 2,186 1,886 2,186 1,986
16,600 16,650 2,194 1,894 2,194 1,994
16,650 16,700 2,201 1,901 2,201 2,001
16,700 16,750 2,209 1,909 2,209 2,009
16,750 16,800 2,216 1,916 2,216 2,016
16,800 16,850 2,224 1,924 2,224 2,024
16,850 16,900 2,231 1,931 2,231 2,031
16,900 16,950 2,239 1,939 2,239 2,039
16,950 17,000 2,246 1,946 2,246 2,046
17,000 17,050 2,254 1,954 2,254 2,054
17,050 17,100 2,261 1,961 2,261 2,061
17,100 17,150 2,269 1,969 2,269 2,069
17,150 17,200 2,276 1,976 2,276 2,076
17,200 17,250 2,284 1,984 2,284 2,084
17,250 17,300 2,291 1,991 2,291 2,091
17,300 17,350 2,299 1,999 2,299 2,099
17,350 17,400 2,306 2,006 2,306 2,106
17,400 17,450 2,314 2,014 2,314 2,114
17,450 17,500 2,321 2,021 2,321 2,121
17,500 17,550 2,329 2,029 2,329 2,129
17,550 17,600 2,336 2,036 2,336 2,136
17,600 17,650 2,344 2,044 2,344 2,144
17,650 17,700 2,351 2,051 2,351 2,151
17,700 17,750 2,359 2,059 2,359 2,159
17,750 17,800 2,366 2,066 2,366 2,166
17,800 17,850 2,374 2,074 2,374 2,174
17,850 17,900 2,381 2,081 2,381 2,181
17,900 17,950 2,389 2,089 2,389 2,189
17,950 18,000 2,396 2,096 2,396 2,196
18,000 18,050 2,404 2,104 2,404 2,204
18,050 18,100 2,411 2,111 2,411 2,211
18,100 18,150 2,419 2,119 2,419 2,219
18,150 18,200 2,426 2,126 2,426 2,226
18,200 18,250 2,434 2,134 2,434 2,234
18,250 18,300 2,441 2,141 2,441 2,241
18,300 18,350 2,449 2,149 2,449 2,249
18,350 18,400 2,456 2,156 2,456 2,256
18,400 18,450 2,464 2,164 2,464 2,264
18,450 18,500 2,471 2,171 2,471 2,271
18,500 18,550 2,479 2,179 2,479 2,279
18,550 18,600 2,486 2,186 2,486 2,286
18,600 18,650 2,494 2,194 2,494 2,294
18,650 18,700 2,501 2,201 2,501 2,301
18,700 18,750 2,509 2,209 2,509 2,309
18,750 18,800 2,516 2,216 2,516 2,316
18,800 18,850 2,524 2,224 2,524 2,324
18,850 18,900 2,531 2,231 2,531 2,331
18,900 18,950 2,539 2,239 2,539 2,339
18,950 19,000 2,546 2,246 2,546 2,346
19,000 19,050 2,554 2,254 2,554 2,354
19,050 19,100 2,561 2,261 2,561 2,361
19,100 19,150 2,569 2,269 2,569 2,369
19,150 19,200 2,576 2,276 2,576 2,376
19,200 19,250 2,584 2,284 2,584 2,384
19,250 19,300 2,591 2,291 2,591 2,391
19,300 19,350 2,599 2,299 2,599 2,399
19,350 19,400 2,606 2,306 2,606 2,406
19,400 19,450 2,614 2,314 2,614 2,414
19,450 19,500 2,621 2,321 2,621 2,421
19,500 19,550 2,629 2,329 2,629 2,429
19,550 19,600 2,636 2,336 2,636 2,436
19,600 19,650 2,644 2,344 2,644 2,444
19,650 19,700 2,651 2,351 2,651 2,451
19,700 19,750 2,659 2,359 2,659 2,459
19,750 19,800 2,666 2,366 2,666 2,466
19,800 19,850 2,674 2,374 2,674 2,474
19,850 19,900 2,681 2,381 2,681 2,481
19,900 19,950 2,689 2,389 2,689 2,489
19,950 20,000 2,696 2,396 2,696 2,496
20,000 20,050 2,704 2,404 2,704 2,504
20,050 20,100 2,711 2,411 2,711 2,511
20,100 20,150 2,719 2,419 2,719 2,519
20,150 20,200 2,726 2,426 2,726 2,526
20,200 20,250 2,734 2,434 2,734 2,534
20,250 20,300 2,741 2,441 2,741 2,541
20,300 20,350 2,749 2,449 2,749 2,549
20,350 20,400 2,756 2,456 2,756 2,556
20,400 20,450 2,764 2,464 2,764 2,564
20,450 20,500 2,771 2,471 2,771 2,571
20,500 20,550 2,779 2,479 2,779 2,579
20,550 20,600 2,786 2,486 2,786 2,586
20,600 20,650 2,794 2,494 2,794 2,594
20,650 20,700 2,801 2,501 2,801 2,601
20,700 20,750 2,809 2,509 2,809 2,609
20,750 20,800 2,816 2,516 2,816 2,616
20,800 20,850 2,824 2,524 2,824 2,624
20,850 20,900 2,831 2,531 2,831 2,631
20,900 20,950 2,839 2,539 2,839 2,639
20,950 21,000 2,846 2,546 2,846 2,646
21,000 21,050 2,854 2,554 2,854 2,654
21,050 21,100 2,861 2,561 2,861 2,661
21,100 21,150 2,869 2,569 2,869 2,669
21,150 21,200 2,876 2,576 2,876 2,676
21,200 21,250 2,884 2,584 2,884 2,684
21,250 21,300 2,891 2,591 2,891 2,691
21,300 21,350 2,899 2,599 2,899 2,699
21,350 21,400 2,906 2,606 2,906 2,706
21,400 21,450 2,914 2,614 2,914 2,714
21,450 21,500 2,921 2,621 2,921 2,721
21,500 21,550 2,929 2,629 2,929 2,729
21,550 21,600 2,936 2,636 2,936 2,736
21,600 21,650 2,944 2,644 2,944 2,744
21,650 21,700 2,951 2,651 2,951 2,751
21,700 21,750 2,959 2,659 2,959 2,759
21,750 21,800 2,966 2,666 2,966 2,766
21,800 21,850 2,974 2,674 2,974 2,774
21,850 21,900 2,981 2,681 2,981 2,781
21,900 21,950 2,989 2,689 2,989 2,789
21,950 22,000 2,996 2,696 2,996 2,796
22,000 22,050 3,004 2,704 3,004 2,804
22,050 22,100 3,011 2,711 3,011 2,811
22,100 22,150 3,019 2,719 3,019 2,819
22,150 22,200 3,026 2,726 3,026 2,826
22,200 22,250 3,034 2,734 3,034 2,834
22,250 22,300 3,041 2,741 3,041 2,841
22,300 22,350 3,049 2,749 3,049 2,849
22,350 22,400 3,056 2,756 3,056 2,856
22,400 22,450 3,064 2,764 3,064 2,864
22,450 22,500 3,071 2,771 3,071 2,871
22,500 22,550 3,079 2,779 3,079 2,879
22,550 22,600 3,086 2,786 3,086 2,886
22,600 22,650 3,094 2,794 3,094 2,894
22,650 22,700 3,101 2,801 3,101 2,901
22,700 22,750 3,109 2,809 3,109 2,909
22,750 22,800 3,116 2,816 3,116 2,916
22,800 22,850 3,124 2,824 3,124 2,924
22,850 22,900 3,131 2,831 3,131 2,931
22,900 22,950 3,139 2,839 3,139 2,939
22,950 23,000 3,146 2,846 3,146 2,946
Page 265

Page 268 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
23,000 23,050 3,154 2,854 3,154 2,954
23,050 23,100 3,161 2,861 3,161 2,961
23,100 23,150 3,169 2,869 3,169 2,969
23,150 23,200 3,176 2,876 3,176 2,976
23,200 23,250 3,184 2,884 3,184 2,984
23,250 23,300 3,191 2,891 3,191 2,991
23,300 23,350 3,199 2,899 3,199 2,999
23,350 23,400 3,206 2,906 3,209 3,006
23,400 23,450 3,214 2,914 3,014
23,450 23,500 3,221 2,921 3,236 3,021
23,500 23,550 3,229 2,929 3,250 3,029
23,550 23,600 3,236 2,936 3,263 3,036
23,600 23,650 3,244 2,944 3,277 3,044
23,650 23,700 3,251 2,951 3,290 3,051
23,700 23,750 3,259 2,959 3,304 3,059
23,750 23,800 3,266 2,966 3,317 3,066
23,800 23,850 3,274 2,974 3,331 3,074
23,850 23,900 3,281 2,981 3,344 3,081
23,900 23,950 3,289 2,989 3,358 3,089
23,950 24,000 3,296 2,996 3,371 3,096
24,000 24,050 3,304 3,004 3,385 3,104
24,050 24,100 3,311 3,011 3,398 3,111
24,100 24,150 3,319 3,019 3,412 3,119
24,150 24,200 3,326 3,026 3,425 3,126
24,200 24,250 3,334 3,034 3,439 3,134
24,250 24,300 3,341 3,041 3,452 3,141
24,300 24,350 3,349 3,049 3,466 3,149
24,350 24,400 3,356 3,056 3,479 3,156
24,400 24,450 3,364 3,064 3,493 3,164
24,450 24,500 3,371 3,071 3,506 3,171
24,500 24,550 3,379 3,079 3,520 3,179
24,550 24,600 3,386 3,086 3,533 3,186
24,600 24,650 3,394 3,094 3,547 3,194
24,650 24,700 3,401 3,101 3,560 3,201
24,700 24,750 3,409 3,109 3,574 3,209
24,750 24,800 3,416 3,116 3,587 3,216
24,800 24,850 3,424 3,124 3,601 3,224
24,850 24,900 3,431 3,131 3,614 3,231
24,900 24,950 3,439 3,139 3,628 3,239
24,950 25,000 3,446 3,146 3,641 3,246
25,000 25,050 3,454 3,154 3,655 3,254
25,050 25,100 3,461 3,161 3,668 3,261
25,100 25,150 3,469 3,169 3,682 3,269
25,150 25,200 3,476 3,176 3,695 3,276
25,200 25,250 3,484 3,184 3,709 3,284
25,250 25,300 3,491 3,191 3,722 3,291
25,300 25,350 3,499 3,199 3,736 3,299
25,350 25,400 3,506 3,206 3,749 3,306
25,400 25,450 3,514 3,214 3,763 3,314
25,450 25,500 3,521 3,221 3,776 3,321
25,500 25,550 3,529 3,229 3,790 3,329
25,550 25,600 3,536 3,236 3,803 3,336
25,600 25,650 3,544 3,244 3,817 3,344
25,650 25,700 3,551 3,251 3,830 3,351
25,700 25,750 3,559 3,259 3,844 3,359
25,750 25,800 3,566 3,266 3,857 3,366
25,800 25,850 3,574 3,274 3,871 3,374
25,850 25,900 3,581 3,281 3,884 3,381
25,900 25,950 3,589 3,289 3,898 3,389
25,950 26,000 3,596 3,296 3,911 3,396
26,000 26,050 3,604 3,304 3,925 3,404
26,050 26,100 3,611 3,311 3,938 3,411
26,100 26,150 3,619 3,319 3,952 3,419
26,150 26,200 3,626 3,326 3,965 3,426
26,200 26,250 3,634 3,334 3,979 3,434
26,250 26,300 3,641 3,341 3,992 3,441
26,300 26,350 3,649 3,349 4,006 3,449
26,350 26,400 3,656 3,356 4,019 3,456
26,400 26,450 3,664 3,364 4,033 3,464
26,450 26,500 3,671 3,371 4,046 3,471
26,500 26,550 3,679 3,379 4,060 3,479
26,550 26,600 3,686 3,386 4,073 3,486
26,600 26,650 3,694 3,394 4,087 3,494
26,650 26,700 3,701 3,401 4,100 3,501
26,700 26,750 3,709 3,409 4,114 3,509
26,750 26,800 3,716 3,416 4,127 3,516
26,800 26,850 3,724 3,424 4,141 3,524
26,850 26,900 3,731 3,431 4,154 3,531
26,900 26,950 3,739 3,439 4,168 3,539
26,950 27,000 3,746 3,446 4,181 3,546
27,000 27,050 3,754 3,454 4,195 3,554
27,050 27,100 3,761 3,461 4,208 3,561
27,100 27,150 3,769 3,469 4,222 3,569
27,150 27,200 3,776 3,476 4,235 3,576
27,200 27,250 3,784 3,484 4,249 3,584
27,250 27,300 3,791 3,491 4,262 3,591
27,300 27,350 3,799 3,499 4,276 3,599
27,350 27,400 3,806 3,506 4,289 3,606
27,400 27,450 3,814 3,514 4,303 3,614
27,450 27,500 3,821 3,521 4,316 3,621
27,500 27,550 3,829 3,529 4,330 3,629
27,550 27,600 3,836 3,536 4,343 3,636
27,600 27,650 3,844 3,544 4,357 3,644
27,650 27,700 3,851 3,551 4,370 3,651
27,700 27,750 3,859 3,559 4,384 3,659
27,750 27,800 3,866 3,566 4,397 3,666
27,800 27,850 3,874 3,574 4,411 3,674
27,850 27,900 3,881 3,581 4,424 3,681
27,900 27,950 3,889 3,589 4,438 3,689
27,950 28,000 3,899 3,596 4,451 3,696
28,000 28,050 3,913 3,604 4,465 3,704
28,050 28,100 3,926 3,611 4,478 3,711
28,100 28,150 3,940 3,619 4,492 3,719
28,150 28,200 3,953 3,626 4,505 3,726
28,200 28,250 3,967 3,634 4,519 3,734
28,250 28,300 3,980 3,641 4,532 3,741
28,300 28,350 3,994 3,649 4,546 3,749
28,350 28,400 4,007 3,656 4,559 3,756
28,400 28,450 4,021 3,664 4,573 3,764
28,450 28,500 4,034 3,671 4,586 3,771
28,500 28,550 4,048 3,679 4,600 3,779
28,550 28,600 4,061 3,686 4,613 3,786
28,600 28,650 4,075 3,694 4,627 3,794
28,650 28,700 4,088 3,701 4,640 3,801
28,700 28,750 4,102 3,709 4,654 3,809
28,750 28,800 4,115 3,716 4,667 3,816
28,800 28,850 4,129 3,724 4,681 3,824
28,850 28,900 4,142 3,731 4,694 3,831
28,900 28,950 4,156 3,739 4,708 3,839
28,950 29,000 4,169 3,746 4,721 3,846
29,000 29,050 4,183 3,754 4,735 3,854
29,050 29,100 4,196 3,761 4,748 3,861
29,100 29,150 4,210 3,769 4,762 3,869
29,150 29,200 4,223 3,776 4,775 3,876
29,200 29,250 4,237 3,784 4,789 3,884
29,250 29,300 4,250 3,791 4,802 3,891
29,300 29,350 4,264 3,799 4,816 3,899
29,350 29,400 4,277 3,806 4,829 3,906
29,400 29,450 4,291 3,814 4,843 3,914
29,450 29,500 4,304 3,821 4,856 3,921
29,500 29,550 4,318 3,829 4,870 3,929
29,550 29,600 4,331 3,836 4,883 3,936
29,600 29,650 4,345 3,844 4,897 3,944
29,650 29,700 4,358 3,851 4,910 3,951
29,700 29,750 4,372 3,859 4,924 3,959
29,750 29,800 4,385 3,866 4,937 3,966
29,800 29,850 4,399 3,874 4,951 3,974
29,850 29,900 4,412 3,881 4,964 3,981
29,900 29,950 4,426 3,889 4,978 3,989
29,950 30,000 4,439 3,896 4,991 3,996
30,000 30,050 4,453 3,904 5,005 4,004
30,050 30,100 4,466 3,911 5,018 4,011
30,100 30,150 4,480 3,919 5,032 4,019
30,150 30,200 4,493 3,926 5,045 4,026
30,200 30,250 4,507 3,934 5,059 4,034
30,250 30,300 4,520 3,941 5,072 4,041
30,300 30,350 4,534 3,949 5,086 4,049
30,350 30,400 4,547 3,956 5,099 4,056
30,400 30,450 4,561 3,964 5,113 4,064
30,450 30,500 4,574 3,971 5,126 4,071
30,500 30,550 4,588 3,979 5,140 4,079
30,550 30,600 4,601 3,986 5,153 4,086
30,600 30,650 4,615 3,994 5,167 4,094
30,650 30,700 4,628 4,001 5,180 4,101
30,700 30,750 4,642 4,009 5,194 4,109
30,750 30,800 4,655 4,016 5,207 4,116
30,800 30,850 4,669 4,024 5,221 4,124
30,850 30,900 4,682 4,031 5,234 4,131
30,900 30,950 4,696 4,039 5,248 4,139
30,950 31,000 4,709 4,046 5,261 4,146
31,000 31,050 4,723 4,054 5,275 4,154
31,050 31,100 4,736 4,061 5,288 4,161
31,100 31,150 4,750 4,069 5,302 4,169
31,150 31,200 4,763 4,076 5,315 4,176
31,200 31,250 4,777 4,084 5,329 4,184
31,250 31,300 4,790 4,091 5,342 4,191
31,300 31,350 4,804 4,099 5,356 4,199
31,350 31,400 4,817 4,106 5,369 4,206
31,400 31,450 4,831 4,114 5,383 4,214
31,450 31,500 4,844 4,121 5,396 4,221
31,500 31,550 4,858 4,129 5,410 4,229
31,550 31,600 4,871 4,136 5,423 4,236
31,600 31,650 4,885 4,144 5,437 4,244
31,650 31,700 4,898 4,151 5,450 4,251
31,700 31,750 4,912 4,159 5,464 4,259
31,750 31,800 4,925 4,166 5,477 4,266
31,800 31,850 4,939 4,174 5,491 4,274
31,850 31,900 4,952 4,181 5,504 4,281
31,900 31,950 4,966 4,189 5,518 4,289
31,950 32,000 4,979 4,196 5,531 4,296
3,223
Page 266

Page 269 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
32,000 32,050 4,993 4,204 5,545 4,304
32,050 32,100 5,006 4,211 5,558 4,311
32,100 32,150 5,020 4,219 5,572 4,319
32,150 32,200 5,033 4,226 5,585 4,326
32,200 32,250 5,047 4,234 5,599 4,334
32,250 32,300 5,060 4,241 5,612 4,341
32,300 32,350 5,074 4,249 5,626 4,349
32,350 32,400 5,087 4,256 5,639 4,356
32,400 32,450 5,101 4,264 5,653 4,364
32,450 32,500 5,114 4,271 5,666 4,371
32,500 32,550 5,128 4,279 5,680 4,379
32,550 32,600 5,141 4,286 5,693 4,386
32,600 32,650 5,155 4,294 5,707 4,394
32,650 32,700 5,168 4,301 5,720 4,401
32,700 32,750 5,182 4,309 5,734 4,409
32,750 32,800 5,195 4,316 5,747 4,416
32,800 32,850 5,209 4,324 5,761 4,424
32,850 32,900 5,222 4,331 5,774 4,431
32,900 32,950 5,236 4,339 5,788 4,439
32,950 33,000 5,249 4,346 5,801 4,446
33,000 33,050 5,263 4,354 5,815 4,454
33,050 33,100 5,276 4,361 5,828 4,461
33,100 33,150 5,290 4,369 5,842 4,469
33,150 33,200 5,303 4,376 5,855 4,476
33,200 33,250 5,317 4,384 5,869 4,484
33,250 33,300 5,330 4,391 5,882 4,491
33,300 33,350 5,344 4,399 5,896 4,499
33,350 33,400 5,357 4,406 5,909 4,506
33,400 33,450 5,371 4,414 5,923 4,514
33,450 33,500 5,384 4,421 5,936 4,521
33,500 33,550 5,398 4,429 5,950 4,529
33,550 33,600 5,411 4,436 5,963 4,536
33,600 33,650 5,425 4,444 5,977 4,544
33,650 33,700 5,438 4,451 5,990 4,551
33,700 33,750 5,452 4,459 6,004 4,559
33,750 33,800 5,465 4,466 6,017 4,566
33,800 33,850 5,479 4,474 6,031 4,574
33,850 33,900 5,492 4,481 6,044 4,581
33,900 33,950 5,506 4,489 6,058 4,589
33,950 34,000 5,519 4,496 6,071 4,596
34,000 34,050 5,533 4,504 6,085 4,604
34,050 34,100 5,546 4,511 6,098 4,611
34,100 34,150 5,560 4,519 6,112 4,619
34,150 34,200 5,573 4,526 6,125 4,626
34,200 34,250 5,587 4,534 6,139 4,634
34,250 34,300 5,600 4,541 6,152 4,641
34,300 34,350 5,614 4,549 6,166 4,649
34,350 34,400 5,627 4,556 6,179 4,656
34,400 34,450 5,641 4,564 6,193 4,664
34,450 34,500 5,654 4,571 6,206 4,671
34,500 34,550 5,668 4,579 6,220 4,679
34,550 34,600 5,681 4,586 6,233 4,686
34,600 34,650 5,695 4,594 6,247 4,694
34,650 34,700 5,708 4,601 6,260 4,701
34,700 34,750 5,722 4,609 6,274 4,709
34,750 34,800 5,735 4,616 6,287 4,716
34,800 34,850 5,749 4,624 6,301 4,724
34,850 34,900 5,762 4,631 6,314 4,731
34,900 34,950 5,776 4,639 6,328 4,739
34,950 35,000 5,789 4,646 6,341 4,746
35,000 35,050 5,803 4,654 6,355 4,754
35,050 35,100 5,816 4,661 6,368 4,761
35,100 35,150 5,830 4,669 6,382 4,769
35,150 35,200 5,843 4,676 6,395 4,776
35,200 35,250 5,857 4,684 6,409 4,784
35,250 35,300 5,870 4,691 6,422 4,791
35,300 35,350 5,884 4,699 6,436 4,799
35,350 35,400 5,897 4,706 6,449 4,806
35,400 35,450 5,911 4,714 6,463 4,814
35,450 35,500 5,924 4,721 6,476 4,821
35,500 35,550 5,938 4,729 6,490 4,829
35,550 35,600 5,951 4,736 6,503 4,836
35,600 35,650 5,965 4,744 6,517 4,844
35,650 35,700 5,978 4,751 6,530 4,851
35,700 35,750 5,992 4,759 6,544 4,859
35,750 35,800 6,005 4,766 6,557 4,866
35,800 35,850 6,019 4,774 6,571 4,874
35,850 35,900 6,032 4,781 6,584 4,881
35,900 35,950 6,046 4,789 6,598 4,889
35,950 36,000 6,059 4,796 6,611 4,896
36,000 36,050 6,073 4,804 6,625 4,904
36,050 36,100 6,086 4,811 6,638 4,911
36,100 36,150 6,100 4,819 6,652 4,919
36,150 36,200 6,113 4,826 6,665 4,926
36,200 36,250 6,127 4,834 6,679 4,934
36,250 36,300 6,140 4,841 6,692 4,941
36,300 36,350 6,154 4,849 6,706 4,949
36,350 36,400 6,167 4,856 6,719 4,956
36,400 36,450 6,181 4,864 6,733 4,964
36,450 36,500 6,194 4,871 6,746 4,971
36,500 36,550 6,208 4,879 6,760 4,979
36,550 36,600 6,221 4,886 6,773 4,986
36,600 36,650 6,235 4,894 6,787 4,994
36,650 36,700 6,248 4,901 6,800 5,001
36,700 36,750 6,262 4,909 6,814 5,009
36,750 36,800 6,275 4,916 6,827 5,016
36,800 36,850 6,289 4,924 6,841 5,024
36,850 36,900 6,302 4,931 6,854 5,031
36,900 36,950 6,316 4,939 6,868 5,039
36,950 37,000 6,329 4,946 6,881 5,046
37,000 37,050 6,343 4,954 6,895 5,054
37,050 37,100 6,356 4,961 6,908 5,061
37,100 37,150 6,370 4,969 6,922 5,069
37,150 37,200 6,383 4,976 6,935 5,076
37,200 37,250 6,397 4,984 6,949 5,084
37,250 37,300 6,410 4,991 6,962 5,091
37,300 37,350 6,424 4,999 6,976 5,099
37,350 37,400 6,437 5,006 6,989 5,106
37,400 37,450 6,451 5,014 7,003 5,114
37,450 37,500 6,464 5,021 7,016 5,124
37,500 37,550 6,478 5,029 7,030 5,138
37,550 37,600 6,491 5,036 7,043 5,151
37,600 37,650 6,505 5,044 7,057 5,165
37,650 37,700 6,518 5,051 7,070 5,178
37,700 37,750 6,532 5,059 7,084 5,192
37,750 37,800 6,545 5,066 7,097 5,205
37,800 37,850 6,559 5,074 7,111 5,219
37,850 37,900 6,572 5,081 7,124 5,232
37,900 37,950 6,586 5,089 7,138 5,246
37,950 38,000 6,599 5,096 7,151 5,259
38,000 38,050 6,613 5,104 7,165 5,273
38,050 38,100 6,626 5,111 7,178 5,286
38,100 38,150 6,640 5,119 7,192 5,300
38,150 38,200 6,653 5,126 7,205 5,313
38,200 38,250 6,667 5,134 7,219 5,327
38,250 38,300 6,680 5,141 7,232 5,340
38,300 38,350 6,694 5,149 7,246 5,354
38,350 38,400 6,707 5,156 7,259 5,367
38,400 38,450 6,721 5,164 7,273 5,381
38,450 38,500 6,734 5,171 7,286 5,394
38,500 38,550 6,748 5,179 7,300 5,408
38,550 38,600 6,761 5,186 7,313 5,421
38,600 38,650 6,775 5,194 7,327 5,435
38,650 38,700 6,788 5,201 7,340 5,448
38,700 38,750 6,802 5,209 7,354 5,462
38,750 38,800 6,815 5,216 7,367 5,475
38,800 38,850 6,829 5,224 7,381 5,489
38,850 38,900 6,842 5,231 7,394 5,502
38,900 38,950 6,856 5,239 7,408 5,516
38,950 39,000 6,869 5,246 7,421 5,529
39,000 39,050 6,883 5,254 7,435 5,543
39,050 39,100 6,896 5,261 7,448 5,556
39,100 39,150 6,910 5,269 7,462 5,570
39,150 39,200 6,923 5,276 7,475 5,583
39,200 39,250 6,937 5,284 7,489 5,597
39,250 39,300 6,950 5,291 7,502 5,610
39,300 39,350 6,964 5,299 7,516 5,624
39,350 39,400 6,977 5,306 7,529 5,637
39,400 39,450 6,991 5,314 7,543 5,651
39,450 39,500 7,004 5,321 7,556 5,664
39,500 39,550 7,018 5,329 7,570 5,678
39,550 39,600 7,031 5,336 7,583 5,691
39,600 39,650 7,045 5,344 7,597 5,705
39,650 39,700 7,058 5,351 7,610 5,718
39,700 39,750 7,072 5,359 7,624 5,732
39,750 39,800 7,085 5,366 7,637 5,745
39,800 39,850 7,099 5,374 7,651 5,759
39,850 39,900 7,112 5,381 7,664 5,772
39,900 39,950 7,126 5,389 7,678 5,786
39,950 40,000 7,139 5,396 7,691 5,799
40,000 40,050 7,153 5,404 7,705 5,813
40,050 40,100 7,166 5,411 7,718 5,826
40,100 40,150 7,180 5,419 7,732 5,840
40,150 40,200 7,193 5,426 7,745 5,853
40,200 40,250 7,207 5,434 7,759 5,867
40,250 40,300 7,220 5,441 7,772 5,880
40,300 40,350 7,234 5,449 7,786 5,894
40,350 40,400 7,247 5,456 7,799 5,907
40,400 40,450 7,261 5,464 7,813 5,921
40,450 40,500 7,274 5,471 7,826 5,934
40,500 40,550 7,288 5,479 7,840 5,948
40,550 40,600 7,301 5,486 7,853 5,961
40,600 40,650 7,315 5,494 7,867 5,975
40,650 40,700 7,328 5,501 7,880 5,988
40,700 40,750 7,342 5,509 7,894 6,002
40,750 40,800 7,355 5,516 7,907 6,015
40,800 40,850 7,369 5,524 7,921 6,029
40,850 40,900 7,382 5,531 7,934 6,042
40,900 40,950 7,396 5,539 7,948 6,056
40,950 41,000 7,409 5,546 7,961 6,069
Page 267

Page 270 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
41,000 41,050 7,423 5,554 7,975 6,083
41,050 41,100 7,436 5,561 7,988 6,096
41,100 41,150 7,450 5,569 8,002 6,110
41,150 41,200 7,463 5,576 8,015 6,123
41,200 41,250 7,477 5,584 8,029 6,137
41,250 41,300 7,490 5,591 8,042 6,150
41,300 41,350 7,504 5,599 8,056 6,164
41,350 41,400 7,517 5,606 8,069 6,177
41,400 41,450 7,531 5,614 8,083 6,191
41,450 41,500 7,544 5,621 8,096 6,204
41,500 41,550 7,558 5,629 8,110 6,218
41,550 41,600 7,571 5,636 8,123 6,231
41,600 41,650 7,585 5,644 8,137 6,245
41,650 41,700 7,598 5,651 8,150 6,258
41,700 41,750 7,612 5,659 8,164 6,272
41,750 41,800 7,625 5,666 8,177 6,285
41,800 41,850 7,639 5,674 8,191 6,299
41,850 41,900 7,652 5,681 8,204 6,312
41,900 41,950 7,666 5,689 8,218 6,326
41,950 42,000 7,679 5,696 8,231 6,339
42,000 42,050 7,693 5,704 8,245 6,353
42,050 42,100 7,706 5,711 8,258 6,366
42,100 42,150 7,720 5,719 8,272 6,380
42,150 42,200 7,733 5,726 8,285 6,393
42,200 42,250 7,747 5,734 8,299 6,407
42,250 42,300 7,760 5,741 8,312 6,420
42,300 42,350 7,774 5,749 8,326 6,434
42,350 42,400 7,787 5,756 8,339 6,447
42,400 42,450 7,801 5,764 8,353 6,461
42,450 42,500 7,814 5,771 8,366 6,474
42,500 42,550 7,828 5,779 8,380 6,488
42,550 42,600 7,841 5,786 8,393 6,501
42,600 42,650 7,855 5,794 8,407 6,515
42,650 42,700 7,868 5,801 8,420 6,528
42,700 42,750 7,882 5,809 8,434 6,542
42,750 42,800 7,895 5,816 8,447 6,555
42,800 42,850 7,909 5,824 8,461 6,569
42,850 42,900 7,922 5,831 8,474 6,582
42,900 42,950 7,936 5,839 8,488 6,596
42,950 43,000 7,949 5,846 8,501 6,609
43,000 43,050 7,963 5,854 8,515 6,623
43,050 43,100 7,976 5,861 8,528 6,636
43,100 43,150 7,990 5,869 8,542 6,650
43,150 43,200 8,003 5,876 8,555 6,663
43,200 43,250 8,017 5,884 8,569 6,677
43,250 43,300 8,030 5,891 8,582 6,690
43,300 43,350 8,044 5,899 8,596 6,704
43,350 43,400 8,057 5,906 8,609 6,717
43,400 43,450 8,071 5,914 8,623 6,731
43,450 43,500 8,084 5,921 8,636 6,744
43,500 43,550 8,098 5,929 8,650 6,758
43,550 43,600 8,111 5,936 8,663 6,771
43,600 43,650 8,125 5,944 8,677 6,785
43,650 43,700 8,138 5,951 8,690 6,798
43,700 43,750 8,152 5,959 8,704 6,812
43,750 43,800 8,165 5,966 8,717 6,825
43,800 43,850 8,179 5,974 8,731 6,839
43,850 43,900 8,192 5,981 8,744 6,852
43,900 43,950 8,206 5,989 8,758 6,866
43,950 44,000 8,219 5,996 8,771 6,879
44,000 44,050 8,233 6,004 8,785 6,893
44,050 44,100 8,246 6,011 8,798 6,906
44,100 44,150 8,260 6,019 8,812 6,920
44,150 44,200 8,273 6,026 8,825 6,933
44,200 44,250 8,287 6,034 8,839 6,947
44,250 44,300 8,300 6,041 8,852 6,960
44,300 44,350 8,314 6,049 8,866 6,974
44,350 44,400 8,327 6,056 8,879 6,987
44,400 44,450 8,341 6,064 8,893 7,001
44,450 44,500 8,354 6,071 8,906 7,014
44,500 44,550 8,368 6,079 8,920 7,028
44,550 44,600 8,381 6,086 8,933 7,041
44,600 44,650 8,395 6,094 8,947 7,055
44,650 44,700 8,408 6,101 8,960 7,068
44,700 44,750 8,422 6,109 8,974 7,082
44,750 44,800 8,435 6,116 8,987 7,095
44,800 44,850 8,449 6,124 9,001 7,109
44,850 44,900 8,462 6,131 9,014 7,122
44,900 44,950 8,476 6,139 9,028 7,136
44,950 45,000 8,489 6,146 9,041 7,149
45,000 45,050 8,503 6,154 9,055 7,163
45,050 45,100 8,516 6,161 9,068 7,176
45,100 45,150 8,530 6,169 9,082 7,190
45,150 45,200 8,543 6,176 9,095 7,203
45,200 45,250 8,557 6,184 9,109 7,217
45,250 45,300 8,570 6,191 9,122 7,230
45,300 45,350 8,584 6,199 9,136 7,244
45,350 45,400 8,597 6,206 9,149 7,257
45,400 45,450 8,611 6,214 9,163 7,271
45,450 45,500 8,624 6,221 9,176 7,284
45,500 45,550 8,638 6,229 9,190 7,298
45,550 45,600 8,651 6,236 9,203 7,311
45,600 45,650 8,665 6,244 9,217 7,325
45,650 45,700 8,678 6,251 9,230 7,338
45,700 45,750 8,692 6,259 9,244 7,352
45,750 45,800 8,705 6,266 9,257 7,365
45,800 45,850 8,719 6,274 9,271 7,379
45,850 45,900 8,732 6,281 9,284 7,392
45,900 45,950 8,746 6,289 9,298 7,406
45,950 46,000 8,759 6,296 9,311 7,419
46,000 46,050 8,773 6,304 9,325 7,433
46,050 46,100 8,786 6,311 9,338 7,446
46,100 46,150 8,800 6,319 9,352 7,460
46,150 46,200 8,813 6,326 9,365 7,473
46,200 46,250 8,827 6,334 9,379 7,487
46,250 46,300 8,840 6,341 9,392 7,500
46,300 46,350 8,854 6,349 9,406 7,514
46,350 46,400 8,867 6,356 9,419 7,527
46,400 46,450 8,881 6,364 9,433 7,541
46,450 46,500 8,894 6,371 9,446 7,554
46,500 46,550 8,908 6,379 9,460 7,568
46,550 46,600 8,921 6,386 9,473 7,581
46,600 46,650 8,935 6,394 9,487 7,595
46,650 46,700 8,948 6,401 9,500 7,608
46,700 46,750 8,962 6,412 9,514 7,622
46,750 46,800 8,975 6,425 9,527 7,635
46,800 46,850 8,989 6,439 9,541 7,649
46,850 46,900 9,002 6,452 9,554 7,662
46,900 46,950 9,016 6,466 9,568 7,676
46,950 47,000 9,029 6,479 9,581 7,689
47,000 47,050 9,043 6,493 9,595 7,703
47,050 47,100 9,056 6,506 9,608 7,716
47,100 47,150 9,070 6,520 9,622 7,730
47,150 47,200 9,083 6,533 9,635 7,743
47,200 47,250 9,097 6,547 9,649 7,757
47,250 47,300 9,110 6,560 9,662 7,770
47,300 47,350 9,124 6,574 9,676 7,784
47,350 47,400 9,137 6,587 9,689 7,797
47,400 47,450 9,151 6,601 9,703 7,811
47,450 47,500 9,164 6,614 9,716 7,824
47,500 47,550 9,178 6,628 9,730 7,838
47,550 47,600 9,191 6,641 9,743 7,851
47,600 47,650 9,205 6,655 9,757 7,865
47,650 47,700 9,218 6,668 9,770 7,878
47,700 47,750 9,232 6,682 9,784 7,892
47,750 47,800 9,245 6,695 9,797 7,905
47,800 47,850 9,259 6,709 9,811 7,919
47,850 47,900 9,272 6,722 9,824 7,932
47,900 47,950 9,286 6,736 9,838 7,946
47,950 48,000 9,299 6,749 9,851 7,959
48,000 48,050 9,313 6,763 9,865 7,973
48,050 48,100 9,326 6,776 9,878 7,986
48,100 48,150 9,340 6,790 9,892 8,000
48,150 48,200 9,353 6,803 9,905 8,013
48,200 48,250 9,367 6,817 9,919 8,027
48,250 48,300 9,380 6,830 9,932 8,040
48,300 48,350 9,394 6,844 9,946 8,054
48,350 48,400 9,407 6,857 9,959 8,067
48,400 48,450 9,421 6,871 9,973 8,081
48,450 48,500 9,434 6,884 9,986 8,094
48,500 48,550 9,448 6,898 10,000 8,108
48,550 48,600 9,461 6,911 10,013 8,121
48,600 48,650 9,475 6,925 10,027 8,135
48,650 48,700 9,488 6,938 10,040 8,148
48,700 48,750 9,502 6,952 10,054 8,162
48,750 48,800 9,515 6,965 10,067 8,175
48,800 48,850 9,529 6,979 10,081 8,189
48,850 48,900 9,542 6,992 10,094 8,202
48,900 48,950 9,556 7,006 10,108 8,216
48,950 49,000 9,569 7,019 10,121 8,229
49,000 49,050 9,583 7,033 10,135 8,243
49,050 49,100 9,596 7,046 10,148 8,256
49,100 49,150 9,610 7,060 10,162 8,270
49,150 49,200 9,623 7,073 10,175 8,283
49,200 49,250 9,637 7,087 10,189 8,297
49,250 49,300 9,650 7,100 10,202 8,310
49,300 49,350 9,664 7,114 10,216 8,324
49,350 49,400 9,677 7,127 10,229 8,337
49,400 49,450 9,691 7,141 10,243 8,351
49,450 49,500 9,704 7,154 10,256 8,364
49,500 49,550 9,718 7,168 10,270 8,378
49,550 49,600 9,731 7,181 10,283 8,391
49,600 49,650 9,745 7,195 10,297 8,405
49,650 49,700 9,758 7,208 10,310 8,418
49,700 49,750 9,772 7,222 10,324 8,432
49,750 49,800 9,785 7,235 10,337 8,445
49,800 49,850 9,799 7,249 10,351 8,459
49,850 49,900 9,812 7,262 10,364 8,472
49,900 49,950 9,826 7,276 10,378 8,486
49,950 50,000 9,839 7,289 10,391 8,499
Page 268

Page 271 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
50,000 50,050 9,853 7,303 10,405 8,513
50,050 50,100 9,866 7,316 10,418 8,526
50,100 50,150 9,880 7,330 10,432 8,540
50,150 50,200 9,893 7,343 10,445 8,553
50,200 50,250 9,907 7,357 10,459 8,567
50,250 50,300 9,920 7,370 10,472 8,580
50,300 50,350 9,934 7,384 10,486 8,594
50,350 50,400 9,947 7,397 10,499 8,607
50,400 50,450 9,961 7,411 10,513 8,621
50,450 50,500 9,974 7,424 10,526 8,634
50,500 50,550 9,988 7,438 10,540 8,648
50,550 50,600 10,001 7,451 10,553 8,661
50,600 50,650 10,015 7,465 10,567 8,675
50,650 50,700 10,028 7,478 10,580 8,688
50,700 50,750 10,042 7,492 10,594 8,702
50,750 50,800 10,055 7,505 10,607 8,715
50,800 50,850 10,069 7,519 10,621 8,729
50,850 50,900 10,082 7,532 10,634 8,742
50,900 50,950 10,096 7,546 10,648 8,756
50,950 51,000 10,109 7,559 10,661 8,769
51,000 51,050 10,123 7,573 10,675 8,783
51,050 51,100 10,136 7,586 10,688 8,796
51,100 51,150 10,150 7,600 10,702 8,810
51,150 51,200 10,163 7,613 10,715 8,823
51,200 51,250 10,177 7,627 10,729 8,837
51,250 51,300 10,190 7,640 10,742 8,850
51,300 51,350 10,204 7,654 10,756 8,864
51,350 51,400 10,217 7,667 10,769 8,877
51,400 51,450 10,231 7,681 10,783 8,891
51,450 51,500 10,244 7,694 10,796 8,904
51,500 51,550 10,258 7,708 10,810 8,918
51,550 51,600 10,271 7,721 10,823 8,931
51,600 51,650 10,285 7,735 10,837 8,945
51,650 51,700 10,298 7,748 10,850 8,958
51,700 51,750 10,312 7,762 10,864 8,972
51,750 51,800 10,325 7,775 10,877 8,985
51,800 51,850 10,339 7,789 10,891 8,999
51,850 51,900 10,352 7,802 10,904 9,012
51,900 51,950 10,366 7,816 10,918 9,026
51,950 52,000 10,379 7,829 10,931 9,039
52,000 52,050 10,393 7,843 10,945 9,053
52,050 52,100 10,406 7,856 10,958 9,066
52,100 52,150 10,420 7,870 10,972 9,080
52,150 52,200 10,433 7,883 10,985 9,093
52,200 52,250 10,447 7,897 10,999 9,107
52,250 52,300 10,460 7,910 11,012 9,120
52,300 52,350 10,474 7,924 11,026 9,134
52,350 52,400 10,487 7,937 11,039 9,147
52,400 52,450 10,501 7,951 11,053 9,161
52,450 52,500 10,514 7,964 11,066 9,174
52,500 52,550 10,528 7,978 11,080 9,188
52,550 52,600 10,541 7,991 11,093 9,201
52,600 52,650 10,555 8,005 11,107 9,215
52,650 52,700 10,568 8,018 11,120 9,228
52,700 52,750 10,582 8,032 11,134 9,242
52,750 52,800 10,595 8,045 11,147 9,255
52,800 52,850 10,609 8,059 11,161 9,269
52,850 52,900 10,622 8,072 11,174 9,282
52,900 52,950 10,636 8,086 11,188 9,296
52,950 53,000 10,649 8,099 11,201 9,309
53,000 53,050 10,663 8,113 11,215 9,323
53,050 53,100 10,676 8,126 11,228 9,336
53,100 53,150 10,690 8,140 11,242 9,350
53,150 53,200 10,703 8,153 11,255 9,363
53,200 53,250 10,717 8,167 11,269 9,377
53,250 53,300 10,730 8,180 11,282 9,390
53,300 53,350 10,744 8,194 11,296 9,404
53,350 53,400 10,757 8,207 11,309 9,417
53,400 53,450 10,771 8,221 11,323 9,431
53,450 53,500 10,784 8,234 11,336 9,444
53,500 53,550 10,798 8,248 11,350 9,458
53,550 53,600 10,811 8,261 11,363 9,471
53,600 53,650 10,825 8,275 11,377 9,485
53,650 53,700 10,838 8,288 11,390 9,498
53,700 53,750 10,852 8,302 11,404 9,512
53,750 53,800 10,865 8,315 11,417 9,525
53,800 53,850 10,879 8,329 11,431 9,539
53,850 53,900 10,892 8,342 11,444 9,552
53,900 53,950 10,906 8,356 11,458 9,566
53,950 54,000 10,919 8,369 11,471 9,579
54,000 54,050 10,933 8,383 11,485 9,593
54,050 54,100 10,946 8,396 11,498 9,606
54,100 54,150 10,960 8,410 11,512 9,620
54,150 54,200 10,973 8,423 11,525 9,633
54,200 54,250 10,987 8,437 11,539 9,647
54,250 54,300 11,000 8,450 11,552 9,660
54,300 54,350 11,014 8,464 11,566 9,674
54,350 54,400 11,027 8,477 11,579 9,687
54,400 54,450 11,041 8,491 11,593 9,701
54,450 54,500 11,054 8,504 11,606 9,714
54,500 54,550 11,068 8,518 11,620 9,728
54,550 54,600 11,081 8,531 11,633 9,741
54,600 54,650 11,095 8,545 11,647 9,755
54,650 54,700 11,108 8,558 11,660 9,768
54,700 54,750 11,122 8,572 11,674 9,782
54,750 54,800 11,135 8,585 11,687 9,795
54,800 54,850 11,149 8,599 11,701 9,809
54,850 54,900 11,162 8,612 11,714 9,822
54,900 54,950 11,176 8,626 11,728 9,836
54,950 55,000 11,189 8,639 11,741 9,849
55,000 55,050 11,203 8,653 11,755 9,863
55,050 55,100 11,216 8,666 11,768 9,876
55,100 55,150 11,230 8,680 11,782 9,890
55,150 55,200 11,243 8,693 11,795 9,903
55,200 55,250 11,257 8,707 11,809 9,917
55,250 55,300 11,270 8,720 11,822 9,930
55,300 55,350 11,284 8,734 11,836 9,944
55,350 55,400 11,297 8,747 11,849 9,957
55,400 55,450 11,311 8,761 11,863 9,971
55,450 55,500 11,324 8,774 11,876 9,984
55,500 55,550 11,338 8,788 11,890 9,998
55,550 55,600 11,351 8,801 11,903 10,011
55,600 55,650 11,365 8,815 11,917 10,025
55,650 55,700 11,378 8,828 11,930 10,038
55,700 55,750 11,392 8,842 11,944 10,052
55,750 55,800 11,405 8,855 11,957 10,065
55,800 55,850 11,419 8,869 11,971 10,079
55,850 55,900 11,432 8,882 11,984 10,092
55,900 55,950 11,446 8,896 11,998 10,106
55,950 56,000 11,459 8,909 12,011 10,119
56,000 56,050 11,473 8,923 12,025 10,133
56,050 56,100 11,486 8,936 12,038 10,146
56,100 56,150 11,500 8,950 12,052 10,160
56,150 56,200 11,513 8,963 12,065 10,173
56,200 56,250 11,527 8,977 12,079 10,187
56,250 56,300 11,540 8,990 12,092 10,200
56,300 56,350 11,554 9,004 12,106 10,214
56,350 56,400 11,567 9,017 12,119 10,227
56,400 56,450 11,581 9,031 12,133 10,241
56,450 56,500 11,594 9,044 12,148 10,254
56,500 56,550 11,608 9,058 12,163 10,268
56,550 56,600 11,621 9,071 12,178 10,281
56,600 56,650 11,635 9,085 12,193 10,295
56,650 56,700 11,648 9,098 12,208 10,308
56,700 56,750 11,662 9,112 12,223 10,322
56,750 56,800 11,675 9,125 12,238 10,335
56,800 56,850 11,689 9,139 12,253 10,349
56,850 56,900 11,702 9,152 12,268 10,362
56,900 56,950 11,716 9,166 12,283 10,376
56,950 57,000 11,729 9,179 12,298 10,389
57,000 57,050 11,743 9,193 12,313 10,403
57,050 57,100 11,756 9,206 12,328 10,416
57,100 57,150 11,770 9,220 12,343 10,430
57,150 57,200 11,783 9,233 12,358 10,443
57,200 57,250 11,797 9,247 12,373 10,457
57,250 57,300 11,810 9,260 12,388 10,470
57,300 57,350 11,824 9,274 12,403 10,484
57,350 57,400 11,837 9,287 12,418 10,497
57,400 57,450 11,851 9,301 12,433 10,511
57,450 57,500 11,864 9,314 12,448 10,524
57,500 57,550 11,878 9,328 12,463 10,538
57,550 57,600 11,891 9,341 12,478 10,551
57,600 57,650 11,905 9,355 12,493 10,565
57,650 57,700 11,918 9,368 12,508 10,578
57,700 57,750 11,932 9,382 12,523 10,592
57,750 57,800 11,945 9,395 12,538 10,605
57,800 57,850 11,959 9,409 12,553 10,619
57,850 57,900 11,972 9,422 12,568 10,632
57,900 57,950 11,986 9,436 12,583 10,646
57,950 58,000 11,999 9,449 12,598 10,659
58,000 58,050 12,013 9,463 12,613 10,673
58,050 58,100 12,026 9,476 12,628 10,686
58,100 58,150 12,040 9,490 12,643 10,700
58,150 58,200 12,053 9,503 12,658 10,713
58,200 58,250 12,067 9,517 12,673 10,727
58,250 58,300 12,080 9,530 12,688 10,740
58,300 58,350 12,094 9,544 12,703 10,754
58,350 58,400 12,107 9,557 12,718 10,767
58,400 58,450 12,121 9,571 12,733 10,781
58,450 58,500 12,134 9,584 12,748 10,794
58,500 58,550 12,148 9,598 12,763 10,808
58,550 58,600 12,161 9,611 12,778 10,821
58,600 58,650 12,175 9,625 12,793 10,835
58,650 58,700 12,188 9,638 12,808 10,848
58,700 58,750 12,202 9,652 12,823 10,862
58,750 58,800 12,215 9,665 12,838 10,875
58,800 58,850 12,229 9,679 12,853 10,889
58,850 58,900 12,242 9,692 12,868 10,902
58,900 58,950 12,256 9,706 12,883 10,916
58,950 59,000 12,269 9,719 12,898 10,929
Page 269

Page 272 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
59,000
60,000
61,000
62,000
63,000
64,000
65,000
66,000
67,000
59,000 59,050 12,283 9,733 12,913 10,943
59,050 59,100 12,296 9,746 12,928 10,956
59,100 59,150 12,310 9,760 12,943 10,970
59,150 59,200 12,323 9,773 12,958 10,983
59,200 59,250 12,337 9,787 12,973 10,997
59,250 59,300 12,350 9,800 12,988 11,010
59,300 59,350 12,364 9,814 13,003 11,024
59,350 59,400 12,377 9,827 13,018 11,037
59,400 59,450 12,391 9,841 13,033 11,051
59,450 59,500 12,404 9,854 13,048 11,064
59,500 59,550 12,418 9,868 13,063 11,078
59,550 59,600 12,431 9,881 13,078 11,091
59,600 59,650 12,445 9,895 13,093 11,105
59,650 59,700 12,458 9,908 13,108 11,118
59,700 59,750 12,472 9,922 13,123 11,132
59,750 59,800 12,485 9,935 13,138 11,145
59,800 59,850 12,499 9,949 13,153 11,159
59,850 59,900 12,512 9,962 13,168 11,172
59,900 59,950 12,526 9,976 13,183 11,186
59,950 60,000 12,539 9,989 13,198 11,199
60,000 60,050 12,553 10,003 13,213 11,213
60,050 60,100 12,566 10,016 13,228 11,226
60,100 60,150 12,580 10,030 13,243 11,240
60,150 60,200 12,593 10,043 13,258 11,253
60,200 60,250 12,607 10,057 13,273 11,267
60,250 60,300 12,620 10,070 13,288 11,280
60,300 60,350 12,634 10,084 13,303 11,294
60,350 60,400 12,647 10,097 13,318 11,307
60,400 60,450 12,661 10,111 13,333 11,321
60,450 60,500 12,674 10,124 13,348 11,334
60,500 60,550 12,688 10,138 13,363 11,348
60,550 60,600 12,701 10,151 13,378 11,361
60,600 60,650 12,715 10,165 13,393 11,375
60,650 60,700 12,728 10,178 13,408 11,388
60,700 60,750 12,742 10,192 13,423 11,402
60,750 60,800 12,755 10,205 13,438 11,415
60,800 60,850 12,769 10,219 13,453 11,429
60,850 60,900 12,782 10,232 13,468 11,442
60,900 60,950 12,796 10,246 13,483 11,456
60,950 61,000 12,809 10,259 13,498 11,469
61,000 61,050 12,823 10,273 13,513 11,483
61,050 61,100 12,836 10,286 13,528 11,496
61,100 61,150 12,850 10,300 13,543 11,510
61,150 61,200 12,863 10,313 13,558 11,523
61,200 61,250 12,877 10,327 13,573 11,537
61,250 61,300 12,890 10,340 13,588 11,550
61,300 61,350 12,904 10,354 13,603 11,564
61,350 61,400 12,917 10,367 13,618 11,577
61,400 61,450 12,931 10,381 13,633 11,591
61,450 61,500 12,944 10,394 13,648 11,604
61,500 61,550 12,958 10,408 13,663 11,618
61,550 61,600 12,971 10,421 13,678 11,631
61,600 61,650 12,985 10,435 13,693 11,645
61,650 61,700 12,998 10,448 13,708 11,658
61,700 61,750 13,012 10,462 13,723 11,672
61,750 61,800 13,025 10,475 13,738 11,685
61,800 61,850 13,039 10,489 13,753 11,699
61,850 61,900 13,052 10,502 13,768 11,712
61,900 61,950 13,066 10,516 13,783 11,726
61,950 62,000 13,079 10,529 13,798 11,739
62,000 62,050 13,093 10,543 13,813 11,753
62,050 62,100 13,106 10,556 13,828 11,766
62,100 62,150 13,120 10,570 13,843 11,780
62,150 62,200 13,133 10,583 13,858 11,793
62,200 62,250 13,147 10,597 13,873 11,807
62,250 62,300 13,160 10,610 13,888 11,820
62,300 62,350 13,174 10,624 13,903 11,834
62,350 62,400 13,187 10,637 13,918 11,847
62,400 62,450 13,201 10,651 13,933 11,861
62,450 62,500 13,214 10,664 13,948 11,874
62,500 62,550 13,228 10,678 13,963 11,888
62,550 62,600 13,241 10,691 13,978 11,901
62,600 62,650 13,255 10,705 13,993 11,915
62,650 62,700 13,268 10,718 14,008 11,928
62,700 62,750 13,282 10,732 14,023 11,942
62,750 62,800 13,295 10,745 14,038 11,955
62,800 62,850 13,309 10,759 14,053 11,969
62,850 62,900 13,322 10,772 14,068 11,982
62,900 62,950 13,336 10,786 14,083 11,996
62,950 63,000 13,349 10,799 14,098 12,009
63,000 63,050 13,363 10,813 14,113 12,023
63,050 63,100 13,376 10,826 14,128 12,036
63,100 63,150 13,390 10,840 14,143 12,050
63,150 63,200 13,403 10,853 14,158 12,063
63,200 63,250 13,417 10,867 14,173 12,077
63,250 63,300 13,430 10,880 14,188 12,090
63,300 63,350 13,444 10,894 14,203 12,104
63,350 63,400 13,457 10,907 14,218 12,117
63,400 63,450 13,471 10,921 14,233 12,131
63,450 63,500 13,484 10,934 14,248 12,144
63,500 63,550 13,498 10,948 14,263 12,158
63,550 63,600 13,511 10,961 14,278 12,171
63,600 63,650 13,525 10,975 14,293 12,185
63,650 63,700 13,538 10,988 14,308 12,198
63,700 63,750 13,552 11,002 14,323 12,212
63,750 63,800 13,565 11,015 14,338 12,225
63,800 63,850 13,579 11,029 14,353 12,239
63,850 63,900 13,592 11,042 14,368 12,252
63,900 63,950 13,606 11,056 14,383 12,266
63,950 64,000 13,619 11,069 14,398 12,279
64,000 64,050 13,633 11,083 14,413 12,293
64,050 64,100 13,646 11,096 14,428 12,306
64,100 64,150 13,660 11,110 14,443 12,320
64,150 64,200 13,673 11,123 14,458 12,333
64,200 64,250 13,687 11,137 14,473 12,347
64,250 64,300 13,700 11,150 14,488 12,360
64,300 64,350 13,714 11,164 14,503 12,374
64,350 64,400 13,727 11,177 14,518 12,387
64,400 64,450 13,741 11,191 14,533 12,401
64,450 64,500 13,754 11,204 14,548 12,414
64,500 64,550 13,768 11,218 14,563 12,428
64,550 64,600 13,781 11,231 14,578 12,441
64,600 64,650 13,795 11,245 14,593 12,455
64,650 64,700 13,808 11,258 14,608 12,468
64,700 64,750 13,822 11,272 14,623 12,482
64,750 64,800 13,835 11,285 14,638 12,495
64,800 64,850 13,849 11,299 14,653 12,509
64,850 64,900 13,862 11,312 14,668 12,522
64,900 64,950 13,876 11,326 14,683 12,536
64,950 65,000 13,889 11,339 14,698 12,549
65,000 65,050 13,903 11,353 14,713 12,563
65,050 65,100 13,916 11,366 14,728 12,576
65,100 65,150 13,930 11,380 14,743 12,590
65,150 65,200 13,943 11,393 14,758 12,603
65,200 65,250 13,957 11,407 14,773 12,617
65,250 65,300 13,970 11,420 14,788 12,630
65,300 65,350 13,984 11,434 14,803 12,644
65,350 65,400 13,997 11,447 14,818 12,657
65,400 65,450 14,011 11,461 14,833 12,671
65,450 65,500 14,024 11,474 14,848 12,684
65,500 65,550 14,038 11,488 14,863 12,698
65,550 65,600 14,051 11,501 14,878 12,711
65,600 65,650 14,065 11,515 14,893 12,725
65,650 65,700 14,078 11,528 14,908 12,738
65,700 65,750 14,092 11,542 14,923 12,752
65,750 65,800 14,105 11,555 14,938 12,765
65,800 65,850 14,119 11,569 14,953 12,779
65,850 65,900 14,132 11,582 14,968 12,792
65,900 65,950 14,146 11,596 14,983 12,806
65,950 66,000 14,159 11,609 14,998 12,819
66,000 66,050 14,173 11,623 15,013 12,833
66,050 66,100 14,186 11,636 15,028 12,846
66,100 66,150 14,200 11,650 15,043 12,860
66,150 66,200 14,213 11,663 15,058 12,873
66,200 66,250 14,227 11,677 15,073 12,887
66,250 66,300 14,240 11,690 15,088 12,900
66,300 66,350 14,254 11,704 15,103 12,914
66,350 66,400 14,267 11,717 15,118 12,927
66,400 66,450 14,281 11,731 15,133 12,941
66,450 66,500 14,294 11,744 15,148 12,954
66,500 66,550 14,308 11,758 15,163 12,968
66,550 66,600 14,321 11,771 15,178 12,981
66,600 66,650 14,335 11,785 15,193 12,995
66,650 66,700 14,348 11,798 15,208 13,008
66,700 66,750 14,362 11,812 15,223 13,022
66,750 66,800 14,375 11,825 15,238 13,035
66,800 66,850 14,389 11,839 15,253 13,049
66,850 66,900 14,402 11,852 15,268 13,062
66,900 66,950 14,416 11,866 15,283 13,076
66,950 67,000 14,429 11,879 15,298 13,089
67,000 67,050 14,443 11,893 15,313 13,103
67,050 67,100 14,456 11,906 15,328 13,116
67,100 67,150 14,470 11,920 15,343 13,130
67,150 67,200 14,483 11,933 15,358 13,143
67,200 67,250 14,497 11,947 15,373 13,157
67,250 67,300 14,510 11,960 15,388 13,170
67,300 67,350 14,524 11,974 15,403 13,184
67,350 67,400 14,537 11,987 15,418 13,197
67,400 67,450 14,551 12,001 15,433 13,211
67,450 67,500 14,564 12,014 15,448 13,224
67,500 67,550 14,578 12,028 15,463 13,238
67,550 67,600 14,591 12,041 15,478 13,251
67,600 67,650 14,605 12,055 15,493 13,265
67,650 67,700 14,618 12,068 15,508 13,278
67,700 67,750 14,633 12,082 15,523 13,292
67,750 67,800 14,648 12,095 15,538 13,305
67,800 67,850 14,663 12,109 15,553 13,319
67,850 67,900 14,678 12,122 15,568 13,332
67,900 67,950 14,693 12,136 15,583 13,346
67,950 68,000 14,708 12,149 15,598 13,359
Page 270

Page 273 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Continued on next page)
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
68,000
69,000
70,000
71,000
72,000
73,000
74,000
75,000
76,000
68,000 68,050 14,723 12,163 15,613 13,373
68,050 68,100 14,738 12,176 15,628 13,386
68,100 68,150 14,753 12,190 15,643 13,400
68,150 68,200 14,768 12,203 15,658 13,413
68,200 68,250 14,783 12,217 15,673 13,427
68,250 68,300 14,798 12,230 15,688 13,440
68,300 68,350 14,813 12,244 15,703 13,454
68,350 68,400 14,828 12,257 15,718 13,467
68,400 68,450 14,843 12,271 15,733 13,481
68,450 68,500 14,858 12,284 15,748 13,494
68,500 68,550 14,873 12,298 15,763 13,508
68,550 68,600 14,888 12,311 15,778 13,521
68,600 68,650 14,903 12,325 15,793 13,535
68,650 68,700 14,918 12,338 15,808 13,548
68,700 68,750 14,933 12,352 15,823 13,562
68,750 68,800 14,948 12,365 15,838 13,575
68,800 68,850 14,963 12,379 15,853 13,589
68,850 68,900 14,978 12,392 15,868 13,602
68,900 68,950 14,993 12,406 15,883 13,616
68,950 69,000 15,008 12,419 15,898 13,629
69,000 69,050 15,023 12,433 15,913 13,643
69,050 69,100 15,038 12,446 15,928 13,656
69,100 69,150 15,053 12,460 15,943 13,670
69,150 69,200 15,068 12,473 15,958 13,683
69,200 69,250 15,083 12,487 15,973 13,697
69,250 69,300 15,098 12,500 15,988 13,710
69,300 69,350 15,113 12,514 16,003 13,724
69,350 69,400 15,128 12,527 16,018 13,737
69,400 69,450 15,143 12,541 16,033 13,751
69,450 69,500 15,158 12,554 16,048 13,764
69,500 69,550 15,173 12,568 16,063 13,778
69,550 69,600 15,188 12,581 16,078 13,791
69,600 69,650 15,203 12,595 16,093 13,805
69,650 69,700 15,218 12,608 16,108 13,818
69,700 69,750 15,233 12,622 16,123 13,832
69,750 69,800 15,248 12,635 16,138 13,845
69,800 69,850 15,263 12,649 16,153 13,859
69,850 69,900 15,278 12,662 16,168 13,872
69,900 69,950 15,293 12,676 16,183 13,886
69,950 70,000 15,308 12,689 16,198 13,899
70,000 70,050 15,323 12,703 16,213 13,913
70,050 70,100 15,338 12,716 16,228 13,926
70,100 70,150 15,353 12,730 16,243 13,940
70,150 70,200 15,368 12,743 16,258 13,953
70,200 70,250 15,383 12,757 16,273 13,967
70,250 70,300 15,398 12,770 16,288 13,980
70,300 70,350 15,413 12,784 16,303 13,994
70,350 70,400 15,428 12,797 16,318 14,007
70,400 70,450 15,443 12,811 16,333 14,021
70,450 70,500 15,458 12,824 16,348 14,034
70,500 70,550 15,473 12,838 16,363 14,048
70,550 70,600 15,488 12,851 16,378 14,061
70,600 70,650 15,503 12,865 16,393 14,075
70,650 70,700 15,518 12,878 16,408 14,088
70,700 70,750 15,533 12,892 16,423 14,102
70,750 70,800 15,548 12,905 16,438 14,115
70,800 70,850 15,563 12,919 16,453 14,129
70,850 70,900 15,578 12,932 16,468 14,142
70,900 70,950 15,593 12,946 16,483 14,156
70,950 71,000 15,608 12,959 16,498 14,169
71,000 71,050 15,623 12,973 16,513 14,183
71,050 71,100 15,638 12,986 16,528 14,196
71,100 71,150 15,653 13,000 16,543 14,210
71,150 71,200 15,668 13,013 16,558 14,223
71,200 71,250 15,683 13,027 16,573 14,237
71,250 71,300 15,698 13,040 16,588 14,250
71,300 71,350 15,713 13,054 16,603 14,264
71,350 71,400 15,728 13,067 16,618 14,277
71,400 71,450 15,743 13,081 16,633 14,291
71,450 71,500 15,758 13,094 16,648 14,304
71,500 71,550 15,773 13,108 16,663 14,318
71,550 71,600 15,788 13,121 16,678 14,331
71,600 71,650 15,803 13,135 16,693 14,345
71,650 71,700 15,818 13,148 16,708 14,358
71,700 71,750 15,833 13,162 16,723 14,372
71,750 71,800 15,848 13,175 16,738 14,385
71,800 71,850 15,863 13,189 16,753 14,399
71,850 71,900 15,878 13,202 16,768 14,412
71,900 71,950 15,893 13,216 16,783 14,426
71,950 72,000 15,908 13,229 16,798 14,439
72,000 72,050 15,923 13,243 16,813 14,453
72,050 72,100 15,938 13,256 16,828 14,466
72,100 72,150 15,953 13,270 16,843 14,480
72,150 72,200 15,968 13,283 16,858 14,493
72,200 72,250 15,983 13,297 16,873 14,507
72,250 72,300 15,998 13,310 16,888 14,520
72,300 72,350 16,013 13,324 16,903 14,534
72,350 72,400 16,028 13,337 16,918 14,547
72,400 72,450 16,043 13,351 16,933 14,561
72,450 72,500 16,058 13,364 16,948 14,574
72,500 72,550 16,073 13,378 16,963 14,588
72,550 72,600 16,088 13,391 16,978 14,601
72,600 72,650 16,103 13,405 16,993 14,615
72,650 72,700 16,118 13,418 17,008 14,628
72,700 72,750 16,133 13,432 17,023 14,642
72,750 72,800 16,148 13,445 17,038 14,655
72,800 72,850 16,163 13,459 17,053 14,669
72,850 72,900 16,178 13,472 17,068 14,682
72,900 72,950 16,193 13,486 17,083 14,696
72,950 73,000 16,208 13,499 17,098 14,709
73,000 73,050 16,223 13,513 17,113 14,723
73,050 73,100 16,238 13,526 17,128 14,736
73,100 73,150 16,253 13,540 17,143 14,750
73,150 73,200 16,268 13,553 17,158 14,763
73,200 73,250 16,283 13,567 17,173 14,777
73,250 73,300 16,298 13,580 17,188 14,790
73,300 73,350 16,313 13,594 17,203 14,804
73,350 73,400 16,328 13,607 17,218 14,817
73,400 73,450 16,343 13,621 17,233 14,831
73,450 73,500 16,358 13,634 17,248 14,844
73,500 73,550 16,373 13,648 17,263 14,858
73,550 73,600 16,388 13,661 17,278 14,871
73,600 73,650 16,403 13,675 17,293 14,885
73,650 73,700 16,418 13,688 17,308 14,898
73,700 73,750 16,433 13,702 17,323 14,912
73,750 73,800 16,448 13,715 17,338 14,925
73,800 73,850 16,463 13,729 17,353 14,939
73,850 73,900 16,478 13,742 17,368 14,952
73,900 73,950 16,493 13,756 17,383 14,966
73,950 74,000 16,508 13,769 17,398 14,979
74,000 74,050 16,523 13,783 17,413 14,993
74,050 74,100 16,538 13,796 17,428 15,006
74,100 74,150 16,553 13,810 17,443 15,020
74,150 74,200 16,568 13,823 17,458 15,033
74,200 74,250 16,583 13,837 17,473 15,047
74,250 74,300 16,598 13,850 17,488 15,060
74,300 74,350 16,613 13,864 17,503 15,074
74,350 74,400 16,628 13,877 17,518 15,087
74,400 74,450 16,643 13,891 17,533 15,101
74,450 74,500 16,658 13,904 17,548 15,114
74,500 74,550 16,673 13,918 17,563 15,128
74,550 74,600 16,688 13,931 17,578 15,141
74,600 74,650 16,703 13,945 17,593 15,155
74,650 74,700 16,718 13,958 17,608 15,168
74,700 74,750 16,733 13,972 17,623 15,182
74,750 74,800 16,748 13,985 17,638 15,195
74,800 74,850 16,763 13,999 17,653 15,209
74,850 74,900 16,778 14,012 17,668 15,222
74,900 74,950 16,793 14,026 17,683 15,236
74,950 75,000 16,808 14,039 17,698 15,249
75,000 75,050 16,823 14,053 17,713 15,263
75,050 75,100 16,838 14,066 17,728 15,276
75,100 75,150 16,853 14,080 17,743 15,290
75,150 75,200 16,868 14,093 17,758 15,303
75,200 75,250 16,883 14,107 17,773 15,317
75,250 75,300 16,898 14,120 17,788 15,330
75,300 75,350 16,913 14,134 17,803 15,344
75,350 75,400 16,928 14,147 17,818 15,357
75,400 75,450 16,943 14,161 17,833 15,371
75,450 75,500 16,958 14,174 17,848 15,384
75,500 75,550 16,973 14,188 17,863 15,398
75,550 75,600 16,988 14,201 17,878 15,411
75,600 75,650 17,003 14,215 17,893 15,425
75,650 75,700 17,018 14,228 17,908 15,438
75,700 75,750 17,033 14,242 17,923 15,452
75,750 75,800 17,048 14,255 17,938 15,465
75,800 75,850 17,063 14,269 17,953 15,479
75,850 75,900 17,078 14,282 17,968 15,492
75,900 75,950 17,093 14,296 17,983 15,506
75,950 76,000 17,108 14,309 17,998 15,519
76,000 76,050 17,123 14,323 18,013 15,533
76,050 76,100 17,138 14,336 18,028 15,546
76,100 76,150 17,153 14,350 18,043 15,560
76,150 76,200 17,168 14,363 18,058 15,573
76,200 76,250 17,183 14,377 18,073 15,587
76,250 76,300 17,198 14,390 18,088 15,600
76,300 76,350 17,213 14,404 18,103 15,614
76,350 76,400 17,228 14,417 18,118 15,627
76,400 76,450 17,243 14,431 18,133 15,641
76,450 76,500 17,258 14,444 18,148 15,654
76,500 76,550 17,273 14,458 18,163 15,668
76,550 76,600 17,288 14,471 18,178 15,681
76,600 76,650 17,303 14,485 18,193 15,695
76,650 76,700 17,318 14,498 18,208 15,708
76,700 76,750 17,333 14,512 18,223 15,722
76,750 76,800 17,348 14,525 18,238 15,735
76,800 76,850 17,363 14,539 18,253 15,749
76,850 76,900 17,378 14,552 18,268 15,762
76,900 76,950 17,393 14,566 18,283 15,776
76,950 77,000 17,408 14,579 18,298 15,789
Page 271

Page 274 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Continued on next page)
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
77,000
78,000
79,000
80,000
81,000
82,000
83,000
84,000
85,000
77,000 77,050 17,423 14,593 18,313 15,803
77,050 77,100 17,438 14,606 18,328 15,816
77,100 77,150 17,453 14,620 18,343 15,830
77,150 77,200 17,468 14,633 18,358 15,843
77,200 77,250 17,483 14,647 18,373 15,857
77,250 77,300 17,498 14,660 18,388 15,870
77,300 77,350 17,513 14,674 18,403 15,884
77,350 77,400 17,528 14,687 18,418 15,897
77,400 77,450 17,543 14,701 18,433 15,911
77,450 77,500 17,558 14,714 18,448 15,924
77,500 77,550 17,573 14,728 18,463 15,938
77,550 77,600 17,588 14,741 18,478 15,951
77,600 77,650 17,603 14,755 18,493 15,965
77,650 77,700 17,618 14,768 18,508 15,978
77,700 77,750 17,633 14,782 18,523 15,992
77,750 77,800 17,648 14,795 18,538 16,005
77,800 77,850 17,663 14,809 18,553 16,019
77,850 77,900 17,678 14,822 18,568 16,032
77,900 77,950 17,693 14,836 18,583 16,046
77,950 78,000 17,708 14,849 18,598 16,059
78,000 78,050 17,723 14,863 18,613 16,073
78,050 78,100 17,738 14,876 18,628 16,086
78,100 78,150 17,753 14,890 18,643 16,100
78,150 78,200 17,768 14,903 18,658 16,113
78,200 78,250 17,783 14,917 18,673 16,127
78,250 78,300 17,798 14,930 18,688 16,140
78,300 78,350 17,813 14,944 18,703 16,154
78,350 78,400 17,828 14,957 18,718 16,167
78,400 78,450 17,843 14,971 18,733 16,181
78,450 78,500 17,858 14,984 18,748 16,194
78,500 78,550 17,873 14,998 18,763 16,208
78,550 78,600 17,888 15,011 18,778 16,221
78,600 78,650 17,903 15,025 18,793 16,235
78,650 78,700 17,918 15,038 18,808 16,248
78,700 78,750 17,933 15,052 18,823 16,262
78,750 78,800 17,948 15,065 18,838 16,275
78,800 78,850 17,963 15,079 18,853 16,289
78,850 78,900 17,978 15,092 18,868 16,302
78,900 78,950 17,993 15,106 18,883 16,316
78,950 79,000 18,008 15,119 18,898 16,329
79,000 79,050 18,023 15,133 18,913 16,343
79,050 79,100 18,038 15,146 18,928 16,356
79,100 79,150 18,053 15,160 18,943 16,370
79,150 79,200 18,068 15,173 18,958 16,383
79,200 79,250 18,083 15,187 18,973 16,397
79,250 79,300 18,098 15,200 18,988 16,410
79,300 79,350 18,113 15,214 19,003 16,424
79,350 79,400 18,128 15,227 19,018 16,437
79,400 79,450 18,143 15,241 19,033 16,451
79,450 79,500 18,158 15,254 19,048 16,464
79,500 79,550 18,173 15,268 19,063 16,478
79,550 79,600 18,188 15,281 19,078 16,491
79,600 79,650 18,203 15,295 19,093 16,505
79,650 79,700 18,218 15,308 19,108 16,518
79,700 79,750 18,233 15,322 19,123 16,532
79,750 79,800 18,248 15,335 19,138 16,545
79,800 79,850 18,263 15,349 19,153 16,559
79,850 79,900 18,278 15,362 19,168 16,572
79,900 79,950 18,293 15,376 19,183 16,586
79,950 80,000 18,308 15,389 19,198 16,599
80,400 80,450 18,443 15,511 19,333 16,721
80,450 80,500 18,458 15,524 19,348 16,734
80,500 80,550 18,473 15,538 19,363 16,748
80,550 80,600 18,488 15,551 19,378 16,761
80,600 80,650 18,503 15,565 19,393 16,775
80,650 80,700 18,518 15,578 19,408 16,788
80,700 80,750 18,533 15,592 19,423 16,802
80,750 80,800 18,548 15,605 19,438 16,815
80,800 80,850 18,563 15,619 19,453 16,829
80,850 80,900 18,578 15,632 19,468 16,842
80,900 80,950 18,593 15,646 19,483 16,856
80,950 81,000 18,608 15,659 19,498 16,869
81,000 81,050 18,623 15,673 19,513 16,883
81,050 81,100 18,638 15,686 19,528 16,896
81,100 81,150 18,653 15,700 19,543 16,910
81,150 81,200 18,668 15,713 19,558 16,923
81,200 81,250 18,683 15,727 19,573 16,937
81,250 81,300 18,698 15,740 19,588 16,950
81,300 81,350 18,713 15,754 19,603 16,964
81,350 81,400 18,728 15,767 19,618 16,977
81,400 81,450 18,743 15,781 19,633 16,991
81,450 81,500 18,758 15,794 19,648 17,004
81,500 81,550 18,773 15,808 19,663 17,018
81,550 81,600 18,788 15,821 19,678 17,031
81,600 81,650 18,803 15,835 19,693 17,045
81,650 81,700 18,818 15,848 19,708 17,058
81,700 81,750 18,833 15,862 19,723 17,072
81,750 81,800 18,848 15,875 19,738 17,085
81,800 81,850 18,863 15,889 19,753 17,099
81,850 81,900 18,878 15,902 19,768 17,112
81,900 81,950 18,893 15,916 19,783 17,126
81,950 82,000 18,908 15,929 19,798 17,139
82,000 82,050 18,923 15,943 19,813 17,153
82,050 82,100 18,938 15,956 19,828 17,166
82,100 82,150 18,953 15,970 19,843 17,180
82,150 82,200 18,968 15,983 19,858 17,193
82,200 82,250 18,983 15,997 19,873 17,207
82,250 82,300 18,998 16,010 19,888 17,220
82,300 82,350 19,013 16,024 19,903 17,234
82,350 82,400 19,028 16,037 19,918 17,247
82,400 82,450 19,043 16,051 19,933 17,261
82,450 82,500 19,058 16,064 19,948 17,274
82,500 82,550 19,073 16,078 19,963 17,288
82,550 82,600 19,088 16,091 19,978 17,301
82,600 82,650 19,103 16,105 19,993 17,315
82,650 82,700 19,118 16,118 20,008 17,328
82,700 82,750 19,133 16,132 20,023 17,342
82,750 82,800 19,148 16,145 20,038 17,355
82,800 82,850 19,163 16,159 20,053 17,369
82,850 82,900 19,178 16,172 20,068 17,382
82,900 82,950 19,193 16,186 20,083 17,396
82,950 83,000 19,208 16,199 20,098 17,409
83,000 83,050 19,223 16,213 20,113 17,423
83,050 83,100 19,238 16,226 20,128 17,436
83,100 83,150 19,253 16,240 20,143 17,450
83,150 83,200 19,268 16,253 20,158 17,463
83,200 83,250 19,283 16,267 20,173 17,477
83,250 83,300 19,298 16,280 20,188 17,490
83,300 83,350 19,313 16,294 20,203 17,504
83,350 83,400 19,328 16,307 20,218 17,517
83,400 83,450 19,343 16,321 20,233 17,531
83,450 83,500 19,358 16,334 20,248 17,544
83,500 83,550 19,373 16,348 20,263 17,558
83,550 83,600 19,388 16,361 20,278 17,571
83,600 83,650 19,403 16,375 20,293 17,585
83,650 83,700 19,418 16,388 20,308 17,598
83,700 83,750 19,433 16,402 20,323 17,612
83,750 83,800 19,448 16,415 20,338 17,625
83,800 83,850 19,463 16,429 20,353 17,639
83,850 83,900 19,478 16,442 20,368 17,652
83,900 83,950 19,493 16,456 20,383 17,666
83,950 84,000 19,508 16,469 20,398 17,679
84,000 84,050 19,523 16,483 20,413 17,693
84,050 84,100 19,538 16,496 20,428 17,706
84,100 84,150 19,553 16,510 20,443 17,720
84,150 84,200 19,568 16,523 20,458 17,733
84,200 84,250 19,583 16,537 20,473 17,747
84,250 84,300 19,598 16,550 20,488 17,760
84,300 84,350 19,613 16,564 20,503 17,774
84,350 84,400 19,628 16,577 20,518 17,787
84,400 84,450 19,643 16,591 20,533 17,801
84,450 84,500 19,658 16,604 20,548 17,814
84,500 84,550 19,673 16,618 20,563 17,828
84,550 84,600 19,688 16,631 20,578 17,841
84,600 84,650 19,703 16,645 20,593 17,855
84,650 84,700 19,718 16,658 20,608 17,868
84,700 84,750 19,733 16,672 20,623 17,882
84,750 84,800 19,748 16,685 20,638 17,895
84,800 84,850 19,763 16,699 20,653 17,909
84,850 84,900 19,778 16,712 20,668 17,922
84,900 84,950 19,793 16,726 20,683 17,936
84,950 85,000 19,808 16,739 20,698 17,949
85,000 85,050 19,823 16,753 20,713 17,963
85,050 85,100 19,838 16,766 20,728 17,976
85,100 85,150 19,853 16,780 20,743 17,990
85,150 85,200 19,868 16,793 20,758 18,003
85,200 85,250 19,883 16,807 20,773 18,017
85,250 85,300 19,898 16,820 20,788 18,030
85,300 85,350 19,913 16,834 20,803 18,044
85,350 85,400 19,928 16,847 20,818 18,057
85,400 85,450 19,943 16,861 20,833 18,071
85,450 85,500 19,958 16,874 20,848 18,084
85,500 85,550 19,973 16,888 20,863 18,098
85,550 85,600 19,988 16,901 20,878 18,111
85,600 85,650 20,003 16,915 20,893 18,125
85,650 85,700 20,018 16,928 20,908 18,138
85,700 85,750 20,033 16,942 20,923 18,152
85,750 85,800 20,048 16,955 20,938 18,165
85,800 85,850 20,063 16,969 20,953 18,179
85,850 85,900 20,078 16,982 20,968 18,192
85,900 85,950 20,093 16,996 20,983 18,206
85,950 86,000 20,108 17,009 20,998 18,219
80,000 80,050 18,323 15,403 19,213 16,613
80,050 80,100 18,338 15,416 19,228 16,626
80,100 80,150 18,353 15,430 19,243 16,640
80,150 80,200 18,368 15,443 19,258 16,653
80,200 80,250 18,383 15,457 19,273 16,667
80,250 80,300 18,398 15,470 19,288 16,680
80,300 80,350 18,413 15,484 19,303 16,694
80,350 80,400 18,428 15,497 19,318 16,707
Page 272

Page 275 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Continued on next page)
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
86,000
87,000
88,000
89,000
90,000
91,000
92,000
93,000
94,000
86,000 86,050 20,123 17,023 21,015 18,233
86,050 86,100 20,138 17,036 21,033 18,246
86,100 86,150 20,153 17,050 21,050 18,260
86,150 86,200 20,168 17,063 21,068 18,273
86,200 86,250 20,183 17,077 21,085 18,287
86,250 86,300 20,198 17,090 21,103 18,300
86,300 86,350 20,213 17,104 21,120 18,314
86,350 86,400 20,228 17,117 21,138 18,327
86,400 86,450 20,243 17,131 21,155 18,341
86,450 86,500 20,258 17,144 21,173 18,354
86,500 86,550 20,273 17,158 21,190 18,368
86,550 86,600 20,288 17,171 21,208 18,381
86,600 86,650 20,303 17,185 21,225 18,395
86,650 86,700 20,318 17,198 21,243 18,408
86,700 86,750 20,333 17,212 21,260 18,422
86,750 86,800 20,348 17,225 21,278 18,435
86,800 86,850 20,363 17,239 21,295 18,449
86,850 86,900 20,378 17,252 21,313 18,462
86,900 86,950 20,393 17,266 21,330 18,476
86,950 87,000 20,408 17,279 21,348 18,489
87,000 87,050 20,423 17,293 21,365 18,503
87,050 87,100 20,438 17,306 21,383 18,516
87,100 87,150 20,453 17,320 21,400 18,530
87,150 87,200 20,468 17,333 21,418 18,543
87,200 87,250 20,483 17,347 21,435 18,557
87,250 87,300 20,498 17,360 21,453 18,570
87,300 87,350 20,513 17,374 21,470 18,584
87,350 87,400 20,528 17,387 21,488 18,597
87,400 87,450 20,543 17,401 21,505 18,611
87,450 87,500 20,558 17,414 21,523 18,624
87,500 87,550 20,573 17,428 21,540 18,638
87,550 87,600 20,588 17,441 21,558 18,651
87,600 87,650 20,603 17,455 21,575 18,665
87,650 87,700 20,618 17,468 21,593 18,678
87,700 87,750 20,633 17,482 21,610 18,692
87,750 87,800 20,648 17,495 21,628 18,705
87,800 87,850 20,663 17,509 21,645 18,719
87,850 87,900 20,678 17,522 21,663 18,732
87,900 87,950 20,693 17,536 21,680 18,746
87,950 88,000 20,708 17,549 21,698 18,759
88,000 88,050 20,723 17,563 21,715 18,773
88,050 88,100 20,738 17,576 21,733 18,786
88,100 88,150 20,753 17,590 21,750 18,800
88,150 88,200 20,768 17,603 21,768 18,813
88,200 88,250 20,783 17,617 21,785 18,827
88,250 88,300 20,798 17,630 21,803 18,840
88,300 88,350 20,813 17,644 21,820 18,854
88,350 88,400 20,828 17,657 21,838 18,867
88,400 88,450 20,843 17,671 21,855 18,881
88,450 88,500 20,858 17,684 21,873 18,894
88,500 88,550 20,873 17,698 21,890 18,908
88,550 88,600 20,888 17,711 21,908 18,921
88,600 88,650 20,903 17,725 21,925 18,935
88,650 88,700 20,918 17,738 21,943 18,948
88,700 88,750 20,933 17,752 21,960 18,962
88,750 88,800 20,948 17,765 21,978 18,975
88,800 88,850 20,963 17,779 21,995 18,989
88,850 88,900 20,978 17,792 22,013 19,002
88,900 88,950 20,993 17,806 22,030 19,016
88,950 89,000 21,008 17,819 22,048 19,029
89,000 89,050 21,023 17,833 22,065 19,043
89,050 89,100 21,038 17,846 22,083 19,056
89,100 89,150 21,053 17,860 22,100 19,070
89,150 89,200 21,068 17,873 22,118 19,083
89,200 89,250 21,083 17,887 22,135 19,097
89,250 89,300 21,098 17,900 22,153 19,110
89,300 89,350 21,113 17,914 22,170 19,124
89,350 89,400 21,128 17,927 22,188 19,137
89,400 89,450 21,143 17,941 22,205 19,151
89,450 89,500 21,158 17,954 22,223 19,164
89,500 89,550 21,173 17,968 22,240 19,178
89,550 89,600 21,188 17,981 22,258 19,191
89,600 89,650 21,203 17,995 22,275 19,205
89,650 89,700 21,218 18,008 22,293 19,218
89,700 89,750 21,233 18,022 22,310 19,232
89,750 89,800 21,248 18,035 22,328 19,245
89,800 89,850 21,263 18,049 22,345 19,259
89,850 89,900 21,278 18,062 22,363 19,272
89,900 89,950 21,293 18,076 22,380 19,286
89,950 90,000 21,308 18,089 22,398 19,299
90,000 90,050 21,323 18,103 22,415 19,313
90,050 90,100 21,338 18,116 22,433 19,326
90,100 90,150 21,353 18,130 22,450 19,340
90,150 90,200 21,368 18,143 22,468 19,353
90,200 90,250 21,383 18,157 22,485 19,367
90,250 90,300 21,398 18,170 22,503 19,380
90,300 90,350 21,413 18,184 22,520 19,394
90,350 90,400 21,428 18,197 22,538 19,407
90,400 90,450 21,443 18,211 22,555 19,421
90,450 90,500 21,458 18,224 22,573 19,434
90,500 90,550 21,473 18,238 22,590 19,448
90,550 90,600 21,488 18,251 22,608 19,461
90,600 90,650 21,503 18,265 22,625 19,475
90,650 90,700 21,518 18,278 22,643 19,488
90,700 90,750 21,533 18,292 22,660 19,502
90,750 90,800 21,548 18,305 22,678 19,515
90,800 90,850 21,563 18,319 22,695 19,529
90,850 90,900 21,578 18,332 22,713 19,542
90,900 90,950 21,593 18,346 22,730 19,556
90,950 91,000 21,608 18,359 22,748 19,569
91,000 91,050 21,623 18,373 22,765 19,583
91,050 91,100 21,638 18,386 22,783 19,596
91,100 91,150 21,653 18,400 22,800 19,610
91,150 91,200 21,668 18,413 22,818 19,623
91,200 91,250 21,683 18,427 22,835 19,637
91,250 91,300 21,698 18,440 22,853 19,650
91,300 91,350 21,713 18,454 22,870 19,664
91,350 91,400 21,728 18,467 22,888 19,677
91,400 91,450 21,743 18,481 22,905 19,691
91,450 91,500 21,758 18,494 22,923 19,704
91,500 91,550 21,773 18,508 22,940 19,718
91,550 91,600 21,788 18,521 22,958 19,731
91,600 91,650 21,803 18,535 22,975 19,745
91,650 91,700 21,818 18,548 22,993 19,758
91,700 91,750 21,833 18,562 23,010 19,772
91,750 91,800 21,848 18,575 23,028 19,785
91,800 91,850 21,863 18,589 23,045 19,799
91,850 91,900 21,878 18,602 23,063 19,812
91,900 91,950 21,893 18,616 23,080 19,826
91,950 92,000 21,908 18,629 23,098 19,839
92,000 92,050 21,923 18,643 23,115 19,853
92,050 92,100 21,938 18,656 23,133 19,866
92,100 92,150 21,953 18,670 23,150 19,880
92,150 92,200 21,968 18,683 23,168 19,893
92,200 92,250 21,983 18,697 23,185 19,907
92,250 92,300 21,998 18,710 23,203 19,920
92,300 92,350 22,013 18,724 23,220 19,934
92,350 92,400 22,028 18,737 23,238 19,947
92,400 92,450 22,043 18,751 23,255 19,961
92,450 92,500 22,058 18,764 23,273 19,974
92,500 92,550 22,073 18,778 23,290 19,988
92,550 92,600 22,088 18,791 23,308 20,001
92,600 92,650 22,103 18,805 23,325 20,015
92,650 92,700 22,118 18,818 23,343 20,028
92,700 92,750 22,133 18,832 23,360 20,042
92,750 92,800 22,148 18,845 23,378 20,055
92,800 92,850 22,163 18,859 23,395 20,069
92,850 92,900 22,178 18,872 23,413 20,082
92,900 92,950 22,193 18,886 23,430 20,096
92,950 93,000 22,208 18,899 23,448 20,109
93,000 93,050 22,223 18,913 23,465 20,123
93,050 93,100 22,238 18,926 23,483 20,136
93,100 93,150 22,253 18,940 23,500 20,150
93,150 93,200 22,268 18,953 23,518 20,163
93,200 93,250 22,283 18,967 23,535 20,177
93,250 93,300 22,298 18,980 23,553 20,190
93,300 93,350 22,313 18,994 23,570 20,204
93,350 93,400 22,328 19,007 23,588 20,217
93,400 93,450 22,343 19,021 23,605 20,231
93,450 93,500 22,358 19,034 23,623 20,244
93,500 93,550 22,373 19,048 23,640 20,258
93,550 93,600 22,388 19,061 23,658 20,271
93,600 93,650 22,403 19,075 23,675 20,285
93,650 93,700 22,418 19,088 23,693 20,298
93,700 93,750 22,433 19,102 23,710 20,312
93,750 93,800 22,448 19,115 23,728 20,325
93,800 93,850 22,463 19,129 23,745 20,339
93,850 93,900 22,478 19,142 23,763 20,352
93,900 93,950 22,493 19,156 23,780 20,366
93,950 94,000 22,508 19,169 23,798 20,379
94,000 94,050 22,523 19,183 23,815 20,393
94,050 94,100 22,538 19,196 23,833 20,406
94,100 94,150 22,553 19,210 23,850 20,420
94,150 94,200 22,568 19,223 23,868 20,433
94,200 94,250 22,583 19,237 23,885 20,447
94,250 94,300 22,598 19,250 23,903 20,460
94,300 94,350 22,613 19,264 23,920 20,474
94,350 94,400 22,628 19,277 23,938 20,487
94,400 94,450 22,643 19,291 23,955 20,501
94,450 94,500 22,658 19,304 23,973 20,514
94,500 94,550 22,673 19,318 23,990 20,528
94,550 94,600 22,688 19,331 24,008 20,541
94,600 94,650 22,703 19,345 24,025 20,555
94,650 94,700 22,718 19,358 24,043 20,568
94,700 94,750 22,733 19,372 24,060 20,582
94,750 94,800 22,748 19,385 24,078 20,595
94,800 94,850 22,763 19,399 24,095 20,609
94,850 94,900 22,778 19,412 24,113 20,622
94,900 94,950 22,793 19,426 24,130 20,636
94,950 95,000 22,808 19,439 24,148 20,649
Page 273

Page 276 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002 Tax Table— Continued
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—
If line 41
(taxable
income) is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
95,000
96,000
97,000
98,000
99,000
$100,000
or over —
use the
Tax Rate
Schedules.
95,000 95,050 22,823 19,453 24,165 20,663
95,050 95,100 22,838 19,466 24,183 20,676
95,100 95,150 22,853 19,480 24,200 20,690
95,150 95,200 22,868 19,493 24,218 20,703
95,200 95,250 22,883 19,507 24,235 20,717
95,250 95,300 22,898 19,520 24,253 20,730
95,300 95,350 22,913 19,534 24,270 20,744
95,350 95,400 22,928 19,547 24,288 20,757
95,400 95,450 22,943 19,561 24,305 20,771
95,450 95,500 22,958 19,574 24,323 20,784
95,500 95,550 22,973 19,588 24,340 20,798
95,550 95,600 22,988 19,601 24,358 20,811
95,600 95,650 23,003 19,615 24,375 20,825
95,650 95,700 23,018 19,628 24,393 20,838
95,700 95,750 23,033 19,642 24,410 20,852
95,750 95,800 23,048 19,655 24,428 20,865
95,800 95,850 23,063 19,669 24,445 20,879
95,850 95,900 23,078 19,682 24,463 20,892
95,900 95,950 23,093 19,696 24,480 20,906
95,950 96,000 23,108 19,709 24,498 20,919
96,000 96,050 23,123 19,723 24,515 20,933
96,050 96,100 23,138 19,736 24,533 20,946
96,100 96,150 23,153 19,750 24,550 20,960
96,150 96,200 23,168 19,763 24,568 20,973
96,200 96,250 23,183 19,777 24,585 20,987
96,250 96,300 23,198 19,790 24,603 21,000
96,300 96,350 23,213 19,804 24,620 21,014
96,350 96,400 23,228 19,817 24,638 21,027
96,400 96,450 23,243 19,831 24,655 21,041
96,450 96,500 23,258 19,844 24,673 21,054
96,500 96,550 23,273 19,858 24,690 21,068
96,550 96,600 23,288 19,871 24,708 21,081
96,600 96,650 23,303 19,885 24,725 21,095
96,650 96,700 23,318 19,898 24,743 21,108
96,700 96,750 23,333 19,912 24,760 21,123
96,750 96,800 23,348 19,925 24,778 21,138
96,800 96,850 23,363 19,939 24,795 21,153
96,850 96,900 23,378 19,952 24,813 21,168
96,900 96,950 23,393 19,966 24,830 21,183
96,950 97,000 23,408 19,979 24,848 21,198
97,000 97,050 23,423 19,993 24,865 21,213
97,050 97,100 23,438 20,006 24,883 21,228
97,100 97,150 23,453 20,020 24,900 21,243
97,150 97,200 23,468 20,033 24,918 21,258
97,200 97,250 23,483 20,047 24,935 21,273
97,250 97,300 23,498 20,060 24,953 21,288
97,300 97,350 23,513 20,074 24,970 21,303
97,350 97,400 23,528 20,087 24,988 21,318
97,400 97,450 23,543 20,101 25,005 21,333
97,450 97,500 23,558 20,114 25,023 21,348
97,500 97,550 23,573 20,128 25,040 21,363
97,550 97,600 23,588 20,141 25,058 21,378
97,600 97,650 23,603 20,155 25,075 21,393
97,650 97,700 23,618 20,168 25,093 21,408
97,700 97,750 23,633 20,182 25,110 21,423
97,750 97,800 23,648 20,195 25,128 21,438
97,800 97,850 23,663 20,209 25,145 21,453
97,850 97,900 23,678 20,222 25,163 21,468
97,900 97,950 23,693 20,236 25,180 21,483
97,950 98,000 23,708 20,249 25,198 21,498
98,000 98,050 23,723 20,263 25,215 21,513
98,050 98,100 23,738 20,276 25,233 21,528
98,100 98,150 23,753 20,290 25,250 21,543
98,150 98,200 23,768 20,303 25,268 21,558
98,200 98,250 23,783 20,317 25,285 21,573
98,250 98,300 23,798 20,330 25,303 21,588
98,300 98,350 23,813 20,344 25,320 21,603
98,350 98,400 23,828 20,357 25,338 21,618
98,400 98,450 23,843 20,371 25,355 21,633
98,450 98,500 23,858 20,384 25,373 21,648
98,500 98,550 23,873 20,398 25,390 21,663
98,550 98,600 23,888 20,411 25,408 21,678
98,600 98,650 23,903 20,425 25,425 21,693
98,650 98,700 23,918 20,438 25,443 21,708
98,700 98,750 23,933 20,452 25,460 21,723
98,750 98,800 23,948 20,465 25,478 21,738
98,800 98,850 23,963 20,479 25,495 21,753
98,850 98,900 23,978 20,492 25,513 21,768
98,900 98,950 23,993 20,506 25,530 21,783
98,950 99,000 24,008 20,519 25,548 21,798
99,000 99,050 24,023 20,533 25,565 21,813
99,050 99,100 24,038 20,546 25,583 21,828
99,100 99,150 24,053 20,560 25,600 21,843
99,150 99,200 24,068 20,573 25,618 21,858
99,200 99,250 24,083 20,587 25,635 21,873
99,250 99,300 24,098 20,600 25,653 21,888
99,300 99,350 24,113 20,614 25,670 21,903
99,350 99,400 24,128 20,627 25,688 21,918
99,400 99,450 24,143 20,641 25,705 21,933
99,450 99,500 24,158 20,654 25,723 21,948
99,500 99,550 24,173 20,668 25,740 21,963
99,550 99,600 24,188 20,681 25,758 21,978
99,600 99,650 24,203 20,695 25,775 21,993
99,650 99,700 24,218 20,708 25,793 22,008
99,700 99,750 24,233 20,722 25,810 22,023
99,750 99,800 24,248 20,735 25,828 22,038
99,800 99,850 24,263 20,749 25,845 22,053
99,850 99,900 24,278 20,762 25,863 22,068
99,900 99,950 24,293 20,776 25,880 22,083
99,950 100,000 24,308 20,789 25,898 22,098
Page 274

Page 277 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002
Tax Rate
Schedules
Use only if your taxable income (Form 1040, line 41) is $100,000 or more.
If less, use the Tax Table. Even though you cannot use the T ax Rate Schedules
below if your taxable income is less than $100,000, all levels of taxable
income are shown so taxpayers can see the tax rate that applies to each level.
Schedule Z— Use if your filing status is Head of household
Schedule X— Use if your filing status is Single
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 42
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
41, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
10,00037,45010,000
6,00015%27,9506,000
27,950
37,45096,70037,450
27,9503,892.50 +67,700
67,700 14,625.00 +
96,70096,700
67,700
Schedule Y-2— Use if your filing status is Married filing separately
Schedule Y-1— Use if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
12,00046,70012,000
6,00023,3506,000
23,350 23,350
46,700112,85046,700
56,425
56,42556,425
112,850 112,850
141,250
171,950
156,600
85,975
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 42
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
41, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 42
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
41, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 42
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
41, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
141,250
307,050
307,050 36,690.00 +
94,720.00 +
141,250
307,050
171,950
307,050
307,050 171,950
307,050
85,975
153,525
153,525 85,975
153,525
156,600
307,050
307,050 156,600
307,050
27%
30%
35%
38.6%
$010%$6,000$0
$010%$12,000$0
$0$6,000$0
$0$10,000$0
$600.00 +
15%
6,405.00 +
24,265.50 +
41,995.50 +
89,280.50 +
27%
30%
35%
38.6%
$1,200.00 +
10%
15%
3,202.50 +
12,132.75 +
20,997.75 +
44,640.25 +
27%
30%
35%
38.6%
$600.00 +
10%
15%
5,117.50 +
21,115.00 +
39,085.00 +
91,742.50 +
27%
30%
35%
38.6%
$1,000.00 +
Page 275

Page 278 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
The first part of this section ex- the right to ask the Appeals Office Please do not hesitate to write to usCollections
plains some of your most important to review your case. You may alsoabout anything you do not under-
Publication 594, The IRS Collec-rights as a taxpayer. The second ask a court to review your case.stand.
tion Process, explains your rightspart explains the examination, ap-Relief from certain penalties andpeal, collection, and refund and responsibilities regarding pay-interest.The IRS will waive pen-By interview. If we notify youprocesses. ment of federal taxes. It describes:alties when allowed by law if youthat we will conduct your examina-
can show you acted reasonably tion through a personal interview,• What to do when you oweDeclaration of and in good faith or relied on theor you request such an interview, taxes. It describes what to doincorrect advice of an IRS em- you have the right to ask that theTaxpayer Rights if you get a tax bill and whatployee. We will waive interest thatexamination take place at a rea- to do if you think your bill isis the result of certain errors or de-sonable time and place that is con-wrong. It also covers makingProtection of your rights.IRS lays caused by an IRS employee.venient for both you and the IRS. Ifinstallment payments, delay-employees will explain and protect our examiner proposes any ing collection action, and sub-your rights as a taxpayer through-
Examinations, changes to your return, he or she mitting an offer inout your contact with us.
will explain the reasons for the compromise.Appeals,Privacy and confidentiality. changes. If you do not agree with
• IRS collection actions. It cov-Collections, andThe IRS will not disclose to anyone these changes, you can meet with
ers liens, releasing a lien, le-the information you give us, except the examiner’s supervisor.Refunds vies, releasing a levy,as authorized by law. You have the
right to know why we are asking seizures and sales, and re-
Repeat examinations. If we ex-Examinations (Audits)you for information, how we will use lease of property.
amined your return for the sameit, and what happens if you do not
We accept most taxpayers’ returnsitems in either of the 2 previousprovide requested information. Your collection appeal rights are
as filed. If we inquire about youryears and proposed no change toexplained in detail in PublicationProfessional and courteous return or select it for examination, ityour tax liability, please contact us1660, Collection Appeal Rights.service. If you believe that andoes not suggest that you are dis-as soon as possible so we can see
IRS employee has not treated youhonest. The inquiry or examinationif we should discontinue the exami-
in a professional, fair, and courte- Innocent spouse relief.Gener-may or may not result in more tax.nation.ous manner, you should tell thatWe may close your case without ally, both you and your spouse are
employee’s supervisor. If the change; or, you may receive a re- responsible, jointly and individu-
supervisor’s response is not satis-fund. ally, for paying the full amount ofAppealsfactory, you should write to the IRSThe process of selecting a re- any tax, interest, or penalties due
director for your area or the centerturn for examination usually beginsIf you do not agree with the on your joint return. However, if you
where you filed your return. in one of two ways. First, we useexaminer’s proposed changes, youqualify for innocent spouse relief,
computer programs to identify re-can appeal them to the Appeals you may not have to pay the tax,Representation. You may either turns that may have incorrect Office of IRS. Most differences caninterest, and penalties related torepresent yourself or, with properamounts. These programs may be be settled without expensive andyour spouse (or former spouse).written authorization, have some-based on information returns, suchtime-consuming court trials. YourFor information on innocent spouseone else represent you in your as Forms 1099 and W–2, on stud-appeal rights are explained in detailrelief and two other ways to getplace. Your representative must beies of past examinations, or on cer-in both Publication 5, Your Appeala person allowed to practice before relief, see Publication 971, Inno-tain issues identified by complianceRights and How To Prepare a Pro-the IRS, such as an attorney, certi- cent Spouse Relief, and Formprojects. Second, we use informa-test If You Don’t Agree, and Publi-fied public accountant, or enrolled 8857, Request for Innocenttion from outside sources that indi-cation 556, Examination ofagent. If you are in an interview and Spouse Relief (And Separation ofcates that a return may have Returns, Appeal Rights, andask to consult such a person, then Liability and Equitable Relief).incorrect amounts. These sourcesClaims for Refund.we must stop and reschedule themay include newspapers, publicinterview in most cases. If you do not wish to use therecords, and individuals. If we de-You can have someone accom- Appeals Office or disagree with itsRefundstermine that the information is ac-pany you at an interview. You may findings, you may be able to takecurate and reliable, we may use itmake sound recordings of any You may file a claim for refund ifyour case to the U.S. Tax Court,to select a return for examination.meetings with our examination, or you think you paid too much tax.U.S. Court of Federal Claims, orPublication 556, Examination ofcollection personnel, provided you You must generally file the claimthe U.S. District Court where youReturns, Appeal Rights, andtell us in writing 10 days before the within 3 years from the date youlive. If you take your case to court,Claims for Refund, explains themeeting. filed your original return or 2 yearsrules and procedures that we follow the IRS will have the burden of
from the date you paid the tax,in examinations. The following sec-proving certain facts if you kept ad-Payment of only the correct
whichever is later. The law gener-tions give an overview of how weequate records to show your taxamount of tax. You are respon-
ally provides for interest on yourconduct examinations. liability, cooperated with the IRS,sible for paying only the correct
refund if it is not paid within 45 daysand meet certain other conditions.amount of tax due under the law—By mail. We handle many exami- of the date you filed your return orIf the court agrees with you on mostno more, no less. If you cannot paynations and inquiries by mail. We claim for refund. Publication 556,issues in your case and finds thatall of your tax when it is due, youwill send you a letter with either a Examination of Returns, Appealsmay be able to make monthly in- our position was largely unjustified,request for more information or a Rights, and Claims for Refund, hasstallment payments. you may be able to recover some ofreason why we believe a change to
more information on refunds.your administrative and litigationyour return may be needed. YouHelp with unresolved tax costs. You will not be eligible tocan respond by mail or you can If you were due a refund but youproblems. See How To Get Tax recover these costs unless yourequest a personal interview with did not file a return, you must fileHelp. tried to resolve your case adminis-an examiner. If you mail us the re- within 3 years from the date the
tratively, including going throughAppeals and judicial review.If quested information or provide an return was originally due to get that
the appeals system, and you gaveyou disagree with us about the explanation, we may or may not refund.
us the information necessary to re-amount of your tax liability or cer- agree with you, and we will explain
solve the case.tain collection actions, you havethe reasons for any changes. ■
Page 276

Page 279 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved• View Internal Revenue Bulle- answers, we use several methods P.O. Box 85074
tax issues, order free publications Richmond, VA 23261–5074tins published in the last few to evaluate the quality of our tele-
and forms, ask tax questions, and years. phone services. One method is for
get more information from the IRS a second IRS representative to CD-ROM. You can order• Search regulations and thein several ways. By selecting the sometimes listen in on or record IRS Publication 1796,Internal Revenue Code.method that is best for you, you will telephone calls. Another is to ask Federal Tax Products onhave quick and easy access to tax• Receive our electronic news-some callers to complete a shortCD-ROM, and obtain:help. letters on hot tax issues andsurvey at the end of the call.
• Current tax forms, instruc-news.
Contacting your Taxpayer tions, and publications.• Learn about the benefits of fil- Walk-in. Many productsAdvocate. If you have attempted • Prior-year tax forms and in-and services are availableing electronically (IRS e-file).to deal with an IRS problem unsuc- structions.on a walk-in basis.cessfully, you should contact your• Get information on starting
Taxpayer Advocate. • Popular tax forms that may• Products. You can walk in toand operating a small busi-
be filled in electronically,The Taxpayer Advocate repre- many post offices, libraries,ness.
printed out for submission,sents your interests and concerns and IRS offices to pick up
and saved for recordkeeping.within the IRS by protecting your certain forms, instructions,You can also reach us with your
rights and resolving problems that and publications. Some IRScomputer using File Transfer Pro- • Internal Revenue Bulletins.have not been fixed through normal offices, libraries, grocerytocol at ftp.irs.gov.
channels. While Taxpayer Advo- stores, copy centers, city andThe CD-ROM can be purchasedcates cannot change the tax law or county governments, creditTaxFax Service. Using from National Technical Informa-make a technical tax decision, they unions, and office supplythe phone attached to tion Service (NTIS) by callingcan clear up problems that resulted stores have an extensive col-your fax machine, you can 1–877–233–6767 or on the In-from previous contacts and ensure lection of products availablereceive forms and instructions by ternet at www.irs.gov/cdorders.that your case is given a complete to print from a CD-ROM orcalling 703–368–9694. Follow the The first release is available inand impartial review. photocopy from reproducibledirections from the prompts. When early January and the final releaseproofs. Also, some IRS of-To contact your Taxpayer Ad-you order forms, enter the catalog is available in late February.fices and libraries have thevocate: number for the form you need. The
Internal Revenue Code, regu-items you request will be faxed to CD-ROM for small busi-• Call the Taxpayer Advocate lations, Internal Revenue Bul-you. nesses. IRS Publicationat letins, and CumulativeFor help with transmission 3207, Small Business Re-1–877–777–4778. Bulletins available for re-problems, call the FedWorld Help source Guide, is a must for everysearch purposes• Call, write, or fax the Tax-Desk at 703–487–4608. small business owner or any tax-payer Advocate office in your payer about to start a business.• Services. You can walk in toarea. Phone. Many services This handy, interactive CD con-your local IRS office to ask
are available by phone. tains all the business tax forms, in-tax questions or get help with• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you
structions and publications neededa tax problem. Now you canare a
to successfully manage a busi-set up an appointment byTTY/TDD user. • Ordering forms, instructions, ness. In addition, the CD providescalling your local IRS officeand publications. Call an abundance of other helpful in-number and, at the prompt,For more information, see Publi-1–800–829–3676 to order formation, such as how to prepareleaving a message requestingcation 1546, The Taxpayer Advo- current and prior year forms, a business plan, finding financingEveryday Tax Solutions help.cate Service of the IRS. instructions, and publications. for your business, and much more.A representative will call you
• Asking tax questions. Call the The design of the CD makes find-Free tax services.To find out back within 2 business days
IRS with your tax questions at ing information easy and quick andwhat services are available, get to schedule an in-person ap-
1–800–829–1040. incorporates file formats andPublication 910, Guide to Free Tax pointment at your conve-
browsers that can be run on virtu-Services. It contains a list of free nience.• Solving problems. Take ad- ally any desktop or laptop com-tax publications and an index of taxvantage of Everyday Tax So- puter.topics. It also describes other freelutions service by calling your Mail. You can send your It is available in March. You cantax information services, includinglocal IRS office to set up an order for forms, instruc-get a free copy by callingtax education and assistance pro- in-person appointment at your tions, and publications to1–800–829–3676  or by visitinggrams and a list of TeleTax topics.convenience. Check your lo-the Distribution Center nearest tothe website at www.irs.gov/cal directory assistance orPersonal computer. you and receive a response withinsmallbiz.www.irs.gov for the num-With your personal com- 10 workdays after your request is
bers.puter and modem, you received. Find the address that ap-
Written tax questions.You cancan access the IRS on the Internet plies to your part of the country.• TTY/TDD equipment. If you send your written tax questions toat www.irs.gov. While visiting our have access to TTY/TDD • Western part of U.S.: your IRS office. You should get anweb site, you can: equipment, call 1–800–829– Western Area Distribution answer in about 30 days. If you do
4059 to ask tax questions or• See answers to frequently Center not have the address, you can get it
to order forms and publica-asked tax questions or re- Rancho Cordova, CA by calling 1–800–829–1040.  Do
tions.quest help by e-mail. 95743–0001 not send tax questions with your
return.• TeleTax topics. Call• Download forms and publica- • Central part of U.S.:
1–800–829–4477 to listentions or search for forms and Central Area Distribution Braille tax materials.A varietyto pre-recorded messagespublications by topic or Center of Braille tax products can be or-covering various tax topics.keyword. P.O. Box 8903 dered at no charge by calling theBloomington, IL 61702–8903• View forms that may be filled IRS at 1–800–829–3676. You
Evaluating the quality of ourin electronically, print the • Eastern part of U.S. and for-can also download accessible
telephone services. To ensurecompleted form, and then eign addresses: products by visiting the Accessibil-
that IRS representatives give accu-save the form for recordkeep- Eastern Area Distribution ity section of the IRS web site at
rate, courteous, and professionaling. Center www.irs.gov.
Page 277

Page 280 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Braille tax materials are avail- Forms 1040, 1040A, and 1040EZ. low-income taxpayers and the Tax you. For the location of an Ameri-
able for review from Regional Li- can Association of Retired PersonsAll of these products come with re-Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)
braries for the Visually Impaired in (AARP) Tax-Aide site in your com-lated schedules, instructions andprogram is designed to assist tax-
conjunction with the National Li- munity, call 1–888–227–7669  ortax tables. payers age 60 or older with their tax
brary Service for the Blind and visit their Internet Web Site atreturns. Some locations offer freeFree help in preparing your re-Physically Handicapped. To locate www.aarp.org/taxaide.electronic filing. See IRS e-file  inturn. Free help in preparing youryour nearest library, call 1–800– chapter 1 for information on elec-return is available nationwide from424–8567 . Braille materials cur- tronic filing.IRS-trained volunteers. The Volun-rently available for review include
Call the IRS for the location ofteer Income Tax Assistancethis publication, Publication 334,
Tax Guide for Small Business, and (VITA)program is designed to help the volunteer assistance site near ■
Page 278

Page 281 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Early distribution........ 8 3 Exchange: Travel .............. 1 8 0A
Investment in........ 80, 82 Where toNontaxable.......... 9 9Abortion, legal.......... 1 4 8
Lump-sum distribution.... 8 1 deduct...... 189, 199, 200Taxable ............ 9 9Accelerated death Purchased............ 8 4 Gift ............... 1 0 0 Business use ofbenefits............ 37, 90 Qualified plan.......... 7 9 Improvements ......... 9 8 home ........ 111, 112, 202Accident and health Reporting............ 8 1 Increases to........... 9 8insurance......... 55, 149 Rollover............. 8 2 Inherited property...... 1 0 0Accidents, car.......... 1 7 2 Simplified method....... 8 0 CInvoluntary conversion.... 9 9Accountable plans....... 1 9 0 Survivor............. 8 1 Like-kind exchange...... 9 9 Campaign:Accounting: Taxability of........... 8 0 Contributions received.... 9 3Other than cost........ 9 9Methods ............. 1 3 Unrecovered Expenses ........ 205, 206Points............... 9 8Period .............. 1 3 investment in..... 38, 205 Property: Canceling a lease........ 6 9To employer ......... 1 9 1 Withholding......... 44, 79 Real .............. 9 7 Cancellation of debt....... 8 9Accuracy-related penalties . . 19Appeal rights.......... 2 7 6 Received for services . . . 99Capital asset, defined..... 1 0 5Active participation........ 7 7 Appraisal fees: Transferred from Capital gain:Activity not for profit..... 70, 93 Casualty losses.... 173, 203 spouse .......... 1 0 0 Character of......... 1 0 5Contributions......... 1 6 8Additional child tax credit . . 236 Real: Distributions.......... 6 7Deducting........... 2 0 3 Estate taxes......... 9 8Address: Investment income..... 1 6 1Archer MSA ....... 38, 39, 95Change of....... 17, 18, 47 Property ............ 9 7 Lump-sum distribution.... 8 2
Label ............... 1 7 Settlement fees........ 9 7Armed forces: Reporting........... 1 1 4
Where to file.......... 1 7 Stocks and bonds...... 1 0 1Combat zone .......... 1 2 Tax computation....... 1 1 5
Dependency allotments . . . 28Adjusted basis....... 98, 177 Beginning date, required Undistributed......... 2 6 2
Disability pension..... 53, 54 (IRA) .............. 1 2 8Administrator, estate...... 3 5 Capital loss:Moving expenses...... 1 3 6 Beneficiary, estate or trust . . . 94Adoption: Carryover........... 1 1 5Reservists........... 1 8 6Credit.............. 2 5 9 Bonds: Character of......... 1 0 5Retirement pay........ 5 3Dependents ........ 27, 148 Amortization of Reporting........... 1 1 4Transportation........ 1 8 6Expenses: premium ....... 101, 204 Car:Travel........... 179, 186As a contribution..... 1 6 8 Basis of............ 1 0 1 Accidents........... 1 7 2Uniforms, deductibility . . . 202Medical ........... 1 4 8 Issued at discount.... 63, 105 Allowance........... 1 9 1Artistic works.......... 1 0 5Taxpayer Original issue discount . . . 63Expenses:
Artists,identification Retirement of...... 102, 105 Business use....... 1 8 5
performing..... 194, 200, 201number ...... 14, 34, 219 Sale of........... 63, 105 Car pools.......... 1 8 6
Assessments for localAdvance: Savings ............. 6 0 Charitable
improvements: contribution....... 1 6 7Commissions .......... 4 9 Series EE and E........ 6 0
Basis ............... 9 8 Depreciation........ 1 8 7Rent ................ 6 9 Series HH and H....... 6 0
Deductibility........ 70, 155 Leasing ........... 1 8 8Travel.............. 1 9 2 Series I.............. 6 0
Assistance (See Tax help) Medical ........... 1 5 0Tax-exempt ........ 64, 105Advance earned income
Moving ........... 1 3 7ATIN:credit.............. 2 5 4 Bonuses .............. 4 9
Child care credit....... 2 1 9 Carryover, capital loss.... 1 1 5Alaska Permanent Fund dividend: Braille tax materials...... 2 7 7
Dependents ........... 3 4 Cash rebates............ 9 3Child’s investment Bribes and illegal
During adoption........ 1 4income ........... 1 6 1 Casualty:payments ........... 2 0 5
Attorney fees,Income .............. 9 3 Appraisal fees..... 173, 203Brokerage account........ 1 3
deductibility....... 203, 206Investment income..... 1 6 1 Deduction limits....... 1 7 6Burial or funeralReporting income....... 9 3 Automatic: Disaster areas........ 1 7 7expenses ..... 31, 148, 205
Extension............ 1 1 Employee ........... 2 0 3Aliens: Business expenses:Investment service..... 1 0 7 Home .............. 1 7 2Child care credit....... 2 1 7 C a r ............... 1 8 5 InsuranceDual-status..........8 ,  2 2 Awards and prizes...... 49, 95 Claiming......... 189, 199 proceeds .... 94, 174, 175Head of household...... 2 3 Away from home, travel . . . 179Conventions ...... 183, 199 Nonbusiness ......... 1 7 2Joint return........... 2 2 Education, work-related: Proof of loss......... 1 7 3Nonresident....... 8 ,  22, 23 Deductible......... 1 9 8B Reimbursement .... 94, 174,Resident.............. 7 Impairment-related . . . 200Baby sitting............ 4 9 175Status................ 7 Qualifying.......... 1 9 6 When to deduct....... 1 7 7Tax return............. 7 Back pay, award for....... 4 9 Transportation...... 1 9 8 Certificates of deposit...... 6 3Alimony: Backup withholding . . 44, 58, 66 Travel............ 1 9 9Deducting........... 1 4 1 Change of:Bad debt, nonbusiness.... 1 0 6 Where toGeneral rules......... 1 3 9 Address ........ 17, 18, 47Bar exam review course . . . 198 deduct ....... 199, 200Instruments executed Name ............. 13, 48Bargain purchases........ 9 9 Employee ........ 187, 188after 1984......... 1 3 9 Charitable contributions . . . 164Barter income........... 8 9 Entertainment........ 1 8 3Recapture........... 1 4 1 Check-writing fees....... 2 0 5Gifts............... 1 8 5Basis:Reporting income.... 93, 141 Checks, year received..... 1 3Home, use as office.... 2 0 2Adjusted.......... 98, 177Allocated tips........... 5 7 Meals and lodging..... 1 8 0 Child:Assessments for local
Alternative minimum tax Parking fees and tolls . . . 187Care provider.......... 4 9improvements........ 9 8
(AMT) .............. 2 0 8 Recordkeeping..... 188, 200 Filing requirements....... 7Bargain purchases...... 9 9
Amended return ......... 1 8 Relating to tax-exempt Gifts to.............. 5 8Changed to business or
American citizens abroad.... 6 and excluded Investment income..... 1 6 1rental use.......... 1 0 0
income ........... 1 9 9 Support........ 32, 94, 140Annuities: Cost ............. 97, 109
Taxes .............. 1 5 3 Tax credit........... 2 3 5Amount received....... 7 9 Decreases to.......... 9 8
Tax credit, additional.... 2 3 6Cost of............ 80, 82 Defined .............. 9 7 Transportation........ 1 8 5
Page 279

Page 282 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax on investment income Hope .............. 2 4 0 Social security number E
o f ............... 2 1 0 (SSN) ........... 13, 34Lifetime learning....... 2 4 0 e-file.................. 9
Minimum tax ......... 2 6 1 Standard deduction..... 1 4 3Child care credit: Early distribution:
Mortgage interest . . . 157, 260Support by divorced orJoint return.......... 2 2 1 Exceptions .......... 1 3 0
Railroad retirement tax separated parents..... 3 2Provider information.... 2 2 1 Tax on .............. 8 3
overpaid .......... 2 6 1 Support test........... 2 8Qualifying........... 2 1 7 Earned income ......... 2 5 2Regulated investment Taxpayer identificationChild tax credit......... 2 3 5 Earned income credit . . . 23, 245company .......... 2 6 2 number ............ 3 4Church employee ....... 2 5 2 Earned income, defined:Retirement savings Tests to claim......... 2 6Citizens outside the U.S...... 6 Standard deduction,contributions........ 2 6 0 Deposits, loss on..... 106, 173Claim for refund.... 18, 36, 107 dependent ......... 1 4 3Social security tax Depreciation:Clergy...............7 ,  5 2 Easements ............. 9 9overpaid .......... 2 6 1 After May 6, 1997...... 1 1 2Clerical help, deductibility Education:Undistributed capital gain, C a r ............... 1 8 7o f................. 2 0 3 Credits............. 2 4 0tax on............ 2 6 2 Rental property........ 7 2 Cruises andClosing costs (settlement Cruises, work-related Special depreciation conventions........ 1 9 9fees) .............. 1 0 9 education........... 1 9 9 allowance........... 7 4 Deductible........... 1 9 8Clothing, work.......... 2 0 2 Custodial fees.......... 2 0 3 Vacant rental property.... 6 9 Employer-providedCollection of tax......... 2 7 6 Custody: Desert Storm (See Combat zone) educationalCombat zone: Exception............ 3 2 assistance......... 1 9 9Diaper service.......... 1 4 8Extension to file return.... 1 2 General rule.......... 3 2 Impairment-relatedDirectors’ fees........... 9 4Extension to pay tax..... 1 2 expenses .......... 2 0 0Disability:Comments .............. 1 Savings account.......1 ,  3 8Armed forces........ 53, 54DCommissions, advance..... 4 9 Savings bond program . . . 62Benefits repaid......... 8 8Damages:Common law marriage..... 2 1 TransportationIncome ........ 53, 54, 229Award for............ 9 4Community expenses .......... 1 9 8Military............ 53, 54Breach of contract..... 2 0 1property....... 22, 61, 147 Travel expenses....... 1 9 9Pension ........... 54, 84Personal injury suit..... 1 5 1Commuting Work-related......... 1 9 6Permanent and total.... 2 2 7Day-care center......... 2 2 1expenses ........ 186, 205 Improving skills...... 1 9 6
Disabled persons:Death benefits: Maintaining skills..... 1 9 6Considered unmarried..... 2 3
Credit for............ 2 2 7Accelerated......... 37, 90 Minimum jobConstructive receipt of Expenses for . . . 150, 194, 204Insurance proceeds..... 9 0 requirements...... 1 9 7income ............ 13, 64
Financially............ 1 9 New trade orPublic safety officers..... 9 0Contributions:
Disaster: business......... 1 9 8Debts:Appraisal fees........ 1 6 8
Area losses.......... 1 7 7 Required by employerBad debt, nonbusiness . . 106Campaign ............ 9 3 o r  l a w........... 1 9 6Relief............... 9 3Cancellation orCharitable........... 1 6 4 Teachers .......... 1 9 7Disclosure statement...... 2 0forgiveness.......... 8 9I R A ............... 1 2 3 Temporary absencePaid by another...... 13, 89 Discount, bonds and notesRecordkeeping........ 1 7 0 from job......... 1 9 6Refund offset against.... 1 0 issued at............. 6 3To retirement plan...... 5 0 Temporary schoolDeceased taxpayer (See Distributions:Conventions: attendance....... 1 9 8Decedent) Capital gain........... 6 7Business expenses..... 1 8 3 Education benefits:Decedent: Early:Education, Employer-providedArcher MSA ......... 38, 39 Exceptions......... 1 3 0work-related........ 1 9 9 educationalCoverdell ESA....... 38, 39 Tax on............. 8 3Foreign............. 1 8 3 assistance......... 1 9 9Deductions in respect of . . 40Exceptions to age 591/2Cooperative apartments: Hope credit.......... 2 4 2Executors and rule.............. 1 2 7Main home .......... 1 0 8 Lifetime learning credit . . 243administrators.... 6 ,  35, 94 Liquidating........... 6 7Real estate taxes...... 1 5 4 Education savings account (SeeExemption............ 2 6 Lump sum ............ 8 2Rental of............. 7 4 Coverdell ESA)Filing requirement........ 6 Nontaxable ........... 6 7Copyrights.......... 92, 105 Educational assistance fromFinal return........... 3 5 Premature........... 1 2 7Cosmetic surgery....... 1 4 8 employer............ 1 9 9Funeral or burial Required............. 8 4Cost: Educator expenses........ 1expenses .... 31, 148, 205 Rollover......... 121, 126Basis ............ 97, 109 Elective deferrals, limit...... 1General information..... 3 5 Distributions from:Of annuity.......... 80, 82 Income in respect of..... 3 8 Electric vehicle credit..... 2 6 1Corporations.......... 6 6Cost-of-living allowances, Medical expenses . . . 147, 149 Electronic filing........... 9Estates and trusts....... 9 4government ........... 5 0 Medical savings Eligible educationalRetirement bonds....... 8 3Coupon bonds .......... 6 4 account .......... 38, 39 institution........... 2 4 1S corporations......... 9 1Court awards........... 9 4 Savings bonds......... 6 1 Emotional distress, awardDividends.............. 6 6Coverdell ESA ...... 1 ,  38, 39 Deductions in respect of f o r ................. 9 4Divorce decree, exemption forCPA exam review course . . 198 decedent............. 4 0 Employee business expenses:child................ 3 2Credit card insurance...... 9 4 Deferred compensation Cellular telephone...... 2 0 1Divorced taxpayers:plans .............. 2 5 2Credits: Education,Alimony ............ 1 3 9Dependent care:Additional child tax..... 2 3 6 work-related........ 1 9 6Dependent, support test . . . 32Benefits............ 2 2 2Adoption............ 2 5 9 Home computer .... 201, 203Exemptions ........... 2 6Credit for............ 2 1 7Child and dependent Miscellaneous........ 2 0 1Filing status........... 2 1care ............. 2 1 7 Recordkeeping........ 1 8 8Dependents: Transfers of property.... 1 0 4Child tax............ 2 3 5 Travel andAdoption............. 2 7 Drugs and medicines..... 1 4 8Earned income........ 2 4 5 transportation....... 1 7 8ATIN ............... 3 4
Dual-status taxpayer.....8 ,  2 2Education........... 2 4 0 Child tax credit........ 2 3 5 Employer plans:
Due dates ........... 10, 11Electric vehicle........ 2 6 1 Exemption............ 2 6 Defined benefit plan.... 1 2 4
Dues:For the disabled....... 2 2 7 Filing requirements....... 7 Defined contribution
Chamber of Commerce . . 201For the elderly........ 2 2 7 Foster child........... 2 7 plan ............. 1 2 4
Club ......... 165, 167, 205Foreign tax.......... 2 6 0 ITIN ........... 5 ,  14, 217 For which year(s) are you
Medical expenses...... 1 4 7Health insurance...... 2 6 2 Union ........ 96, 168, 202 covered? .......... 1 2 4
Page 280

Page 283 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonvested employees . . . 124 Fines............. 187, 205 8839 .............. 2 6 0 Medical insurance
8863 .............. 2 4 3 premiums .......... 1 4 9Employer-provided Fiscal year ........ 13, 46, 48
8880 .............. 2 6 1educational assistance . . 199 Guaranteed payments...... 8 0Flexible spending
9465 ............... 1 6Employer-sponsored health arrangement ......... 1 4 9 Guide dogs............ 1 4 8
S S – 5............. 13, 34insurance plan........ 1 4 9 Foreclosure........... 1 0 9
W – 1 0 ............. 2 2 2Employment: Foreign: HW – 2 .......... 13, 14, 47Abroad .............. 5 3 Conventions ......... 1 8 3 H.R. 10 (Keogh) plan...... 7 9W – 2 G .............. 4 7Agency fees ......... 2 0 2 Employer ............ 5 3 W – 4 ............... 4 1 Hazardous duty area (SeeR´esum´e expenses ..... 2 0 2 Students............. 2 7 W – 4 P ............ 44, 79 Combat zone)Taxes .............. 2 2 3 Tax credit or W – 4 S .............. 4 3 Head of household........ 2 3Energy conservation deduction .... 154, 156, 260 W – 4 V .............. 4 4 Health insurance (See Insurancesubsidies............ 9 4 Where to deduct taxes . . . 156W – 7 ........... 5 ,  14, 34 premiums)Entertainers and Form: (See also Returns and W – 7 A .............. 1 4 Health insurance credit.... 2 6 2musicians........... 2 0 2 Schedule) W – 9 S ............. 2 4 3 Hearing aids........... 1 4 81040 ........... 9 ,  64, 68Entertainment expenses . . . 183 Forms: Help (See Tax help)1 0 4 0 – E S ............ 4 6Estate tax........ 40, 81, 204 W – 5 .............. 2 5 41040–ES(NR) ......... 4 5 Hobbies ............ 95, 203Estates and trusts, income Foster child:1 0 4 0 – V ...........10, 15 Holding period.......... 1 0 7from ................ 9 4 Care:1040A .......... 8 ,  64, 68 Holocaust victimsEstimated tax: Expenses ........... 2 81040EZ ............... 8 restitution............ 9 5Credit for........... 47, 48 Payments ........... 2 81040X .............. 1 8 Home:How to figure.......... 4 5 Dependency exemption for:1065 ............... 9 0 Abandoned .......... 1 0 9Payment-voucher....... 4 6 Member of household1098 ............ 77, 161 Basis ............... 9 7Payments ............ 4 4 test ............. 2 71 0 9 8 – T ............ 2 4 3 Business use of....... 2 0 2Penalty.............. 4 8 Support test......... 2 81099 ............... 1 3 Changed to businessWhen to pay .......... 4 6 Parents and providers.... 9 41 0 9 9 – A ............ 1 0 9 or rental use...... 70, 100Examination of return..... 2 7 6 Free:1099–B . . . 89, 102, 114, 116 Closing costs......... 1 0 9Excess reimbursement.... 1 9 2 Tax services......... 2 7 71 0 9 9 – C ............ 1 0 9 Cost of keeping up...... 2 3Tour received.......... 9 5Exchange: 1 0 9 9 – D I V.......47, 66, 68 Damage to .......... 1 7 2Insurance policies...... 1 0 3 Fringe benefits:1 0 9 9 – I N T.......47, 59, 64 Exclusion of gain...... 1 1 0Like-kind............. 9 9 De minimis (minimal)..... 5 11099–MISC .......... 6 6 Foreclosure.......... 1 0 9Nontaxable ........... 9 9 Taxable income........ 5 01 0 9 9 – O I D............ 6 3 Main home defined . . . 71, 108Taxable ............. 9 9 Withholding........... 4 31 0 9 9 – Q ............. 9 1 Mortgage interest...... 1 5 7Executors and Funeral or burial1 0 9 9 – R .......47, 62, 128 Renting........... 69, 111administrators..... 6 ,  35, 94 expenses ..... 31, 148, 2051 0 9 9 – S ......108, 114, 155 Repossession ........ 1 0 9Exempt-interest dividends . . . 591116 .............. 2 6 0 Sale of............. 1 0 8
Exemptions: 1120S .............. 9 1 Security system....... 2 0 5GDeduction for.......... 2 6 2106 ........... 193, 200 Settlement fees..... 97, 109Gains and losses:Final return for decedent . . 382 1 0 6 – E Z ........193, 200 Tax home defined...... 1 7 9Capital............. 1 0 5Limit on.............. 3 4 2120 ............... 3 1 Vacation............. 7 1Casualty and theft...... 1 7 2Phaseout of........... 3 4 2439 ............ 67, 262 Hope credit............ 2 4 2Deposits............ 1 0 6Expenses, work-related 2441 .............. 2 2 3 Household:Estates and trusts....... 9 4education........... 1 9 6 2688 ............... 1 1 Employees .......... 2 2 3Figuring......... 102, 105
3115 ............... 6 1Extensions............. 1 1 Head of.............. 2 3Gambling ...... 44, 95, 204
3903 .............. 1 3 8Eyeglasses............ 1 4 8 Member of............ 2 7Hobby .............. 9 5
4070 ............... 5 6 Services............ 2 2 1Ordinary............ 1 0 5
4070A .............. 5 6 Passive activity losses.... 2 3
4137 ............... 5 7F Personal items......... 9 6 I4506 ............... 1 7Fair market Related parties........ 1 0 4 work4562 ............. 72, 77value ..... 97, 103, 168, 173 Reporting........... 1 1 4 expenses ..............4684 .............. 1 0 6 Rollover of gain....... 1 0 7Fair rental value......... 3 1 ........ 150, 194, 200, 2044810 ............... 3 6 Gambling winningsFederal: Improvements..... 70, 98, 1094868 ............... 1 1 and losses...... 44, 95, 204Crime investigations or 4952 .............. 1 6 2 Income:prosecutions........ 1 8 0 Garnishments and5329 ............ 83, 130 Alaska Permanent FundIncome tax .......... 1 5 6 attachments........... 1 35 6 ................. 3 5 dividend............ 9 3Per diem............ 1 9 1 General rule, pensions..... 8 06251 .............. 2 0 8 Alimony ............. 9 3Rate, business Gifts:8271 ............... 2 0 Archer MSA ........... 9 5expense ........... 1 9 1 Basis .............. 1 0 08275 ............... 2 0 Bartering............. 8 9Federal Employees Business expenses..... 1 8 58283 .............. 1 7 1 Child’s investment, taxCompensation Act Charitable8332 ............... 3 2 o n............... 2 1 0payments ............ 5 5 contributions........ 1 6 48379 ............... 1 5 Constructive receiptFee-basis From employer......... 5 18396 ........... 157, 260 of .............. 13, 64officials....... 194, 201, 205 Holding period........ 1 0 78582 ............ 77, 114 Disability .......... 53, 229Not taxed............ 9 5Fellowships and 8606 .............. 1 2 8 Earned, defined....... 1 4 3Taxes on, notscholarships........ 31, 96 8615 ......... 58, 66, 212 From estates and trusts . . . 94deductible......... 1 5 6Filing: 8801 .............. 2 6 1 Gross ................ 6To reduce the publicRequirements .......... 5 8812 .............. 2 3 6 Interest.............. 5 8debt .............. 1 7Status: 8814 ......... 58, 66, 210 Investment ....... 161, 210
Grants................ 9 6Considered unmarried . . 23 8815 ............... 6 2 Jury duty............. 9 5
General rules........ 2 1 Gross income, defined...... 68818 ............... 6 3 Kickbacks............ 9 5
Head of household.... 2 3 Ground rent........... 1 5 78822 ............. 18, 47 Medical savings account . . 95
Final return............. 3 5 8824 .............. 1 0 3 Group: Prepaid .............. 1 3
Financially disabled....... 1 9 8834 .............. 2 6 1 Life insurance......... 5 1 Recovery of........... 9 1
Page 281

Page 284 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rental ............ 69, 70 Casualty ...... 94, 174, 175 Leases canceled or Surviving spouse ....... 3 6
transferred........... 6 9Repayment ........... 9 2 Dividends............ 6 8 Maternity clothes........ 1 4 8
Tips ................ 5 6 Dividends, interest on.... 5 9 Leasing a car.......... 1 8 8 Meals and lodging:
Endowment ........... 9 0Income in respect of decedent: Legal expenses . . . 88, 203, 206Business travel....... 1 8 0
From long-term careHow to report.......... 3 8 Education........... 1 9 9License and similar fees . . . 205
contract............ 5 4Installment obligation.... 3 9 Hours of service limits . . . 184Life insurance:InstallmentInterest and dividends.... 3 6 Medical............. 1 4 9Accelerated deathpayments ......... 63, 90Interest, savings Support for dependent.... 2 8benefits............ 9 0Life .............. 63, 90certificates.......... 3 9 Medical expenses:Paid before death....... 9 0Medical............. 1 5 0Partnership........... 3 7 Checklist............ 1 4 8Premiums ......... 51, 205Property......... 174, 175Income tax: Costs you can deduct . . . 147Proceeds .......... 63, 90Veterans............. 5 3Deductibility.......... 1 5 6 Decedent’s return....... 3 8Lifetime learning credit.... 2 4 3Interest:Foreign............. 1 5 6 Dependents .......... 1 4 7Like-kind exchange....... 9 9Expense ............ 1 5 7Interest on......... 16, 162 Health insurance credit . . 262Limits:Fees to collect........ 2 0 3State and local: Insurance........... 1 4 9Capital loss.......... 1 1 5Frozen deposits...... 60, 95Deductible......... 1 5 3 Work-related......... 2 2 2Casualty and theft loss . . 176Income .............. 5 8Refund of.......... 1 5 4 Medical savingsCharitableMortgage ........... 1 5 7Where to deduct..... 1 5 6 account......... 38, 39, 95contributions........ 1 6 9On refund............ 1 7Substantial understatement Medicare ............. 1 4 9Depreciation of car..... 1 8 7On unpaid taxes..... 16, 162o f ................ 2 0 Entertainment........ 1 8 4 Medicines and drugs..... 1 4 8Personal............ 1 6 2Income-producing Exemptions ........... 3 4 Military (See Armed forces)Usurious............. 6 0expenses ........... 2 0 3 Gifts............... 1 8 5 Mineral royalties......... 9 2Interest expense:Indefinite assignment..... 1 7 9 Hours of service, Minimum:Allocation........... 1 6 1Individual retirement arrangement meals ............ 1 8 4 Job requirements...... 1 9 7Carry forward......... 1 6 1(IRA): Itemized deductions.... 1 4 5 Tax credit........... 2 6 1Investment .......... 1 6 1Administrative fees..... 2 0 4 Meals .............. 1 8 4 Ministers.............7 ,  5 2Limit on investmentBeneficiary........... 3 9 Miscellaneous Miscellaneousinterest........... 1 6 1Contributions......... 1 2 3 deductions......... 2 0 1 deductions .......... 2 0 1Passive activity losses . . . 162Deductions .......... 1 2 3 Postponement of gainPoints............ 98, 159 Mobile home............ 7 1General rules......... 1 2 1 from securities sale . . . 107
Interlocutory decree of Modified accelerated costInherited............. 3 9 Liquidating distributionsdivorce............. 1 3 9 recovery systemMarried filing separately . . . 23 (dividends)........... 6 7 (MACRS) ............ 7 4Interview expenses....... 9 5Penalties............ 1 2 9 Literary compositions..... 1 0 5 Money market certificates . . . 59Investment:Retirement savings Loan origination fees..... 1 5 9Expense, interest...... 1 6 1 More information (See Tax help)contributions credit . . . 260 Lobbying expenses...... 2 0 5Income, tax onRollovers and other Mortgage assistanceLocal benefit taxes....... 1 5 5child’s......... 161, 210transfers.......... 1 2 6 payments ............ 9 3Lockout benefits......... 9 6Property......... 105, 161Roth IRA.......... 39, 130 Mortgage interest:Long-term gains andSpecialized smallTraditional........... 1 2 2 Credit........... 157, 260losses........... 107, 114business company.... 1 0 7Individual taxpayer Deduction........... 1 5 7Losses:Involuntary conversion..... 9 9identification Recapture of credit..... 1 1 2Capital............. 1 0 5number ......... 5 ,  14, 217 IRA (See Individual retirement Mortgages:Casualty and theft...... 1 7 2arrangement (IRA))Inheritance: Insurance premiums.... 2 0 5Deduction on final return . . 38Itemized deductions:Basis .............. 1 0 0 Interest on........... 1 5 7Disaster areas........ 1 7 7Changing your mind.... 1 4 3Holding period........ 1 0 7 Prepayment penalty.... 1 5 7Figuring............ 1 0 2Decedent’s return....... 3 8 Seller-financed........ 1 1 2Not taxed............ 9 5 Gambling ......... 95, 204Limit............... 1 4 5 Moving expenses ....... 1 3 4Inherited IRA: Hobby .............. 9 5Recovery of........... 9 1Beneficiary........... 3 9 Multiple support:Holding period........ 1 0 7State benefit funds..... 1 5 3From spouse ......... 1 2 6 Agreement ........... 3 1Insolvent or bankruptWho should itemize..... 1 4 3 Medical expenses...... 1 4 8Injured spouse.......... 1 5 financial institution.... 1 0 6ITIN............. 5 ,  14, 217 Municipal bonds......... 6 4Injury and illness Long term........... 1 1 4
payments .......... 50, 53 Musical compositions..... 1 0 5Ordinary............ 1 0 5
Innocent spouse......... 2 2 Musicians andPassive activity . . 23, 77, 162J entertainers.......... 2 0 2Related parties........ 1 0 4Installment: Job search expenses..... 2 0 2 Rental .............. 2 3Agreement ........... 1 6 Mutual funds:Joint accounts......... 58, 66 Reporting........... 1 1 4Sale ............... 1 1 2 Allocated expenses..... 2 0 3
Joint return, revoked by Sale of personal items.... 9 6 Average basis........ 1 0 1Insurance policies
personal representative . . . 36Short term........... 1 1 4 Capital gain distributions . . 67exchanged .......... 1 0 3
Jury duty.............. 9 5 Nonpublicly offered..... 2 0 3Lost property....... 172, 206Insurance premiums:
Lotteries............... 9 5Alimony ............ 1 3 9
Group life............ 5 1 Lump-sum distribution..... 8 1K NHealth insurance credit . . 262
Keeping: Name change ......... 13, 48Home .............. 2 0 5
Records ............ 2 0 0 M Net operating loss....... 1 7 7Liability............. 2 0 1
Up a home ........... 2 3 M&IE ................ 1 8 1Life ............... 2 0 5 New job:
Keogh (H.R. 10) plan...... 7 9 Main home .......... 71, 108Long-term care....... 1 4 9 Employment agency
Kickbacks.............. 9 5Medical............. 1 4 9 Mandatory retirement fees ............. 2 0 2
Kidnapped child......... 2 4 9Mortgage ........... 2 0 5 a g e ............... 2 2 9 Job search expenses . . . 202
Paid in advance........ 5 9 Moving expenses...... 1 3 4Married taxpayers: (See also
Rental .............. 7 0 Travel expenses....... 2 0 2Spouse)
LSelf-employed........ 1 4 9 Estimated tax.......... 4 5 New trade or business:
Laboratory fees......... 1 4 8Insurance proceeds: Filing status ........... 2 1 C P A............... 1 9 8
Accident and health..... 5 5 Late payment charges.... 1 5 7 Signing joint return...... 2 2 Education required..... 1 9 8
Page 282

Page 285 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
L a w ............... 1 9 8 Pensions: Rental income and Q
expenses .......... 69, 70Additional taxes........ 8 3Teaching............ 1 9 8 Qualified 5-year gain..... 1 1 5
Amount received....... 7 9 Repayment:Nominees ......... 59, 63, 66 Qualified Domestic Relations
Cost of............ 80, 82 Amount previouslyNonaccountable plans.... 1 9 3 Order (QDRO) ......... 8 3
Early distribution........ 8 3 included inNonresident aliens.... 8 ,  22, 23 Qualified tuition programInvestment in........ 80, 82 income ......... 92, 205Nontaxable: (QTP) ..............2 ,  9 6Lump-sum distribution.... 8 1 Social security benefits . . . 88Distributions.......... 6 7 Qualifying work-related educationPenalty taxes.......... 8 3 Repossession of home.... 1 0 9Exchange ..... 99, 103, 107 (See Education: Work-related)Qualified plan.......... 7 9 Required beginning dateNot-for-profit activity..... 70, 93 Reporting............ 8 1 (IRA) .............. 1 2 8Note: Rollover............. 8 2 Required education:RDiscounted ........ 63, 105 Simplified method....... 8 0 Defined............. 1 9 6Raffles................ 9 5Received for services.... 5 0 Survivor............. 8 1 Minimum ............ 1 9 7Railroad retirement:Nursing home.......... 1 4 9 Unrecovered Teachers ........... 1 9 7Benefits:Nutrition Program for the investment in..... 38, 205 Resident aliens........... 7Deductions.......... 8 8Elderly.............. 9 3 Withholding......... 44, 79 Restitution, holocaustRepayment .......... 8 8Per diem allowance...... 1 9 1 victims.............. 9 5Taxation of.......... 8 5Performing artists.... 194, 201 Retirement of bonds . . . 102, 105O Withholding......... 4 4Permanent and total Retirement pay:Credit for overpayment ofOffice: disability............ 2 2 7 Armed forces.......... 5 3t a x .............. 2 6 1Rent, deductibility of.... 2 0 3 Personal: Military.............. 5 3Real estate taxes:Use of home as....... 2 0 2 Exemption............ 2 6 Pensions and annuities . . . 79Basis adjustment....... 9 8Older taxpayers: Interest............. 1 6 2 Retirement plans:CooperativeCredit for the elderly.... 2 2 7 Property taxes........ 1 5 6 457 plans............ 8 0apartments......... 1 5 4Filing requirements....... 6 Representative......... 3 5 Contributions.......... 5 0Deductible........... 1 5 4Original issue Points: For employees......... 7 9Local benefits...... 70, 155discount.......... 63, 105 Basis ............... 9 8 Individual retirementNot deductible........ 1 5 5Overpayment of tax: Interest expense..... 98, 159 arrangement (IRA).... 1 2 1Part-year owner....... 1 5 4Credited to estimated Political campaign Keogh .............. 7 9Refund of........... 1 5 5t a x .............46, 48 expenses ........ 205, 206 Retirement savingsService charges....... 1 5 6Refunded ............ 1 5 contributions credit . . . 260Power of attorney........ 1 5 Where to deduct....... 1 5 6 Roth IRA............ 1 3 0Premature distributions Recapture, alimony...... 1 4 1 Self-employed......... 7 9(early withdrawals),P Recordkeeping: Retirement savingsexceptions........... 1 2 7Parent’s responsibility for Contributions, contributions credit..... 2 6 0Prepaid:child’s tax............. 7 charitable.......... 1 7 0 Return of capital......... 6 7Income .............. 1 3Parking fees and tolls: Employee businessInsurance......... 59, 149 Return, tax:Contributions......... 1 6 7 expenses .......... 1 8 8Interest............. 1 5 7 Aliens................ 7Employee business Gambling ........... 2 0 4Rent ................ 6 9 Amended ............ 1 8expenses .......... 1 8 7 General Child .............7 ,  2 1 0Preparer’s fee........ 70, 203Medical............. 1 5 0 requirements.... 17, 200, Copies of............ 1 7Presidential Election 201Partners and Deceased taxpayer....... 6Campaign Fund ........ 1 4 Home .............. 1 1 0partnerships....... 90, 203 Estimated tax.......... 4 6Private: Savings bonds used forPartnership, final return.... 3 7 Extension of filing date . . . 11Delivery services....... 1 0 education........... 6 3Passive activity Filing status........... 2 1Schools, tuition to...... 1 6 8 Recovery of:losses......... 23, 77, 162 Final................ 3 5Prizes and awards...... 49, 95 Amounts previouslyPatents ............... 9 2 How to file............ 1 2Profit-sharing plan, lump-sum deducted ........... 9 1Patronage dividends...... 6 8 Joint......... 22, 26, 35, 36distribution........... 8 1 Itemized deductions..... 9 1Payment: Puerto Rican residents.... 6Prompt assessment, Stolen property....... 1 7 3By credit card........ 16, 47 Separate........... 22, 26request.............. 3 6 Refund: (See also Tax refund)By electronic funds Signatures....... 14, 22, 35Proof of expense (See Claim for...... 36, 107, 276withdrawal.......... 4 7 When to file........... 1 0Recordkeeping) Of interest........... 1 5 9O f  t a x............15, 276 Which form to use........ 8
Property: Of state income tax Who must file........... 5Peace Corps allowances.... 5 3
Casualty and theft loss . . 172 (recovery).......... 9 1 Rollover:Penalties: Changed to business Offset against Annuity.............. 8 2Accuracy-related....... 1 9 or rental use...... 70, 100 debts......... 10, 15, 19 From an IRA ...... 121, 126Criminal............. 2 0 Gifts to charity........ 1 6 8 Past due............. 1 8 Gain from sale ofDeductibility....... 162, 205 Inherited.......... 95, 100 Taxability of........... 9 1 securities.......... 1 0 7Estimated tax.......... 4 8 Received as gift....... 1 0 0 Regulated investment Individual retirementFailure to file.......... 1 9 Received for company ............ 2 6 2 arrangement (IRA).... 1 2 6Failure to furnish tax shelter services.......... 50, 99 Reimbursement: Pension ............. 8 2registration number.... 2 0 Rental .............. 6 9 Casualty and Roth IRA............ 1 3 2Failure to pay.......... 1 9 Taxes ........... 154, 156 theft loss.... 94, 174, 175 T o  a n  I R A ........... 1 2 6Failure to report tips to Transferred from Employee business Waiting period betweenemployer ........... 5 6 spouse ........... 1 0 0 expenses .......... 1 9 0 rollovers........... 1 2 7Failure to supply social Prorating standard meal Medical expenses...... 1 5 0 Roth IRA:security number...... 2 0 allowance........... 1 9 1 Moving expenses...... 1 3 8 Beneficiary........... 3 9Form W–4 ........... 4 3
Protective clothing....... 2 0 2 Unclaimed........... 1 9 8 Conversions ......... 1 3 2Fraud ............... 2 0
Psychiatric care......... 1 4 8 Related parties, transactions Defined ............. 1 3 0Frivolous return........ 2 0
Public assistance benefits . . . 93between ............ 1 0 4 Rollovers........... 1 3 2Negligence ........... 2 0
Publications (See Tax help) When to set up ........ 1 3 0Substantial understatement Release from personal
of income tax........ 2 0 liability, request for...... 3 6Puerto Rico, residents of..... 6 Rounding off dollars....... 1 4
Page 283

Page 286 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Royalties.............. 9 2 Social security Support test for dependent . . 28 Ten-year tax option ....... 8 2
number ...... 13, 34, 66, 217Support, decree of....... 1 3 9 Tenants:
Social security tax: By the entirety ....... 58, 66Survivor annuities........ 8 1
S In common ......... 58, 66Credit for overpayment . . 261
S corporations........ 91, 203 Deductibility.......... 1 5 6 Terrorist attacks, tax relief.... 3
Safe deposit box........ 2 0 4 TSpecial depreciation Theft losses........... 1 7 2
allowance............ 7 4Salaries and wages: Tax counsel fees ........ 2 0 3 Tip income............. 5 6
Income .............. 4 9 Specialized small business Tax figured by IRS....... 2 0 8 Tip Rate Determination and
Unpaid ............. 1 0 6 investment company.... 1 0 7 Tax help.............. 2 7 7 Education Program...... 5 7
Sales and exchanges: Spouse: (See also Married Tax home ............. 1 7 9 Tools............. 186, 202
Bonds ............ 63, 105 taxpayers) Tax on early distribution.... 8 3 Trade (See Nontaxable exchange)General rules......... 1 0 2 Deceased ...........6 ,  2 6 Tax preference items..... 2 0 8 Trade-in.............. 1 0 3Home .............. 1 0 8 Disabled, qualifying for Tax preparer’s fee..... 70, 203 Traditional IRA......... 1 2 2dependent careSavings: Tax refund: Transfer taxes.......... 1 5 6credit............. 2 1 9Bonds ............. 60, 65 Claim for.......... 18, 276 TransportingExemption for......... 2 6Bonds used for Deceased taxpayer.... 35, 36 schoolchildren......... 9 6Injured.............. 1 5education........... 6 2 General rules for....... 1 5 Travel and transportation:Innocent............. 2 2Certificate.......... 59, 63 Interest on....... 17, 19, 60 Armed forces...... 179, 186Medical expenses for . . . 147Savings account......... 3 9 Less than $1.......... 1 5 Contributions......... 1 6 7Standard deduction..... 1 4 2Schedule (Form 1040): Offset against debts . . . 10, 15Educational.......... 1 9 9Student............. 2 1 9C.................. 7 7 Past due............. 1 8 Employees .......... 1 7 8Standard deduction:D................. 1 1 4 State income tax Expenses paid forAge 65 or older....... 1 4 2E.................. 7 7 recovery ........... 9 1 others............ 2 0 6Blindness........... 1 4 2R................. 2 2 9 Tax return (See Return, tax) In the United States.... 1 8 2Decedent’s return....... 3 8S E.................. 7 Tax-exempt: Investment-related..... 1 8 3Dependents .......... 1 4 3Schedule (Form 1040A): Bonds and other Medical............. 1 5 0Persons not eligible..... 1 4 21 – Part I............ 6 4 obligations....... 64, 105 Moving ............. 1 3 7Spouse ............. 1 4 22 ................. 2 2 3 Income ............. 2 0 6 New employment ...... 2 0 2Standard meal2 – Part II............ 6 8 Interest.............. 6 4 Outside the Unitedallowance........ 181, 1913 ................. 2 2 9 States............ 1 8 2Taxes:Standard mileageSchedule K–1: Rental .............. 7 0Alternative minimum.... 2 0 8rate ............ 187, 198Form 1041 ......... 58, 66 Reservists........... 1 8 6Business............ 1 5 3
State:Form 1065 ........... 9 0 Standard mileage rate.... 7 0Credit for............. 4 7
Benefit funds......... 1 5 3Form 1120S .......... 9 1 Transportation..... 185, 198Deductible........... 1 5 3
Benefit payments..... 28, 93Scholarships.......... 31, 96 Travel advance....... 1 9 2Estimated.......... 44, 48
Income tax:Security deposit.......... 6 9 For not making minimum Treasury notes....... 59, 104
Deductible......... 1 5 3 distributions......... 8 3Self-employed persons: Trusts and estates, incomeRefund ........... 1 5 4 Foreign....... 153, 154, 260Filing requirements....... 7 from ................ 9 4Refund, recovery of.... 9 1 How to figure......... 2 0 7Health insurance TTY/TDD information..... 2 7 7Where to deduct..... 1 5 6 Income, state and local . . 153premiums .......... 1 4 9 Tuition and fees deduction . . . 1Obligations, interest on . . . 64Indian tribalSelf-employment tax, Tuition programs, qualified . . 96Officials...... 194, 201, 205 government ........ 1 5 3deduction for......... 1 5 6 Tuition, parochial school . . . 168Sterilization........... 1 4 8 IRA penalties......... 1 2 9Seller-financed mortgage . . 112Stock: Minor children ........ 2 1 0Separated taxpayers: Not deductible..... 155, 156Appreciation rights...... 5 0 UDependent, support test . . . 32 On capital gains....... 1 1 5Basis .............. 1 0 1 U.S. citizens abroad........ 6Filing status........... 2 1 On child’s investmentDividends............ 6 7Separate maintenance U.S. obligations,income ........... 2 1 0For services........... 5 0decree............ 1 3 9 interest............ 59, 60Personal property...... 1 5 6Holding period........ 1 0 7Separation agreement . . . 139 Underpayment of estimatedRailroad retirement..... 2 6 1Indirect ownership..... 1 0 4Series EE and E savings tax, penalty for......... 4 8Real estate.......... 1 5 4Mutual fund.......... 1 0 1bonds ............... 6 0 Undistributed capital gain,Social security...... 50, 261Options.............. 5 0Series HH and H savings credit for tax on....... 2 6 2Where to deduct....... 1 5 6Rights............ 67, 107bonds ............... 6 0 UnemploymentWithholding......... 41, 47Rollover of gain from
Series I savings bonds..... 6 0 compensation ....... 44, 92sale.............. 1 0 7 Taxpayer Advocate . . . 276, 277
Service charges: Uniforms .......... 167, 202Sale or exchange...... 1 0 3 Taxpayer identification number
Deductible taxes....... 1 5 6 Union:Small business........ 1 0 7 (TIN):
Dividend reinvestment Assessments ....... 96, 202Worthless........... 1 0 2 ATIN ............ 14, 219
plan ............. 2 0 4 Benefits............. 9 6Stock bonus plan, lump-sum ITIN ...............5 ,  1 4
Settlement fees......... 1 0 9 Dues ........ 96, 168, 202distribution........... 8 1 S S N................ 3 4
Severance pay .......... 5 0 Unpaid salaries andStockholders’ meeting Taxpayer rights ......... 2 7 6
wages ............. 1 0 6Shareholder, S corporation . . 91expenses ........... 2 0 6 Teachers, deduction of
Unstated interest......... 9 7Short-term gains and Strike benefits........... 9 6 classroom expenses...... 1
losses........... 107, 114 Use of home in business . . . 202Student loan interest....... 1 Teaching:
Sick pay....... 43, 50, 53, 149 Usurious interest......... 6 0Certification.......... 1 9 7Students:
Signing your return . . 14, 22, 36 Minimum job Utility rebate............ 9 6Dependent ........... 2 8
requirements....... 1 9 7Simplified method, who must Fellowships, grants,
Related duties........ 1 9 8u s e ................ 8 0 and scholarships.... 31, 96
VLiving in your home..... 1 6 6 Telephones ........... 2 0 6Social security benefits:
Vacation homes ......... 7 1Loan canceled......... 8 9Deductions ........... 8 8 Temporary:
Vandalism ............ 1 7 2Withholding, exemptionMedicare............ 1 4 9 Absence from job...... 1 9 6
from .............. 4 2 Veterans’ benefits...... 31, 53Repayment ........ 88, 204 Assignment ....... 179, 186
Taxation of........... 8 5 Suggestions............. 1 Attendance at school.... 1 9 8 Victims of terrorist attacks.... 3
Page 284

Page 287 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
VISTA volunteers........ 5 3 Fee-basis officials...... 2 0 0 Withholding: Unemployment
Impairment-related work Backup .............. 4 4 compensation........ 4 4Volunteer work......... 2 2 1
expenses .......... 2 0 0 Credit for............. 4 7 Work clothes........... 2 0 2
Performing artists...... 2 0 0 Federal payments....... 4 4 Work-related educationalW Self-employed persons . . 199 Fringe benefits......... 4 3 expenses ........... 1 9 6Wages: Gambling winnings...... 4 4Where to file: Workers’ compensation.... 5 5Income .............. 4 9 General rules.......... 4 1Address ............. 1 7 Worthless securities...... 1 0 2Unpaid ............. 1 0 6 Pensions andDeceased taxpayer...... 3 6 Wristwatch............ 2 0 6Welfare benefits......... 9 3 annuities......... 44, 79Who should itemize...... 1 4 3
Wheelchair............ 1 4 8 Railroad retirement ■Widow(er) with dependent
benefits............ 4 4When to file............ 1 0 child................ 2 4
Salaries and wages...... 4 1Where to deduct business Winter energy payments.... 9 3 Sick pay............. 4 3expenses: Withdrawals........... 1 2 9 Tips ................ 4 3Employees .......... 1 9 9
Page 285

Page 288 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Order Blank
for Forms and
Publications
The most frequently ordered forms and publications are listed on the order blank below .
We will mail you two copies of each form and one copy of each publication you order. To
help reduce waste, please order only the items you need to prepare your return.
For faster ways of getting the items you need, such as by computer or
fax, see the front cover.
Circle the forms and
publications you need. The
instructions for any form
you order will be included.
Schedule R
(1040)
8582
24411040
Pub. 508
1040EZ
Schedule SE
(1040)
Pub. 590
8829
Pub. 521
Schedules A&B
(1040)
1040-ES
(2003)
3903
Pub. 11040A
Pub. 523
Pub. 910
Schedule C
(1040)
1040X
4562
Pub. 17
Pub. 525
Schedule D
(1040)
Schedule 1
(1040A)
2106
Pub. 929
Pub. 334
Pub. 527
4868
Schedule E
(1040)
Schedule 2
(1040A)
5329
Pub. 463
Pub. 529
Schedule 3
(1040A)
Schedule F
(1040)
Pub. 505
Schedule EIC
(1040A or 1040) Pub. 596
8822
Central United States Central Area Distribution Center
Eastern United States or a foreign country Eastern Area Distribution Center
THEN mail to . . .IF you live in the . . .
Western United States Western Area Distribution Center
Where To Mail Your Order Blank for Free Forms and Publications
AT this address . . .
Detach at this line
Name
Number and street
City
Schedule
C-EZ (1040)
2210
Order Blank
Fill in your name and
address.
How To Use the Order
Blank
Circle the items you need on the order blank
below . Use the blank spaces to order items
not listed. If you need more space, attach a
separate sheet of paper.
Print or type your name and address accu-
rately in the space provided below . An accu-
rate address is necessary to ensure delivery
of your order. Cut the order blank on the
dotted line. Enclose the order blank in your
own envelope and send it to the IRS address
shown on this page that applies to you. Y ou
should receive your order within 10 days
after we receive your request.
Some items may be picked up at many IRS offices, post offices, and libraries. You may also download all
these items from the Internet at www.irs.gov or place an electronic order for them.
8283
8606
Pub. 501
Pub. 502
Pub. 550
Pub. 575
Pub. 554
Pub. 936
2106-EZ
Schedule H
(1040) Pub. 926
1040-V
Schedule J
(1040)
8812
8863
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743-0001
P.O. Box 8903 Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
P.O. Box 85074 Richmond, VA 23261-5074
Pub. 970
Schedule D-1
(1040)
9465
Pub. 535
Pub. 972
Apt./Suite/Room
Foreign country
Daytime telephone number (optional)
State ZIP code
International postal code
()
Page 286

Page 289 of 288 of Publication 17 15:35 -  5-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 287