Userid: ________ Leading adjust: % ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P525.SGM (12-Nov-2004) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\tnqcb\documents\Epicfiles\2004EPIC\04P525 SGML.sgm
Page 1 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047d
What’s New ..................... 1Department
of the Reminders ...................... 2Taxable andTreasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Nontaxable Employee Compensation ........... 3Service
Miscellaneous Compensation....... 3
Fringe Benefits................ 4Income Retirement Plan Contributions...... 7
Stock Options................. 9
Restricted Property.............. 11
For use in preparing Special Rules for Certain
Employees ................... 12
Clergy ...................... 122004 Returns Members of Religious Orders....... 12
Foreign Employer............... 12
Military...................... 13
Volunteers................... 13
Business and Investment Income..... 13
Rents From Personal Property...... 13
Royalties.................... 14
Partnership Income............. 14
S Corporation Income............ 14
Sickness and Injury Benefits......... 14
Disability Pensions.............. 15
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts................. 15
Workers’ Compensation.......... 16
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits.................. 16
Miscellaneous Income ............. 16
Bartering.................... 16
Canceled Debts................ 17
Education Loan Repayment
Assistance................ 18
Life Insurance Proceeds.......... 18
Recoveries................... 19
Survivor Benefits............... 25
Unemployment Benefits.......... 25
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits.......... 26
Other Income................. 27
Repayments .................... 31
How To Get Tax Help.............. 32
Index.......................... 34
What’s New
Education loan repayment assistance.Be-
ginning in 2004, education loan repayments
made to you by the National Health Service
Corps Loan Repayment Program (NHSC Loan
Repayment Program) or a state education loan
repayment program eligible for funds under the
Get forms and other information
Public Health Service Act are not taxable if you
faster and easier by: agree to provide primary health services in
health professional shortage areas. For more
Internet • www.irs.gov information, see Publication 970, Tax Benefits
for Education.
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine)

Page 2 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Unlawful discrimination claims.You may be ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. ThisPrepaid income. Prepaid income, such as
able to take a deduction from gross income for applies to earned income (such as wages and compensation for future services, is generally
attorney fees and court costs paid after October tips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- included in your income in the year you receive
22, 2004, for actions settled or decided after that est, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, it. However, if you use an accrual method of
date involving a claim of unlawful discrimination, and royalties). accounting, you can defer prepaid income you
a claim against the United States Government,  If you reside outside the United States, you receive for services to be performed before the
or a claim made under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign end of the next tax year. In this case, you include
the Social Security Act, but only up to the source earned income. For details, see Publica- the payment in your income as you earn it by
amount included in gross income for the tax year tion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi- performing the services.
from such claim. See Court awards and dam- dent Aliens Abroad. Comments and suggestions. We welcomeages, under Other Income. your comments about this publication and yourPhotographs of missing children.The Inter-
suggestions for future editions.Elective deferrals.The limit on the amount of nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
You can write to us at the following address:your wages you can elect to defer into certain National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
retirement plans (such as section 401(k) plans) dren. Photographs of missing children selected
Internal Revenue Serviceincreases each year through 2006. If you are by the Center may appear in this publication on
Individual Forms and Publications Branchage 50 or older, you may be able to make addi- pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Itional catch-up elective deferrals. See Elective help bring these children home by looking at the
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406Deferrals in the discussion on retirement planphotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
Washington, DC 20224contributions under Employee Compensation. (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Health Savings Accounts (HSAs). Begin- We respond to many letters by telephone.
ning in 2004, you may be able to make tax-de- Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
ductible contributions to a health savings clude your daytime phone number, including theIntroductionaccount to pay qualified medical expenses. area code, in your correspondence.
You can receive income in the form of money,Amounts from HSAs used for qualified medical You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
property, or services. This publication discussesexpenses are not includible in gross income. asterisk must be included in the address.)
many kinds of income and explains whetherAmounts from HSAs not used for qualified medi- Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis-cal expenses are includible in income. HSAs are ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
cussions on employee wages and fringe bene-discussed in Publication 969, Health Savings ally to each email, we do appreciate your
fits, and income from bartering, partnerships, SAccounts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. feedback and will consider your comments as
corporations, and royalties. It also includes infor-we revise our tax products.
Smallpox vaccine injuries.If you are an eligi-mation on disability pensions, life insurance pro-Tax questions. If you have a tax question,ble individual who receives benefits under theceeds, and welfare and other public assistancevisit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. WeSmallpox Emergency Personnel Protection Actbenefits. Check the index for the location of acannot answer tax questions at either of theof 2003 for a covered injury resulting from aspecific subject. addresses listed above.covered countermeasure, you can exclude theGenerally, an amount included in your in-
payment from your income (to the extent it is notcome is taxable unless it is specifically ex-Ordering forms and publications. Visit
allowed as a medical and dental expense de-empted by law. Income that is taxable must bewww.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
duction on Schedule A (Form 1040)). Eligiblereported on your return and is subject to tax.publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to
individuals include health care workers, emer-Income that is nontaxable may have to be one of the three addresses shown under How To
gency personnel, and first responders in ashown on your tax return but is not taxable.Get Tax Help in the back of this publication.
smallpox emergency, who have received a Constructively received income.You aresmallpox vaccination. Useful Itemsgenerally taxed on income that is available to
You may want to see:you, regardless of whether it is actually in yourCapital gains treatment for certain stock
possession.sales to comply with conflict-of-interest re- PublicationA valid check that you received or that wasquirements. You are considered to meet the
made available to you before the end of the taxholding period requirement and qualify for capi- ❏ 523 Selling Your Home
year is considered income constructively re-tal gain treatment for certain sales after October ❏ 527 Residential Rental Propertyceived in that year, even if you do not cash the22, 2004, of stock acquired from the exercise of (Including Rental of Vacationcheck or deposit it to your account until the nextstatutory stock options. SeeStatutory Stock Op- Homes)year. For example, if the postal service tries totions under Stock Options.
deliver a check to you on the last day of the tax❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
year but you are not at home to receive it, you (Including Capital Gains and
must include the amount in your income for that Losses)
tax year. If the check was mailed so that it couldReminders ❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, andnot possibly reach you until after the end of the
Administratorstax year, and you could not otherwise get theTerrorist attacks.You can exclude from in-funds before the end of the year, you include the❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributionscome certain disaster assistance, disability, andamount in your income for the next tax year.death payments received as a result of a terror- ❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income
ist or military action. For more information, seeAssignment of income. Income received
❏ 915 Social Security and EquivalentPublication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Ter-by an agent for you is income you constructively
Railroad Retirement Benefitsrorist Attacks. received in the year the agent received it. If you
Astronauts.  You can also exclude deathagree by contract that a third party is to receive❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education
payments for astronauts dying in the line of dutyincome for you, you must include the amount inSee How To Get Tax Help, near the end ofafter 2002. your income when the third party receives it.this publication, for information about getting
these publications.Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen orExample. You and your employer agree
resident alien, you must report income fromthat part of your salary is to be paid directly to
sources outside the United States (foreign in-your former spouse. You must include that
come) on your tax return unless it is exempt byamount in your income when your former
U.S. law. This is true whether you reside insidespouse receives it.
or outside the United States and whether or not
you receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-
Page 2

Page 3 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
W-2. These include prizes such as vacation trips cluded in your income. Do not include that part
for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award youagain in your income. Include the rest of theEmployee
receive is goods or services, you must includepayment in your income in the year of payment.
the fair market value of the goods or services inIf your employer gives you a nonnegotiableCompensation
your income. However, if your employer merelyunsecured note as payment for your services,
promises to pay you a bonus or award at someGenerally, you must include in gross income payments on the note that are credited toward
future time, it is not taxable until you receive it oreverything you receive in payment for personal the principal amount of the note are compensa-
it is made available to you.services. In addition to wages, salaries, commis- tion income when you receive them.
sions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms ofEmployee achievement award. If you re- Severance pay. Amounts you receive as sev-compensation such as fringe benefits and stockceive tangible personal property (other thanerance pay are taxable. A lump-sum paymentoptions. cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) asfor cancellation of your employment contract   You should receive a Form W-2, Wage andan award for length-of-service or safety achieve-must be included in your income in the tax yearTax Statement, from your employer showing thement, you generally can exclude its value fromyou receive it.pay you received for your services. Include youryour income. However, the amount you can ex-pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or onclude is limited to your employer’s cost andAccrued leave payment. If you are a fed-line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re-cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardseral employee and receive a lump-sum paymentceive a Form W-2. that are not qualified plan awards) for all suchfor accrued annual leave when you retire or
awards you receive during the year. Your em-resign, this amount will be included as wages onChildcare providers. If you provide child
ployer can tell you whether your award is ayour Form W-2.care, either in the child’s home or in your home
qualified plan award. Your employer must makeIf you resign from one agency and are reem-or other place of business, the pay you receive
the award as part of a meaningful presentation,must be included in your income. If you are not ployed by another agency, you may have to
under conditions and circumstances that do notan employee, you are probably self-employed repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-
create a significant likelihood of it being dis-and must include payments for your services on ment to the second agency. You can reduce
guised pay.Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From gross wages by the amount you repaid in the
However, the exclusion does not apply to theBusiness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net same tax year in which you received it. Attach to
following awards.Profit From Business. You generally are not an your tax return a copy of the receipt or statement
employee unless you are subject to the will and given to you by the agency you repaid to explain• A length-of-service award if you received it
control of the person who employs you as to the difference between the wages on your returnfor less than 5 years of service or if you
what you are to do and how you are to do it. and the wages on your Forms W-2.received another length-of-service award
during the year or the previous 4 years.Baby-sitting.If you baby-sit for relatives or Outplacement services. If you choose to
neighborhood children, whether on a regular accept a reduced amount of severance pay so• A safety achievement award if you are a
basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare that you can receive outplacement servicesmanager, administrator, clerical employee,
providers apply to you. (such as training in r´esum´e writing and interviewor other professional employee or if more
techniques), you must include the unreducedthan 10% of eligible employees previously
amount of the severance pay in income.received safety achievement awards dur-Miscellaneous
ing the year. However, you can deduct the value of theseCompensation
outplacement services (up to the difference be-
tween the severance pay included in incomeThis section discusses many types of employeeExample. Ben Green received three em- and the amount actually received) as a miscella-compensation. The subjects are arranged in al-ployee achievement awards during the year: aneous deduction (subject to the 2% limit) onphabetical order. nonqualified plan award of a watch valued atSchedule A (Form 1040).$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereoAdvance commissions and other earnings.
valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued atIf you receive advance commissions or other Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-amounts for services to be performed in the while you are sick or injured is part of your salaryfied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachfuture and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you or wages. In addition, you must include in youraward by itself would be excluded from income.must include these amounts in your income in income sick pay benefits received from any ofHowever, because the $1,750 total value of thethe year you receive them. the following payers.awards is more than $1,600, Ben must includeIf you repay unearned commissions or other
$150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income. • A welfare fund.amounts in the same year you receive them,
reduce the amount included in your income byGovernment cost-of-living allowances. • A state sickness or disability fund.the repayment. If you repay them in a later taxCost-of-living allowances generally are included• An association of employers or employ-year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-in your income. However, they are not includedees.ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),in your income if you are a federal civilian em-
or you may be able to take a credit for that year.ployee or a federal court employee who is sta-• An insurance company, if your employerSee Repayments, later. tioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the Unitedpaid for the plan.
States.Allowances and reimbursements.   If you However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-Allowances and differentials that increasereceive travel, transportation, or other business dent or health insurance policy, the benefits youyour basic pay as an incentive for taking a lessexpense allowances or reimbursements from receive under the policy are not taxable. Fordesirable post of duty are part of your compen-your employer, see Publication 463, Travel, En- more information, see Other Sickness and Injurysation and must be included in income. Fortertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you are Benefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits,example, your compensation includes Foreignreimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica- later.Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropicaltion 521, Moving Expenses. differentials. For more information, see Publica-Social security and Medicare taxes paid byBack pay awards. Include in income amountstion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employeesemployer. If you and your employer have anyou are awarded in a settlement or judgment forStationed Abroad. agreement that your employer pays your socialback pay. These include payments made to you security and Medicare taxes without deductingNote received for services.If your employerfor damages, unpaid life insurance premiums, them from your gross wages, you must reportgives you a secured note as payment for yourand unpaid health insurance premiums. They the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wagesservices, you must include the fair market valueshould be reported to you by your employer on on your tax return. The payment is also treated(usually the discount value) of the note in yourForm W-2. as wages for figuring your social security andincome for the year you receive it. When you
Medicare taxes and your social security andBonuses and awards. Bonuses or awards later receive payments on the note, a propor-
Medicare benefits. However, these paymentsyou receive for outstanding work are included in tionate part of each payment is the recovery of
are not treated as social security and Medicareyour income and should be shown on your Form the fair market value that you previously in-
Page 3

Page 4 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
wages if you are a household worker or a farmForm W-2. Your employer reports your tax- the value is not included in your compensation.
worker. able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, other The gym must be used primarily by employees,
compensation) of Form W-2. The total value oftheir spouses, and their dependent children.Stock appreciation rights.Do not include ayour fringe benefits may also be noted in box 12.If your employer pays for a fitness programstock appreciation right granted by your em-The value of your fringe benefits may be addedprovided to you at an off-site resort hotel orployer in income until you exercise (use) theto your other compensation on one Form W-2, orathletic club, the value of the program is in-right. When you use the right, you are entitled toyou may receive a separate Form W-2 showingcluded in your compensation.a cash payment equal to the fair market value ofjust the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 withthe corporation’s stock on the date of use, minusa notation in box 12.the fair market value on the date the right was De Minimis (Minimal) Benefitsgranted. You include the cash payment in in-
come in the year you use the right. If your employer provides you with a product orAccident or Health Plan
service and the cost of it is so small that it would
Generally, the value of accident or health planFringe Benefits be unreasonable for the employer to account for
coverage provided to you by your employer isit, the value is not included in your income.Fringe benefits received in connection with thenot included in your income. Benefits you re-Generally, the value of benefits such as dis-performance of your services are included inceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-counts at company cafeterias, cab fares homeyour income as compensation unless you payplained, later, under Sickness and Injury when working overtime, and company picnicsfair market value for them or they are specificallyBenefits. are not included in your income. Also see Em-excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform- ployee Discounts, later.Long-term care coverage. Contributions byance of services (for example, under a covenantyour employer to provide coverage for long-termnot to compete) is treated as the performance of Holiday gifts.If your employer gives you acare services generally are not included in yourservices for purposes of these rules. turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atincome. However, contributions made through aSee Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in this Christmas or other holidays, do not include theflexible spending or similar arrangement (suchdiscussion, for information on how to determine value of the gift in your income. However, if youras a cafeteria plan) must be included in yourthe amount to include in income. employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or aincome. This amount will be reported as wages
Recipient of fringe benefit.You are the re- similar item that you can easily exchange forin box 1 of your Form W-2.
cipient of a fringe benefit if you perform the cash, you include the value of that gift as extraArcher MSA contributions.Contributions byservices for which the fringe benefit is provided. salary or wages regardless of the amount in-your employer to your Archer MSA generally areYou are considered to be the recipient even if it volved.not included in your income. Their total will beis given to another person, such as a member ofreported in box 12 of Form W-2, with code R.your family. An example is a car your employerYou must report this amount on Form 8853,gives to your spouse for services you perform. Dependent Care BenefitsArcher MSAs and Long-Term Care InsuranceThe car is considered to have been provided toContracts. File the form with your return.If your employer provides dependent care bene-you and not to your spouse.
fits under a qualified plan, you may be able toYou do not have to be an employee of theHealth flexible spending arrangement
exclude these benefits from your income. De-provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. If(health FSA). If your employer provides a
pendent care benefits include:you are a partner, director, or independent con-health FSA that qualifies as an accident or
tractor, you can also be the recipient of a fringehealth plan, the amount of your salary reduction,• Amounts your employer pays directly tobenefit. and reimbursements of your medical care ex- either you or your care provider for thepenses and those of your spouse and depen-Provider of benefit.Your employer or an- care of your qualifying person while youdents, generally are not included in your income.other person for whom you perform services is work, and
the provider of a fringe benefit regardless ofHealth reimbursement arrangement (HRA). • The fair market value of care in a daycarewhether that person actually provides the fringeIf your employer provides an HRA that qualifiesfacility provided or sponsored by your em-benefit to you. The provider can be a client oras an accident or health plan, coverage and ployer.customer of an independent contractor. reimbursements of your medical care expenses
and those of your spouse and dependents gen-The amount you can exclude is limited to theAccounting period. You must use the same erally are not included in your income. lesser of:accounting period your employer uses to reportSee also Reimbursement for medical careyour taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-under Other Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. • The total amount of dependent care bene-ployer has the option to report taxable noncash fits you received during the year,fringe benefits by using either of the following
rules. • The total amount of qualified expensesAdoption Assistance you incurred during the year,• The general rule: benefits are reported for
You may be able to exclude from your incomea full calendar year (January 1 – Decem- • Your earned income,amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-ber 31). • Your spouse’s earned income, orployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-
• The special accounting period rule: bene-nection with your adoption of an eligible child.• $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-fits provided during the last 2 months ofSee Publication 968, Tax Benefits for Adoption,rately).the calendar year (or any shorter period)for more information.
are treated as paid during the followingAdoption benefits are reported by your em-Your employer must show the total amount ofcalendar year. For example, each yearployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. Theydependent care benefits provided to you duringyour employer reports the value of bene-also are included as social security and Medi-the year under a qualified plan in box 10 of yourfits provided during the last 2 months ofcare wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they areForm W-2. Your employer also will include anythe prior year and the first 10 months ofnot included as wages in box 1. To determinedependent care benefits over $5,000 in yourthe current year. the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you mustwages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.complete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-Your employer does not have to use the same  To claim the exclusion, you must completetion Expenses. File the form with your return.accounting period for each fringe benefit, but either Part III of Form 2441, Child and Depen-
must use the same period for all employees who dent Care Expenses, or Part III of Schedule 2
receive a particular benefit. (Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex-Athletic Facilities penses for Form 1040A Filers. (You cannot useYou must use the same accounting period
Form 1040EZ.)that you use to report the benefit to claim an If your employer provides you with the free or
See the instructions for Form 2441 or Sched-employee business deduction (for use of a car, low-cost use of an employer-operated gym or
ule 2 (Form 1040A) for more information.for example). other athletic club on your employer’s premises,
Page 4

Page 5 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Permanent benefits.If your group-term lifeEducational Assistance
7.Enter the number of fullinsurance policy includes permanent benefits,
You can exclude from your income up to $5,250 months of coverage at thissuch as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you
cost................ 7.of qualified employer-provided educational as-must include in your income, as wages, the cost
sistance. The exclusion applies to undergradu-of the permanent benefits minus the amount you
8.Multiply line 6 by line 7 . . .8.ate and graduate-level courses. For more pay for them. Your employer should be able to
information, see Publication 970. tell you the amount to include in your income.
9.Enter the
Accidental death benefits.Insurance that premiums you
provides accidental or other death benefits butpaid per month 9.Employee Discounts
does not provide general death benefits (travel
insurance, for example) is not group-term lifeIf your employer sells you property or services at 10.Enter the
insurance.a discount, you may be able to exclude the number of
amount of the discount from your income. The months you paid
the premiums 10.exclusion applies to discounts on property orFormer employer. If your former employer
services offered to customers in the ordinaryprovides more than $50,000 of group-term life
11.Multiply line 9 by line 10. . .11.course of the line of business in which you work.insurance coverage during the year, the amount
However, it does not apply to discounts on realincluded in your income is reported as wages in
12.Subtract line 11 from line 8.property or property commonly held for invest-box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately
Include this amount inment (such as stocks or bonds). in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show the
your income as wages .. 12.The exclusion is limited to the price chargedamount of uncollected social security and Medi-
nonemployee customers multiplied by the fol-care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes
lowing percentage. M and N. You must pay these taxes with your
income tax return. Include them in your total tax• For a discount on property, your Table 1. Cost of $1,000 ofon line 62, Form 1040, and enter “UT” and theemployer’s gross profit percentage (gross Group-Term Life Insurance for Oneamount of the taxes on the dotted line next toprofit divided by gross sales) on all prop- Monthline 62.erty sold during the employer’s previous
tax year. (Ask your employer for this per- Age CostTwo or more employers. Your exclusion forcentage.) Under 25 ............ $  . 0 5employer-provided group-term life insurance
• For a discount on services, 20%. 25 through 29 .........  . 0 6coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of
coverage, whether the insurance is provided by
30 through 34......... . 0 8a single employer or multiple employers. If twoFinancial Counseling Fees 35 through 39......... . 0 9or more employers provide insurance coverage
that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-Financial counseling fees paid for you by your
40 through 44......... . 1 0ported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not beemployer are included in your income and must
45 through 49......... . 1 5correct. You must figure how much to include inbe reported as part of wages. If the fees are for
your income. Reduce the amount you figure bytax or investment counseling, they can be de-
50 through 54......... . 2 3any amount reported with code C in box 12 ofducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel-
55 through 59......... . 4 3your Forms W-2, add the result to the wageslaneous deduction (subject to the 2% limit).
reported in box 1, and report the total on your   Qualified retirement planning services paid
60 through 64......... . 6 6return.for you by your employer may be excluded from
65 through 69......... 1.27your income. For more information, see Retire-
70 and older.......... 2.06ment Planning Services, later. Figuring the taxable cost. Use the following
worksheet to figure the amount to include in your
If you pay any part of the cost of the insur-income.
ance, your entire payment reduces, dollar forGroup-Term Life Insurance Worksheet 1. Figuring the Cost of
dollar, the amount you would otherwise includeGroup-Term Life Insurance ToGenerally, the cost of up to $50,000 of in your income. However, you cannot reduce theInclude in Incomegroup-term life insurance coverage provided to amount to include in your income by:
you by your employer (or former employer) is not1.Enter the total amount of • Payments for coverage in a different taxincluded in your income. However, you must your insurance coverage year,include in income the cost of employer-providedfrom your employer(s).... 1.
insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000 • Payments for coverage through a cafeteria
of coverage reduced by any amount you pay plan, unless the payments are after-tax2.Limit on exclusion for
toward the purchase of the insurance. contributions, oremployer-provided
For exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost group-term life insurance • Payments for coverage not taxed to youexcluded, and Entire cost taxed, later. coverage ............ 2. 50,000 because of the exceptions discussed laterIf your employer provided more than $50,000 under Entire cost excluded.of coverage, the amount included in your in-3.Subtract line 2 from line 13.
come is reported as part of your wages in box 1
of your Form W-2. It is also shown separately in4.Divide line 3 by $1,000. Example. You are 51 years old and work for
Figure to the nearest tenth4.box 12 with code C. employers A and B. Both employers provide
group-term life insurance coverage for you forGroup-term life insurance.This insurance is 5.Go to Table 1. Using your the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 withterm life insurance protection (insurance for aage on the last day of the employer A and $45,000 with employer B. Youfixed period of time) that: tax year, find your age pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
group in the left column,• Provides a general death benefit, ployer B group plan. You figure the amount toand enter the cost from the include in your income as follows.• Is provided to a group of employees, column on the right for your
age group............ 5.• Is provided under a policy carried by the
employer, and 6.Multiply line 4 by line 5 . . .6.
• Provides an amount of insurance to each
employee based on a formula that pre-
vents individual selection.
Page 5

Page 6 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The average of rentals paid by individualsWorksheet 1. Figuring the Cost of • The insurance is provided by your em- (other than employees or students) forGroup-Term Life Insurance To ployer through a qualified employees’ comparable lodging held for rent by theInclude in Income—Illustrated trust, such as a pension trust or a qualifiededucational institution.annuity plan.
1.Enter the total amount of If the amount you pay is less than the lesser of• You are a key employee and youryour insurance coverage these amounts, you must include the differenceemployer’s plan discriminates in favor offrom your employer(s).... 1. 80,000 in your income.key employees.2.Limit on exclusion for
The lodging must be appraised by an inde-employer-provided
pendent appraiser and the appraisal must begroup-term life insurance Meals and Lodging reviewed on an annual basis.coverage............. 2. 50,000
3.Subtract line 2 from line 1 . .3. 30,000 You do not include in your income the value ofExample. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes-4.Divide line 3 by $1,000. meals and lodging provided to you and yoursor for State University, rents a home from theFigure to the nearest tenth4. 30.0 family by your employer at no charge if theuniversity that is qualified campus lodging. The5.Go to Table 1. Using your following conditions are met. house is appraised at $100,000. The averageage on the last day of the tax
rent paid for comparable university lodging byyear, find your age group in 1. The meals are:
the left column, and enter the persons other than employees or students is
a. Furnished on the business premises ofcost from the column on the $7,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent of
right for your age group . . .5. .23 your employer, and $5,500. Carl does not include in his income any
6.Multiply line 4 by line 5.... 6. 6.90 rental value because the rent he pays equals atb. Furnished for the convenience of your7.Enter the number of full least 5% of the appraised value of the houseemployer.months of coverage at this (5% × $100,000 = $5,000). If Carl paid annual
cost................. 7. 12 rent of only $4,000, he would have to include2. The lodging is:8.Multiply line 6 by line 7.... 8. 82.80 $1,000 in his income ($5,000 − $4,000).
9.Enter the premiums a. Furnished on the business premises of
you paid per month9. 4.15 your employer,
10.Enter the number Moving Expense Reimbursements
b. Furnished for the convenience of yourof months you paid
employer, and Generally, if your employer pays for your movingthe premiums . . .10. 12
expenses (either directly or indirectly) and the11.Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . .11. 49.80 c. A condition of your employment. (Youexpenses would have been deductible if you12.Subtract line 11 from line 8. must accept it in order to be able topaid them yourself, the value is not included inInclude this amount in your properly perform your duties.) your income. See Publication 521 for more infor-income as wages ....... 12. 33.00
mation. You also do not include in your income the
The total amount to include in income for thevalue of meals or meal money that qualifies as a
cost of excess group-term life insurance is $33.de minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini-No-Additional-Cost ServicesNeither employer provided over $50,000 insur-mal) Benefits, earlier.
ance coverage, so the wages shown on your The value of services you receive from yourFaculty lodging.If you are an employee of anForms W-2 do not include any part of that $33. employer for free, at cost, or for a reduced priceeducational institution or an academic healthYou must add it to the wages shown on your is not included in your income if your employer:center and you are provided with lodging thatForms W-2 and include the total on your return.
• Offers the same service for sale to cus-does not meet the three conditions above, you
tomers in the ordinary course of the line ofstill may not have to include the value of theEntire cost excluded.You are not taxed on
business in which you work, andlodging in income. However, the lodging mustthe cost of group-term life insurance if any of the
be qualified campus lodging, and you must payfollowing circumstances apply. • Does not have a substantial additionalan adequate rent. cost (including any sales income given up)1. You are permanently and totally disabled to provide you with the service (regardlessAcademic health center.This is an organi-and have ended your employment. of what you paid for the service).zation that meets the following conditions.
2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-• Its principal purpose or function is to pro-Generally, no-additional-cost services are ex-icy for the entire period the insurance is invide medical or hospital care or medicalcess capacity services, such as airline, bus, orforce during the tax year. education or research. train tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone serv-3. A charitable organization to which contri- ices.• It receives payments for graduate medicalbutions are deductible is the only benefi-education under the Social Security Act.ciary of the policy for the entire period the Example. You are employed as a flight at-• One of its principal purposes or functionsinsurance is in force during the tax year. tendant for a company that owns both an airlineis to provide and teach basic and clinical(You are not entitled to a deduction for a and a hotel chain. Your employer allows you tomedical science and research using itscharitable contribution for naming a chari- take personal flights (if there is an unoccupiedown faculty.table organization as the beneficiary of seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if there
your policy.) is an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. TheQualified campus lodging.Qualified cam- value of the personal flight is not included in your4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:pus lodging is lodging furnished to you, yourincome. However, the value of the hotel room isspouse, or one of your dependents by, or onincluded in your income because you do nota. You retired before January 2, 1984, andbehalf of, the institution or center for use as awork in the hotel business.were covered by the plan when you re-home. The lodging must be located on or near atired, or campus of the educational institution or aca-
b. You reached age 55 before January 2,demic health center. Retirement Planning Services1984, and were employed by the em- Adequate rent. The amount of rent you payployer or its predecessor in 1983. If your employer has a qualified retirement plan,for the year for qualified campus lodging is con-qualified retirement planning services providedsidered adequate if it is at least equal to theto you (and your spouse) by your employer arelesser of:Entire cost taxed.You are taxed on the entire not included in your income. Qualified services
cost of group-term life insurance if either of the• 5% of the appraised value of the lodging, include retirement planning advice, information
following circumstances apply. or about your employer’s retirement plan, and in-
Page 6

Page 7 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
formation about how the plan may fit into your employee, former employee who retired or riod. The value cannot be determined by multi-
overall individual retirement income plan. You became disabled, or his or her spouse andplying a cents-per-mile rate times the number of
cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation, dependent children. miles driven unless you prove the vehicle could
accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro- have been leased on a cents-per-mile basis.• For education furnished to a graduate stu-vided by your employer. Also, see Financial Flights on employer-provided aircraft.dent at an educational institution if theCounseling Fees, earlier. Under the general valuation rules, if your flightgraduate student is engaged in teaching
or research activities for that institution. on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri-
marily personal and you control the use of theTransportation • Representing payment for teaching, re-aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount itsearch, or other services if you receive thewould cost to charter the flight from a third party.If your employer provides you with a qualifiedamount under the National Health Service
If there is more than one employee on thetransportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedCorps Scholarship Program or the Armed
flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must befrom your income, up to certain limits. A qualifiedForces Health Professions Scholarship
transportation fringe benefit is: divided among those employees. The divisionand Financial Assistance Program.
must be based on all the facts, including which• Transportation in a commuter highway ve-For more information, see Publication 970.employee or employees control the use of thehicle (such as a van) between your home aircraft.and work place, Working Condition Benefits
• A transit pass, or Special valuation rules.You generally canIf your employer provides you with a product oruse a special valuation rule for a fringe benefit• Qualified parking. service and the cost of it would have been allow-only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-able as a business or depreciation deduction ifCash reimbursement by your employer for these ployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannotyou paid for it yourself, the cost is not included inexpenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar- use a different special rule to value that benefit.your income.rangement is also excludable. However, cash You always can use the general valuation rule
reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable discussed earlier, based on facts and circum-Example. You work as an engineer andonly if a voucher or similar item that can be stances, even if your employer uses a specialyour employer provides you with a subscriptionexchanged only for a transit pass is not readily rule.to an engineering trade magazine. The cost ofavailable for direct distribution to you. If you and your employer use a special valua-the subscription is not included in your income
tion rule, you must include in your income thebecause the cost would have been allowable toExclusion limit.The exclusion for commuter amount your employer determines under theyou as a business deduction if you had paid forhighway vehicle transportation and transit pass special rule minus the sum of:the subscription yourself.fringe benefits cannot be more than a total of
$100 a month. 1. Any amount you repaid your employer,
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe plusValuation of Fringe Benefitsbenefit cannot be more than $195 a month.
2. Any amount specifically excluded from in-If the benefits have a value that is more thanIf a fringe benefit is included in your income, thecome by law.these limits, the excess must be included in youramount included is generally its value deter-
income. The special valuation rules are the following.mined under the general valuation rule or under
the special valuation rules. For an exception,• The automobile lease rule.Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high-see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier.way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not • The vehicle cents-per-mile rule.including the driver). At least 80% of theGeneral valuation rule.You must include in • The commuting rule.vehicle’s mileage must reasonably be expectedyour income the amount by which the fair marketto be: value of the fringe benefit is more than the sum• The unsafe conditions commuting rule.
of:• For transporting employees between their • The employer-operated eating-facility rule.homes and work place, and 1. The amount, if any, you paid for the bene-
For more information on these rules, see Pub-• On trips during which employees occupy fit, plus
lication 15-B, Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringeat least half of the vehicle’s adult seating2. The amount, if any, specifically excludedBenefits.capacity (not including the driver). from your income by law.  For information on the non-commercial flight
and commercial flight valuation rules, see sec-If you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit,Transit pass.This is any pass, token, fare- tions 1.61-21(g) and 1.61-21(h) of the regula-no amount is included in your income.card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person tions.to ride mass transit (whether public or private)Fair market value.The fair market value of
free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commutera fringe benefit is determined by all the facts and
Retirement Planhighway vehicle operated by a person in thecircumstances. It is the amount you would have
business of transporting persons for compensa- Contributionsto pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit.
tion. This is determined without regard to:
Your employer’s contributions to a qualified re-
• Your perceived value of the benefit, orQualified parking.This is parking provided to tirement plan for you are not included in income
an employee at or near the employer’s place of at the time contributed. (Your employer can tell• The amount your employer paid for the
business. It also includes parking provided on or you whether your retirement plan is qualified.)benefit.
near a location from which the employee com- However, the cost of life insurance coverage
mutes to work by mass transit, in a commuter included in the plan may have to be included.Employer-provided vehicles.If your em-
highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in- See Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier, underployer provides a car (or other highway motor
clude parking at or near the employee’s home. Fringe Benefits.vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car is
If your employer pays into a nonqualifiedusually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.
plan for you, you generally must include theUnder the general valuation rules, the value
Tuition Reduction contributions in your income as wages for theof an employer-provided vehicle is the amount
tax year in which the contributions are made.you would have to pay a third party to lease theYou can exclude a qualified tuition reduction However, if your interest in the plan is not trans-same or a similar vehicle on the same or compa-from your income. This is the amount of a reduc- ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei-rable terms in the same geographic area wheretion in tuition: ture (you have a good chance of losing it) at theyou use the vehicle. An example of a compara-
time of the contribution, you do not have to• For education (below graduate level) fur- ble lease term is the amount of time the vehicle
include the value of your interest in your incomenished by an educational institution to an is available for your use, such as a 1-year pe-
Page 7

Page 8 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
until it is transferable or is no longer subject to a SIMPLE plan count toward the overall limit 2. The limit for prior years minus the amount
substantial risk of forfeiture. you deferred in prior years plus the lesser($13,000 for 2004) and may affect the amount
of:you can defer under other elective deferral
plans. a. Your includible compensation for theElective Deferrals
current year, orLimit for deferrals under section 457 plans.If you are covered by certain kinds of retirement b. The dollar limit for the current year.If you are a participant in a section 457 plan (aplans, you can choose to have part of yourdeferred compensation plan for employees ofcompensation contributed by your employer to astate or local governments or tax-exempt orga-retirement fund, rather than have it paid to you. Catch-up contributions. You generally
nizations), you should have deferred no moreThe amount you set aside (called an elective can have additional elective deferrals made to
than the lesser of your includible compensationdeferral) is treated as an employer contribution your governmental section 457 plan if:
or $13,000. However, if you are within 3 years ofto a qualified plan. It is not included in wages • You reached age 50 by the end of thenormal retirement age, you may be allowed ansubject to income tax at the time contributed. year, andincreased limit if the plan allows it. See In-However, it is included in wages subject to social
creased limit, later.security and Medicare taxes. • No other elective deferrals can be made
Elective deferrals include elective contribu- for you to the plan for the year because ofIncludible compensation.This is the paytions to the following retirement plans. limits or restrictions.you received for the year from the employer who
If you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of yourmaintained the section 457 plan. It generally1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section
includible compensation or $13,000 ($14,000includes all the following payments.401(k) plans).
for 2005), plus $3,000 ($4,000 for 2005). How-
2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ- ever, if you are within 3 years of retirement age1. Wages and salaries.
ees. and your plan provides the increased limit ear-2. Fees for professional services. lier, that limit may be higher.3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-
3. The value of any employer-provided quali-sion plans (SARSEP).
Limit for tax-sheltered annuities.If you are afied transportation fringe benefit (defined
4. Savings incentive match plans for employ- participant in a tax-sheltered annuity planunder Transportation, earlier) that is notees (SIMPLE plans). (403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals forincluded in your income.
2004 generally is $13,000 ($14,000 for 2005).5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans).4. Other amounts received (cash or noncash)However, if you have at least 15 years of service
for personal services you performed, in-6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re- with a public school system, a hospital, a home
cluding, but not limited to, the followingporting by employer, later.) health service agency, a health and welfare
items. service agency, a church, or a convention or7. Section 457 plans.
association of churches (or associated organi-a. Commissions and tips. zation), the limit on elective deferrals is in-Overall limit on deferrals.For 2004, you gen- creased by the least of the following amounts.b. Fringe benefits.erally should not have deferred more than a total
of $13,000 of contributions to the plans listed inc. Bonuses. 1. $3,000.(1) through (6) above. You should not have
2. $15,000, reduced by increases to the over-deferred more than the lesser of your includible5. Employer contributions (elective deferrals)
all limit that you were allowed in earliercompensation (defined later) or $13,000 of con-to: years because of this years-of-service rule.tributions to the plan listed in (7) above (section
a. The section 457 plan.457 plan). 3. $5,000 times your number of years of serv-Your employer or plan administrator should ice for the organization, minus the totalb. Qualified cash or deferred arrange-apply the proper annual limit when figuring your elective deferrals under the plan for earlierments (section 401(k) plans) that areplan contributions. However, you are responsi- years.not included in your income.ble for monitoring the total you defer to ensure
For more information, see Publication 571,that the deferrals are not more than the overall c. A salary reduction simplified employee
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b) Plans).limit. pension (SARSEP).
Reporting by employer.Your employer gen-d. A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b)Catch-up contributions.You may be allowed
erally should not include elective deferrals inplan).catch-up contributions (additional elective defer-
your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. Instead, yourrals) if you are age 50 or older by the end of youre. A savings incentive match plan for em-employer should mark the Retirement plantax year. For more information about catch-up ployees (SIMPLE plan). checkbox in box 13 and show the total amountcontributions to 403(b) plans, see chapter 6 of
deferred in box 12.Publication 571, Tax Sheltered Annuity Plans f. A section 125 cafeteria plan.
(403(b) Plans). Section 501(c)(18)(D) contributions.
Instead of using the amounts listed above toFor more information about additional elec- Wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2 should
tive deferrals to: determine your includible compensation, yournot have been reduced for contributions you
employer can use any of the following amounts.made to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirement plan.• SEPs (SARSEPs), see Salary Reduction
The amount you contributed should be identifiedSimplified Employee Pension in Publica- • Your wages as defined for income tax with code “H” in box 12. You may deduct thetion 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-withholding purposes. amount deferred subject to the limits that apply.ness.
• Your wages as reported in box 1 of FormInclude your deduction in the total on Form
• SIMPLE plans, see How Much Can Be 1040, line 35. Enter the amount andW-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
Contributed on Your Behalf in chapter 3 of “501(c)(18)(D)” on the dotted line next to line 35.• Your wages that are subject to social se-Publication 590, Individual Retirement Ar-
curity withholding (including elective defer-Excess deferrals.If your deferrals exceed therangements (IRAs).
rals). limit, you must notify your plan by the date re-• Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferrals quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex-under section 457 plans, later. Increased limit.During any, or all, of thecess amount will be distributed to you. If you
last 3 years ending before you reach normal participate in more than one plan, you can have
Limit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans.If the excess paid out of any of the plans thatretirement age under the plan, your plan may
you are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, you permit these distributions. You must notify eachprovide that your limit is the lesser of:
generally should not have deferred more than plan by the date required by that plan of the
1. Twice the dollar limit for the year, or$9,000 in 2004.  Amounts you defer under a amount to be paid from that particular plan. The
Page 8

Page 9 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
plan must then pay you the amount of the ex- Even though a corrective distribution ofafter-tax contributions and earnings from these
cess, along with any income earned on that excess deferrals is reported on Formcontributions.
amount, by April 15 of the following year. 1099-R, it is not otherwise treated as aA corrective payment of excess annual addi-
TIP
distribution from the plan. It cannot be rolledtions consisting of elective deferrals or earningsYou must include the excess deferral in your
over into another plan, and it is not subject to thefrom your after-tax contributions is fully taxableincome for the year of the deferral. File Form
additional tax on early distributions. in the year paid. A corrective payment consisting1040 to add the excess deferral amount to your
of your after-tax contributions is not taxable.wages on line 7. Do not use Form 1040A or
If you received a corrective payment of ex-Form 1040EZ to report excess deferral
cess annual additions, you should receive aamounts. Excess Contributions
separate Form 1099-R for the year of the pay-Excess not distributed.If you do not takeIf you are a highly compensated employee, thement with the code “E” in box 7. Report the totalout the excess amount, you cannot include it intotal of your elective deferrals and other contri-payment shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R on linethe cost of the contract even though you in-butions made for you for any year under a sec-16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Form 1040A.cluded it in your income. Therefore, you aretion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as a Report the taxable amount shown in box 2a oftaxed twice on the excess deferral left in thepercentage of pay, no more than 125% of theForm 1099-R on line 16b of Form 1040 or lineplan—once when you contribute it, and againaverage deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligible12b of Form 1040A.when you receive it as a distribution. non-highly compensated employees. Even though a corrective distribution of If the total contributed to the plan is moreExcess distributed to you.If you take out excess annual additions is reported onthan the amount allowed under the ADP test, thethe excess after the year of the deferral and you Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIP
excess contributions must be either distributedreceive the corrective distribution by April 15 of treated as a distribution from the plan. It cannotto you or recharacterized as after-tax employeethe following year, do not include it in income be rolled over into another plan, and it is notcontributions by treating them as distributed toagain in the year you receive it. If you receive it subject to the additional tax on early distribu-later, you must include it in income in both the you and then contributed by you to the plan. Youtions.year of the deferral and the year you receive it.must include the excess contributions in your
Any income on the excess deferral taken out isincome as wages on Form 1040, line 7. You
Stock Optionstaxable in the tax year in which you take it out. Ifcannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to
you take out part of the excess deferral and thereport excess contribution amounts. If you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or sellincome on it, allocate the distribution proportion-If you receive excess contributions from astock or other property as payment for yourately between the excess deferral and the in-401(k) plan and any income earned on the con-services, you usually will have income when youcome. tributions within 21/2 months after the close of thereceive the option, when you exercise the optionplan year, you must include them in your incomeYou should receive a Form 1099-R, Distribu- (use it to buy or sell the stock or other property),in the year of the contribution. If you receivetions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or or when you sell or otherwise dispose of theProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-them later, or receive less than $100 excessoption. However, if your option is a statutorytracts, etc., for the year in which the excesscontributions, include the excess contributionsstock option (defined later), you will not have anydeferral is distributed to you. Use the followingand earnings in your income in the year distrib-income until you sell or exchange your stock.rules to report a corrective distribution shown onuted. If the excess contributions are recharacter-Your employer can tell you which kind of optionForm 1099-R for 2004. ized, you must include them in income in theyou hold.year a corrective distribution would have oc-• If the distribution was for a 2004 excesscurred. For a SARSEP, the employer must notifydeferral, your Form 1099-R should haveyou by March 15 following the year in whichNonstatutory Stock Optionsthe code “8” in box 7. Add the excessexcess contributions are made that you mustdeferral amount to your wages on yourwithdraw the excess and earnings. You mustIf you are granted a nonstatutory stock option,2004 tax return. include the excess contributions in your incomethe amount of income to include and the time to
in the year of the contribution (or the year of theinclude it depend on whether the fair market• If the distribution was for a 2003 excess
notification if less than $100) and include thevalue of the option can be readily determined.deferral, your Form 1099-R should have
earnings in your income in the year withdrawn.The fair market value of an option can be readilythe code “P” in box 7. If you did not add
determined if it is actively traded on an estab-the excess deferral amount to your wagesYou should receive a Form 1099-R for the
lished market.on your 2003 tax return, you must file anyear in which the excess contributions are dis-
amended return on Form 1040X, The fair market value of an option that is nottributed to you (or are recharacterized). Add
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re- traded on an established market can be readilyexcess contributions or earnings shown on
turn. If you did not receive the distribution determined only if all of the following conditionsForm 1099-R for 2004 to your wages on your
by April 15, 2004, you also must add it to exist.2004 tax return if code “8” is in box 7. If code “P”
your wages on your 2004 tax return. or “D” is in box 7, you may have to file an• You can transfer the option.amended 2003 or 2002 return on Form 1040X to• If the distribution was for a 2002 excess • You can exercise the option immediatelyadd the excess contributions or earnings to yourdeferral, your Form 1099-R should have in full.wages in the year of the contribution.the code “D” in box 7. If you did not add
the excess deferral amount to your wages • The option or the property subject to theEven though a corrective distribution of
on your 2002 tax return, you must file an option is not subject to any condition orexcess contributions is reported on
amended return on Form 1040X. You also restriction (other than a condition to se-Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIP
must add it to your wages on your 2004 cure payment of the purchase price) thattreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot
income tax return. has a significant effect on the fair marketbe rolled over into another plan, and it is not
value of the option.subject to the additional tax on early distribu-• If the distribution was for the incometions.earned on an excess deferral, your Form • The fair market value of the option privi-
1099-R should have the code “8” in box 7. lege can be readily determined.
Add the income amount to your wages on The option privilege for an option to buy is the
Excess Annual Additionsyour 2004 income tax return, regardless of opportunity to benefit during the option’s exer-when the excess deferral was made. The amount contributed in 2004 to a definedcise period from any increase in the value of
contribution plan is generally limited to theReport a loss on a corrective distribution of an property subject to the option without risking any
lesser of 100% of your compensation orexcess deferral in the year the excess amount capital. For example, if during the exercise pe-
$40,000. Under certain circumstances, contribu-(reduced by the loss) is distributed to you. In- riod the fair market value of stock subject to an
tions that exceed these limits (excess annualclude the loss as a negative amount on Form option is greater than the option’s exercise price,
additions) may be corrected by a distribution of1040, line 21 and identify it as “Loss on Excess a profit may be realized by exercising the option
your elective deferrals or a return of yourDeferral Distribution.” and immediately selling the stock at its higher
Page 9

Page 10 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
value. The option privilege for an option to sell isported to you on Form 1099-MISC, a share. On January 24, 2004, you sold the
the opportunity to benefit during the exercise Miscellaneous Income, in box 3. stock for $15 a share. Although you held the
period from a decrease in the value of the prop- stock for more than a year, less than 2 years had
erty subject to the option. passed from the time you were granted the op-
Statutory Stock Options tion. In 2004, you must report the difference
If you or a member of your family is an between the option price ($10) and the value ofThere are two kinds of statutory stock options.officer, director, or more-than-10% the stock when you exercised the option ($12)
owner of an expatriated corporation, as wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain,CAUTION
!
• Incentive stock options (ISOs), andyou may owe an excise tax on the value of figured as follows:
• Options granted under employee stocknonstatutory options and other stock-based
purchase plans. Selling price ($15 × 100 shares)..... $  1,500compensation from that corporation. For more
Purchase price ($10 × 100 shares) . . .−1,000information on the excise tax, see Internal Reve-
For either kind of option, you must be anGain ....................... $  5 0 0nue Code section 4985.
Amount reported as wagesemployee of the company granting the option, or
[($12 × 100 shares) − $1,000]...... − 200a related company, at all times beginning withOption with readily determined value.If you
the date the option is granted, until 3 monthsreceive a nonstatutory stock option that has a Amount reported as capital gain $ 300before you exercise the option (for an incentivereadily determined fair market value at the time it
stock option, 1 year before if you are disabled).is granted to you, the option is treated like other Alternative minimum tax (AMT).For theAlso, the option must be nontransferable exceptproperty received as compensation. See Re- AMT, you must treat stock acquired through theat death. If you do not meet the employmentstricted Property, later, for rules on how much exercise of an ISO as if no special treatmentrequirements, or you receive a transferable op-income to include and when to include it. How- applied. This means that, when your rights in thetion, your option is a nonstatutory stock option.ever, the rule described in that discussion for stock are transferable or no longer subject to aSee Nonstatutory Stock Options, earlier in thischoosing to include the value of property in your substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include asdiscussion.income for the year of the transfer does not an adjustment in figuring alternative minimum
apply to a nonstatutory option. If you receive a statutory stock option, do nottaxable income the amount by which the fair
include any amount in your income either whenmarket value of the stock exceeds the optionOption without readily determined value.If the option is granted or when you exercise it.price. Enter this adjustment on Form 6251, linethe fair market value of the option is not readilyYou have taxable income or a deductible loss13, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals. In-determined at the time it is granted to you (evenwhen you sell the stock that you bought bycrease your AMT basis in any stock you acquireif it is determined later), you do not have incomeexercising the option. Your income or loss is theby exercising the ISO by the amount of theuntil you transfer or exercise the option. Whendifference between the amount you paid for theadjustment. However, no adjustment is requiredyou exercise this kind of option, the restrictedstock (the option price) and the amount youif you dispose of the stock in the same year youproperty rules apply to the property received.receive when you sell it. You generally treat thisexercise the option.The amount to include in your income is theamount as capital gain or loss and report it onSee Restricted Property, later, for more infor-difference between the amount you pay for theSchedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains andmation.property and its fair market value when it be-Losses, for the year of the sale.
comes substantially vested. Your basis in the Your AMT basis in stock acquiredHowever, you may have ordinary income forproperty you acquire under the option is the through an ISO is likely to differ fromthe year that you sell or otherwise dispose of theamount you pay for it plus any amount you must your regular tax basis. Therefore, keepstock in either of the following situations.
RECORDS
include in your gross income under this rule. For adequate records for both the AMT and regular
more information on restricted property, see Re- • You do not meet the holding period re-tax so that you can figure your adjusted gain or
stricted Property, later. quirement. This situation generally appliesloss.
if you sell the stock within 1 year after itsUnrelated person. If you transferred this transfer to you or within 2 years after theExample. The facts are the same as in thekind of option in an arm’s-length transaction tooption was granted. However, you are previous example. On January 17, 2004, whenan unrelated person, you must include in yourconsidered to meet the holding period re-the stock was selling on the open market for $14income the money or other property you re- quirement for certain sales after Octobera share, your rights to the stock first becameceived for the transfer, as if you had exercised22, 2004, to comply with conflict-of-inter-transferable. You include $400 ($1,400 valuethe option. est requirements. when your rights first became transferable mi-Related person. If you transferred this kind nus $1,000 purchase price) as an adjustment on• You meet the conditions described underof option in an arm’s-length transaction to a Form 6251, line 13.Option granted at a discount, under Em-related person after July 1, 2003, the option isployee stock purchase plan, later.not treated as exercised or closed at that time, Employee stock purchase plan.If you soldand you do not include in your income theReport your ordinary income as wages on Formstock acquired by exercising an option grantedmoney or other property you received for the1040, line 7, for the year of the sale. under an employee stock purchase plan, deter-transfer at that time. See Temporary Regula- mine your ordinary income and your capital gaintions section 1.83-7T for the definition of a re-Incentive stock options (ISOs).If you sellor loss as follows.lated person. stock acquired by exercising an ISO and meet
Option granted at a discount.If at the timethe holding period requirement, your gain or lossRecourse note in satisfaction of the exer- the option was granted, the option price perfrom the sale is capital gain or loss.cise price of an option.If you are an em- share was less than 100% (but not less thanIf you do not meet the holding period require-ployee, and you issue a recourse note to your 85%) of the fair market value of the share, andment and you have a gain from the sale, the gainemployer in satisfaction of the exercise price of you dispose of the share after meeting the hold-is ordinary income up to the amount by whichan option to acquire your employer’s stock, and ing period requirement, or you die while owningthe stock’s fair market value when you exercisedyour employer and you subsequently agree to the share, you must include in your income asthe option exceeded the option price. Any ex-reduce the stated principal amount of the note, compensation, the lesser of:cess gain is capital gain. If you have a loss fromyou generally recognize compensation income
the sale, it is a capital loss and you do not haveat the time and in the amount of the reduction. • The amount, if any, by which the priceany ordinary income. paid under the option was exceeded byTax form. If you receive compensation from the fair market value of the share at theemployer-provided nonstatutory stock options, itExample. Your employer, X Corporation, time the option was granted, oris reported in box 1 of Form W-2. It is also granted you an ISO on March 11, 2002, to buy
• The amount, if any, by which the pricereported in box 12 using code “V.” 100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 a
paid under the option was exceeded by If you are a nonemployee spouse and you share, its fair market value at the time. You
the fair market value of the share at theexercise nonstatutory stock options you re- exercised the option on January 17, 2003, when
time of the disposition or death.ceived incident to a divorce, the income is re- the stock was selling on the open market for $12
Page 10

Page 11 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For this purpose, if the option price was not fixed transfer to you, usually your employer. However, plus the amount you included in income as com-
any income from the property, or the right to use pensation.or determinable at the time the option was
the property, is included in your income as addi-granted, the option price is figured as if the If you make this choice, you cannottional compensation in the year you receive theoption had been exercised at the time it was revoke it without the consent of theincome or have the right to use the property.granted. Internal Revenue Service. Consent willCAUTION
!
When the property becomes substantiallybe given only if you were under a mistake of factAny excess gain is capital gain. If you have avested, you must include its fair market value,as to the underlying transaction.loss from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you dominus any amount you paid for it, in your incomenot have any ordinary income. If you forfeit the property after you have in-for that year.
cluded its value in income, your loss is the
Example. Your employer, Y Corporation, amount you paid for the property minus anyExample. Your employer, the RST Corpo-granted you an option under its employee stock amount you realized on the forfeiture.ration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 apurchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of Yshare. At the time of the sale the fair market You cannot make this choice for a non-Corporation for $20 a share at a time when thevalue of the stock is $100 a share. Under the statutory stock option.stock had a value of $22 a share. Eighteenterms of the sale, the stock is under a substantialCAUTION
!
months later, when the value of the stock wasrisk of forfeiture (you have a good chance of
$23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14losing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is not
months after that you sold your stock for $30 asubstantially vested when it is transferred, soHow to make the choice. You make theshare. In the year of sale, you must report asyou do not include any amount in your income inchoice by filing a written statement with the Inter-wages the difference between the option pricethe year you buy it. At the end of the 5-yearnal Revenue Service Center where you file your($20) and the value at the time the option wasperiod, the fair market value of the stock is $200return. You must file this statement no later thangranted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8 pera share. You must include $19,000 in your in-30 days after the date the property was trans-share) is capital gain, figured as follows:come [100 shares × ($200 fair market value − ferred. A copy of the statement must be attached
$10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor-to your tax return for the year the property wasSelling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $  3,000 poration on your 100 shares of stock are taxabletransferred. You also must give a copy of thisPurchase price (option price) to you as additional compensation during thestatement to the person for whom you per-($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000 period the stock can be forfeited. formed the services and, if someone other thanGain ...................... $  1,000 you received the property, to that person.Amount reported as wages Substantially vested.Property is substan- You must sign the statement and indicate on[($22 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 200 tially vested when: it that you are making the choice under sectionAmount reported as capital gain $ 800 • It is transferable, or 83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state-
ment must contain all of the following informa-• It is not subject to a substantial risk ofHolding period requirement not met.If tion.forfeiture. (You do not have a goodyou do not meet the holding period requirement,
chance of losing it.)your ordinary income is the amount by which the • Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-
stock’s fair market value when you exercised the cation number.Transferable property.Property is trans-option exceeded the option price. This ordinary
• A description of each property for whichferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge yourincome is not limited to your gain from the sale of
you are making the choice.interest in the property to any person (other thanthe stock. Increase your basis in the stock by the
the transferor), and if the person receiving youramount of this ordinary income. The difference • The date or dates on which the propertyinterest in the property is not required to give upbetween your increased basis and the selling was transferred and the tax year for whichthe property, or its value, if the substantial risk ofprice of the stock is a capital gain or loss. you are making the choice.forfeiture occurs.
• The nature of any restrictions on the prop-Example.   The facts are the same as in theSubstantial risk of forfeiture.A substan- erty.previous example, except that you sold thetial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in the
stock only 6 months after you exercised the • The fair market value at the time of trans-property transferred depend on performing (or
option. You did not hold the stock long enough, fer (ignoring restrictions except those thatnot performing) substantial services, or on a
so you must report $300 as wages and $700 as will never lapse) of each property forcondition related to the transfer, and the possi-
capital gain, figured as follows: which you are making the choice.bility of forfeiture is substantial if the condition is
not satisfied. • Any amount that you paid for the property.Selling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $3,000
Purchase price (option price) • A statement that you have provided copiesExample. The Spin Corporation transfers to
($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000 to the appropriate persons.you as compensation for services 100 shares of
Gain ...................... $1,000 its corporate stock for $100 a share. Under theAmount reported as wages terms of the transfer, you must resell the stock toDividends received on restricted stock.[($23 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 300 the corporation at $100 a share if you leave yourDividends you receive on restricted stock arejob for any reason within 3 years from the date ofAmount reported as capital gain treated as compensation and not as dividend[$3,000 – ($2,000 + $300)] $700 transfer. You must perform substantial servicesincome. Your employer should include theseover a period of time and you must resell thepayments on your Form W-2. If they are alsostock to the corporation at $100 a share (regard-reported on a Form 1099-DIV, Dividends andRestricted Property less of its value) if you do not perform the serv-Distributions, you should list them on Scheduleices, so your rights to the stock are subject to aB (Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),Generally, if you receive property for your serv-substantial risk of forfeiture. Interest and Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040Aices, you must include its fair market value in
Filers, with a statement that you have includedyour income in the year you receive the prop-Choosing to include in income for year ofthem as wages. Do not include them in the totalerty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-transfer.You can choose to include the valuedividends received.erty that has certain restrictions that affect itsof restricted property at the time of transfer (mi-
value, you do not include the value of the prop-nus any amount you paid for the property) inStock you chose to include in your
erty in your income until it has been substantiallyyour income for the year it is transferred. If youincome. Dividends you receive on restricted
vested. (You can choose to include the value ofmake this choice, the substantial vesting rules stock you chose to include in your income in the
the property in your income in the year it isdo not apply and, generally, any later apprecia- year transferred are treated the same as any
transferred to you, as discussed later, rathertion in value is not included in your compensa- other dividends. You should receive a Form
than the year it is substantially vested.)tion when the property becomes substantially 1099-DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-
Until the property becomes substantiallyvested. Your basis for figuring gain or loss when clude the dividends in your wages on your re-
vested, it is owned by the person who makes the you sell the property is the amount you paid for it turn. Report them as dividends.
Page 11

Page 12 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sale of property not substantially vested. trol of the order. You are considered to be anClergy
These rules apply to the sale or other disposition agent of the order and any wages you earn at
the hospital that you turn over to your order areof property that you did not choose to include inIf you are a member of the clergy, you must
not included in your income.include in your income offerings and fees youyour income in the year transferred and that is
receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,not substantially vested. Services performed outside the order.Ifmasses, etc., in addition to your salary. If theIf you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop- you are directed to work outside the order, youroffering is made to the religious institution, it iserty in an arm’s-length transaction, include in services are not an exercise of duties requirednot taxable to you.your income as compensation for the year of by the order unless they meet both of the follow-If you are a member of a religious organiza-sale the amount realized minus the amount you ing requirements.tion and you give your outside earnings to thepaid for the property. If you exchange the prop- • They are the kind of services that are ordi-organization, you still must include the earningserty in an arm’s-length transaction for other narily the duties of members of the order.in your income. However, you may be entitled toproperty that is not substantially vested, treat thea charitable contribution deduction for the• They are part of the duties that you mustnew property as if it were substituted for theamount paid to the organization. See Publica-exercise for, or on behalf of, the religiousexchanged property. tion 526, Charitable Contributions. Also, seeorder as its agent.The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-Members of Religious Orders, later.
tory stock option to a related person after July 1, If you are an employee of a third party, thePension. A pension or retirement pay for a2003, is not considered an arm’s-length transac- services you perform for the third party will notmember of the clergy usually is treated as anybe considered directed or required of you by thetion. See Temporary Regulations section other pension or annuity. It must be reported onorder. Amounts you receive for these services1.83-7T for the definition of a related person.lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12aare included in your income, even if you haveIf you sell the property in a transaction that isand 12b of Form 1040A. taken a vow of poverty.not at arm’s length, include in your income as
compensation for the year of sale the total of any Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of amoney you received and the fair market value ofHousing religious order and has taken a vow of poverty.any substantially vested property you received He renounces all claims to his earnings andSpecial rules for housing apply to members ofon the sale. In addition, you will have to report turns over his earnings to the order.the clergy. Under these rules, you do not includeincome when the original property becomes Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructedin your income the rental value of a home (in-substantially vested, as if you still held it. Report by the superiors of the order to get a job with acluding utilities) or a designated housing allow-as compensation its fair market value minus the private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-ance provided to you as part of your pay.total of the amount you paid for the property and ployee of the school, and, at his request, theHowever, the exclusion cannot be more than thethe amount included in your income from the school made the salary payments directly to thereasonable pay for your service. If you pay forearlier sale. order.the utilities, you can exclude any allowance des-Because Mark is an employee of the school,ignated for utility cost, up to your actual cost.Example. In 2001, you paid your employer he is performing services for the school ratherThe home or allowance must be provided as$50 for a share of stock that had a fair market than as an agent of the order. The wages Markcompensation for your services as an ordained,value of $100 and was subject to forfeiture until earns working for the school are included in hislicensed, or commissioned minister. However,2004. In 2003, you sold the stock to your spouse income.you must include the rental value of the home orfor $10 in a transaction not at arm’s length. Youthe housing allowance as earnings from Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member of ahad compensation of $10 from this transaction.self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040),religious order who, as a condition of member-In 2004, when the stock had a fair market valueSelf-Employment Tax, if you are subject to theship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience.of $120, it became substantially vested. Forself-employment tax. For more information, seeAll claims to his earnings are renounced. Gene2004, you must report additional compensationPublication 517, Social Security and Other Infor-received permission from the order to establishof $60, figured as follows: mation for Members of the Clergy and Religiousa private practice as a psychologist and coun-Workers. sels members of religious orders as well asFair market value of stock at time
nonmembers. Although the order reviewsof substantial vesting........ $120
Members of Religious OrdersMinus: Amount paid for stock . . . $50 Gene’s budget annually, Gene controls not only
Minus: Compensation previously the details of his practice but also the means byIf you are a member of a religious order who hasincluded in income from sale to which his work as a psychologist is accom-taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earningsspouse.................. 1 0 −60 plished.that you renounce and turn over to the orderAdditional income $60 Gene’s private practice as a psychologistdepends on whether your services are per-does not make him an agent of the religiousformed for the order. order. The psychological services provided byInherited property not substantially vested. Gene are not the type of services that are pro-Services performed for the order.If you are If you inherit property not substantially vested at vided by the order. The income Gene earns as aperforming the services as an agent of the orderthe time of the decedent’s death, any income psychologist is earned in his individual capacity.in the exercise of duties required by the order,you receive from the property is considered in- Gene must include in his income the earningsdo not include in your income the amountscome in respect of a decedent and is taxed from his private practice.turned over to the order.according to the rules for restricted propertyIf your order directs you to perform servicesreceived for services. For information about in-for another agency of the supervising church orForeign Employercome in respect of a decedent, see Publicationan associated institution, you are considered to559. Special rules apply if you work for a foreignbe performing the services as an agent of the
employer.order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an
order that you turn over to the order are notU.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen whoincluded in your income. works in the United States for a foreign govern-Special Rules for ment, an international organization, a foreignExample. You are a member of a church embassy, or any foreign employer, you mustCertain Employees order and have taken a vow of poverty. Youinclude your salary in your income.renounce any claims to your earnings and turn
This part of the publication deals with specialover to the order any salaries or wages youSocial security and Medicare taxes.You
rules for people in certain types of employment:earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order are exempt from social security and Medicare
members of the clergy, members of religiousassigns you to work in a hospital that is an employee taxes if you are employed in the
orders, people working for foreign employers,associated institution of the church. However, United States by an international organization or
military personnel, and volunteers. you remain under the general direction and con- a foreign government. However, you must pay
Page 12

Page 13 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
self-employment tax on your earnings from serv-Veterans’ benefits.Do not include in your in- him until the end of his service, Gary must in-
ices performed in the United States, evencome any veterans’ benefits paid under any law, clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is
though you are not self-employed. This rule also regulation, or administrative practice adminis- credited to his account.
applies if you are an employee of a qualifying tered by the Department of Veterans AffairsVolunteers in Service to America (VISTA).Ifwholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov- (VA). The following amounts paid to veterans oryou are a VISTA volunteer, you must includeernment. their families are not taxable. meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your
income as wages.
• Education, training, and subsistence al-Employees of international organizations or lowances.foreign governments. Your compensation National Senior Service Corps programs.
for official services to an international organiza- Do not include in your income amounts you• Disability compensation and pension pay-
tion is exempt from federal income tax if you are receive for supportive services or reimburse-ments for disabilities paid either to veter-
not a citizen of the United States or you are a ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-ans or their families.
citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you are lowing programs.• Grants for homes designed for wheelchaira citizen of the United States). • Retired Senior Volunteer Programliving.Your compensation for official services to a (RSVP).• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans whoforeign government is exempt from federal in-
• Foster Grandparent Program.lost their sight or the use of their limbs.come tax if all of the following are true.
• Senior Companion Program.• Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-• You are not a citizen of the United States
dends paid either to veterans or their ben-or you are a citizen of the Philippines
eficiaries, including the proceeds of a(whether or not you are a citizen of the Service Corps of Retired Executivesveteran’s endowment policy paid beforeUnited States). (SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-death. ive services or reimbursements for• Your work is like the work done by em-
out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not• Interest on insurance dividends left on de-ployees of the United States in foreign
include these amounts in gross income.posit with the VA.countries.
Volunteer tax counseling.Do not include in• Benefits under a dependent-care assis-• The foreign government gives an equal
your income any reimbursements you receivetance program.exemption to employees of the United
for transportation, meals, and other expensesStates in its country. • The death gratuity paid to a survivor of ayou have in training for, or actually providing,member of the Armed Forces who died volunteer federal income tax counseling for theWaiver of alien status.If you are an alien after September 10, 2001. elderly (TCE).who works for a foreign government or interna-
You can deduct as a charitable contributiontional organization and you file a waiver underRehabilitative program payments. VA your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses insection 247(b) of the Immigration and National-payments to hospital patients and resident vet-taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salaryerans for their services under the VA’s therapeu-tance (VITA) program.you receive after the date you file the waiver istic or rehabilitative programs are not treated asnot exempt under this rule. However, it may benontaxable veterans’ benefits. Report theseexempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi-payments as income on Form 1040, line 21.cation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more
Business andinformation about treaties. Volunteers
Nonwage income. This exemption applies Investment IncomeThe tax treatment of amounts you receive as aonly to employees’ wages, salaries, and fees.
volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similarPensions and other income do not qualify for this This section provides information on the treat-agency is covered in the following discussions.exemption. ment of income from certain rents and royalties,
and from interests in partnerships and S corpo-Peace Corps. Living allowances you receiveEmployment abroad. For information on the rations. For additional information about busi-as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leadertax treatment of income earned abroad, see ness and investment income, you may want tofor housing, utilities, household supplies, food,Publication 54. see the following publications.and clothing are exempt from tax.
• Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Busi-Taxable allowances. The following al-Military ness (For Individuals Who Use Schedulelowances must be included in your income andC or C-EZ).Payments you receive as a member of a militaryreported as wages.
service generally are taxed as wages except for • Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-• Allowances paid to your spouse and minorretirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. erty (Including Rental of Vacation Homes).children while you are a volunteer leaderAllowances generally are not taxed. For more • Publication 541, Partnerships.training in the United States.information on the tax treatment of military al-
lowances and benefits, see Publication 3, • Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-• Living allowances designated by the Di-
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide. tions of Assets.rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-
pensation. These are allowances for • Publication 550, Investment Income andMilitary retirement pay.If your retirement personal items such as domestic help, Expenses (Including Capital Gains andpay is based on age or length of service, it islaundry and clothing maintenance, enter- Losses).taxable and must be included in your income astainment and recreation, transportation,
a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 orand other miscellaneous expenses.
on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not Income from sales at auctions, includ-• Leave allowances.include in your income the amount of any reduc- ing online auctions, may be business
tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a income. For more information, see• Readjustment allowances or termination
CAUTION
!
survivor annuity for your spouse or children Publication 334.payments. These are considered received
under the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec-by you when credited to your account.
tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan. Rents From PersonalFor a more detailed discussion of survivorExample. Gary Carpenter, a Peace CorpsPropertyannuities, see Publication 575. volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment
Disability.If you are retired on disability, allowance during his period of service, to be paid If you rent out personal property, such as equip-
see Military and Government Disability Pen-to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour of ment or vehicles, how you report your income
sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. duty. Although the allowance is not available to and expenses is generally determined by:
Page 13

Page 14 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,Partner’s return.You generally must report• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-see Publication 544. partnership items on your individual return theness, and same way as they are reported on the partner-Sale of property interest.If you sell your• Whether or not the rental activity is con- ship return. That is, if the partnership had acomplete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,ducted for profit. capital gain, you report your share on Schedulethe amount you receive is considered paymentD (Form 1040). You report your share of partner-Generally, if your primary purpose is income orfor the sale of section 1231 property, not royaltyship ordinary income on Schedule E (Formprofit and you are involved in the rental activityincome. Under certain circumstances, the sale1040).with continuity and regularity, your rental activityis subject to capital gain or loss treatment on
is a business. See Publication 535, BusinessSchedule D (Form 1040). For more information Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)
Expenses, for details on deducting expenses foron selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3 will tell you where to report each item of
both business and not-for-profit activities.of Publication 544. income on your individual return.
TIP
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,
Reporting business income and expenses. or a net profit interest in a mineral property for
S Corporation IncomeIf you are in the business of renting personalthe life of the property, you have made a lease or
property, report your income and expenses ona sublease, and any cash you receive for theIn general, an S corporation does not pay tax onSchedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). Theassignment of other interests in the property isits income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-form instructions have information on how toordinary income subject to a depletion allow-tions, and credits of the corporation are passedcomplete them. ance. through to the shareholders based on each
Part of future production sold.If you ownReporting nonbusiness income. If you are shareholder’s pro rata share. You must report
mineral property but sell part of the future pro-not in the business of renting personal property, your share of these items on your return. Gener-
duction, you generally treat the money you re-report your rental income on Form 1040, line 21. ally, the items passed through to you will in-
ceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as aList the type and amount of the income on the crease or decrease the basis of your S
loan from the buyer. Do not include it in yourdotted line next to line 21. corporation stock as appropriate.
income or take depletion based on it.
Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you S corporation return.An S corporation mustWhen production begins, you include all the
rent personal property for profit, include your file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Taxproceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-
rental expenses in the total amount you enter on Return for an S Corporation. This shows thetion expenses, and deduct depletion from that
Form 1040, line 35. Also, enter the amount and results of the corporation’s operations for its taxamount to arrive at your taxable income from the
“PPR” on the dotted line next to line 35. year and the items of income, losses, deduc-property.
If you do not rent personal property for profit, tions, or credits that affect the shareholders’
your deductions are limited and you cannot re- individual income tax returns.Partnership Incomeport a loss to offset other income. See Activity Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). You shouldnot for profit under Other Income in the discus-A partnership generally is not a taxable entity.receive from the S corporation in which you aresion of Miscellaneous Income, later. The income, gains, losses, deductions, anda shareholder a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form
credits of a partnership are passed through to1120S), Shareholder’s Share of Income, Deduc-
Royalties the partners based on each partner’s distributivetions, Credits, etc., showing your share of in-
share of these items. For more information, seecome, losses, deductions, and credits, of the SRoyalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,Publication 541, Partnerships. corporation for the tax year. Retain Scheduleand mineral properties are taxable as ordinary K-1 for your records. Do not attach it to yourPartner’s distributive share.Your distribu-income. Form 1040.tive share of partnership income, gains, losses,  You generally report royalties in Part I of
deductions, or credits is generally based on theSchedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income Shareholder’s return.Your distributive sharepartnership agreement. You must report yourand Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil, of the items of income, losses, deductions, ordistributive share of these items on your returngas, or mineral interest or are in business as a credits of the S corporation must be shown sep-whether or not they are actually distributed toself-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., report arately on your Form 1040. The character ofyou. However, your distributive share of theyour income and expenses on Schedule C or these items generally is the same as if you hadpartnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba-Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). realized or incurred them personally.sis of your partnership interest at the end of the
Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S)Copyrights and patents. Royalties from partnership year in which the losses took place.
will tell you where to report each item ofcopyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works,Partnership agreement. The partnership income on your individual return.and similar property, or from patents on inven-
TIP
agreement usually covers the distribution oftions, are amounts paid to you for the right to useprofits, losses, and other items. However, if theDistributions.Generally, S corporation dis-your work over a specified period of time. Royal-agreement does not state how a specific item oftributions are a nontaxable return of your basisties generally are based on the number of unitsgain or loss will be shared, or the allocationin the corporation stock. However, in certainsold, such as the number of books, tickets to astated in the agreement does not have substan-cases, part of the distributions may be taxableperformance, or machines sold. tial economic effect, your distributive share isas a dividend, or as a long-term or short-term
Oil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income from figured according to your interest in the partner-capital gain, or as both. The corporation’s distri-
oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount ship. butions may be in the form of cash or property.
you receive when natural resources are ex-Partnership return.Although a partnershipMore information.  For more information, seetracted from your property. The royalties aregenerally pays no tax, it must file an informationthe Instructions for Form 1120S.based on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., andreturn on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnershipare paid to you by a person or company whoIncome. This shows the result of theleases the property from you. partnership’s operations for its tax year and the
Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco- items that must be passed through to the part-Sickness andnomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas ners.
wells, you can recover your investment throughSchedule K-1 (Form 1065).You should re- Injury Benefitsthe depletion allowance. For information on thisceive from each partnership in which you are asubject, see chapter 10 of Publication 535.member a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),Generally, you must report as income any
Coal and iron ore.Under certain circum- Partner’s Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, amount you receive for personal injury or sick-
stances, you can treat amounts you receive etc., showing your share of income, deductions, ness through an accident or health plan that is
from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay- credits, and tax preference items of the partner- paid for by your employer. If both you and your
ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather ship for the tax year. Retain Schedule K-1 for employer pay for the plan, only the amount you
than as royalty income. For information about your records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040. receive that is due to your employer’s payments
Page 14

Page 15 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is reported as income. However, certain pay-Service-connected disability.You may be you received on release from active duty, even if
ments may not be taxable to you. For informa- able to exclude from income amounts you re- you are later given a retroactive disability rating
tion on nontaxable payments, see Military andceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowance by the VA.
Government Disability Pensions and Other for personal injury or sickness resulting from
Terrorist attack or military action.Do notSickness and Injury Benefits, later in this discus- active service in one of the following govern-
include in your income disability payments yousion. ment services.
receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter-Do not report as income any amounts• The armed forces of any country. rorist or military action.paid to reimburse you for medical ex- A terrorist action is one that is directed• The National Oceanic and Atmosphericpenses you incurred after the plan was
TIP
against the United States or any of its alliesAdministration.established. (including a multinational force in which the• The Public Health Service. United States is participating). A military actionCost paid by you.If you pay the entire cost of is one that involves the armed forces of the• The Foreign Service.an accident or health plan, do not include any United States and is a result of actual oramounts you receive from the plan for personal threatened violence or aggression against theConditions for exclusion.Do not includeinjury or sickness as income on your tax return. United States or any of its allies, but does notthe disability payments in your income if any ofIf your plan reimbursed you for medical ex- include training exercises.the following conditions apply.penses you deducted in an earlier year, you may
have to include some, or all, of the reimburse-1. You were entitled to receive a disabilityLong-Term Carement in your income. See Recoveries under payment before September 25, 1975.Miscellaneous Income, later. Insurance Contracts
2. You were a member of a listed govern-
Cafeteria plans.Generally, if you are covered Long-term care insurance contracts generallyment service or its reserve component, or
by an accident or health insurance plan through are treated as accident and health insurancewere under a binding written commitment
a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur- contracts. Amounts you receive from themto become a member, on September 24,
ance premiums was not included in your in- (other than policyholder dividends or premium1975.
come, you are not considered to have paid the refunds) generally are excludable from income3. You receive the disability payments for apremiums and you must include any benefits as amounts received for personal injury or sick-combat-related injury. This is a personalyou receive in your income. If the amount of the ness. To claim an exclusion for payments madeinjury or sickness that:premiums was included in your income, you are on a per diem or other periodic basis under a
considered to have paid the premiums and any long-term care insurance contract, you must filea. Results directly from armed conflict,benefits you receive are not taxable. Form 8853 with your return.
b. Takes place while you are engaged in A long-term care insurance contract is anextra-hazardous service,Disability Pensions insurance contract that only provides coverage
for qualified long-term care services. The con-c. Takes place under conditions simulat-If you retired on disability, you must include in tract must:ing war, including training exercisesincome any disability pension you receive undersuch as maneuvers, or • Be guaranteed renewable,a plan that is paid for by your employer. You
d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.must report your taxable disability payments as • Not provide for a cash surrender value or
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A other money that can be paid, assigned,4. You would be entitled to receive disabilityuntil you reach minimum retirement age. Mini- pledged, or borrowed,compensation from the Department of Vet-mum retirement age generally is the age at
• Provide that refunds, other than refundserans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-which you can first receive a pension or annuity
on the death of the insured or completetion for it. Your exclusion under thisif you are not disabled.
surrender or cancellation of the contract,condition is equal to the amount you wouldYou may be entitled to a tax credit if and dividends under the contract may bebe entitled to receive from the VA.you were permanently and totally dis- used only to reduce future premiums or
abled when you retired. For informa-
TIP
increase future benefits, andPension based on years of service.If yoution on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit for
receive a disability pension based on years of• Generally not pay or reimburse expensesthe Elderly or the Disabled.
service, you generally must include it in yourincurred for services or items that wouldBeginning on the day after you reach mini-income. However, if the pension qualifies for thebe reimbursed under Medicare, exceptmum retirement age, payments you receive areexclusion for a service-connected disability (dis-where Medicare is a secondary payer ortaxable as a pension or annuity. Report thecussed earlier), do not include in income the partthe contract makes per diem or other peri-payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 orof your pension that you would have received ifodic payments without regard to ex-on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For morethe pension had been based on a percentage ofpenses.information on pensions and annuities, see Pub-disability. You must include the rest of your pen-lication 575. sion in your income. Qualified long-term care services.Qualified
Retirement and profit-sharing plans.If you long-term care services are:Retroactive VA determination.If you retirereceive payments from a retirement or from the armed services based on years of serv-• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-ice and are later given a retroactive service-con-peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili-bility retirement, do not treat the payments as anected disability rating by the VA, your tative services, and maintenance anddisability pension. The payments must be re-retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-personal care services, andported as a pension or annuity. cluded from income up to the amount of VA
disability benefits you would have been entitled• Required by a chronically ill individual andAccrued leave payment.If you retire on disa-
to receive. You can claim a refund of any taxprovided pursuant to a plan of care pre-bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for
paid on the excludable amount (subject to thescribed by a licensed health care practi-accrued annual leave is a salary payment. The
statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-tioner.payment is not a disability payment. Include it in
turn on Form 1040X for each previous yearyour income in the tax year you receive it.
during the retroactive period. Chronically ill individual.A chronically ill in-If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-dividual is one who has been certified by aance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-Military and Government licensed health care practitioner within the previ-ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severanceDisability Pensions ous 12 months as one of the following.benefit from your income. However, you must
Certain military and government disability pen- include in your income any lump-sum readjust-• An individual who, for at least 90 days, is
sions are not taxable. ment or other nondisability severance payment unable to perform at least two activities of
Page 15

Page 16 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
daily living without substantial assistance Reimbursement for medical care. A reim-Other Sickness
bursement for medical care generally is not tax-due to loss of functional capacity. Activi-and Injury Benefits able. However, it may reduce your medicalties of daily living are eating, toileting,
expense deduction. If you receive reimburse-transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-In addition to disability pensions and annuities,ment for an expense you deducted in an earliernence. you may receive other payments for sickness oryear, see Recoveries, later.injury.• An individual who requires substantial su- If you receive an “advance reimbursement”pervision to be protected from threats toRailroad sick pay.Payments you receive asor “loan” for future medical expenses from yourhealth and safety due to severe cognitivesick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-employer without regard to whether you sufferedimpairment. surance Act are taxable and you must includea personal injury or sickness or incurred medical
them in your income. However, do not includeexpenses, that amount is included in your in-
them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobLimit on exclusion.The exclusion for pay- come, whether or not you incur uninsured medi-
injury.ments made on a per diem or other periodic cal expenses during the year.
basis under a long-term care insurance contract Reimbursements received under yourBlack lung benefit payments. These pay-is subject to a limit. The limit applies to the total employer’s plan for expenses incurred beforements are similar to workers’ compensation andof these payments and any accelerated death the plan was established are included in income.generally are not taxable.benefits made on a per diem or other periodic  Reimbursements received under your
basis under a life insurance contract becauseFederal Employees’ Compensation Act employer’s plan of the amount paid for nonpre-
the insured is chronically ill. (For more informa-(FECA). Payments received under this Act for scription medicines and drugs (such as allergy
tion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In- personal injury or sickness, including payments medicine, pain reliever, and cold medicine) are
surance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable. not included in income. However, reimburse-
Income, later.) However, you are taxed on amounts you receive ments of the amount paid for dietary supple-
under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45ments (such as vitamins) that are merelyUnder this limit, the excludable amount for
days while a claim is being decided. Report this beneficial to your general health are included inany period is figured by subtracting any reim-
income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or income.bursement received (through insurance or oth-
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sickerwise) for the cost of qualified long-term care
leave while a claim is being processed is taxableservices during the period from the larger of the
and must be included in your income as wages.following amounts.
Miscellaneous IncomeIf part of the payments you receive• The cost of qualified long-term care serv- under FECA reduces your social se-ices during the period. This section discusses various types of income.curity or equivalent railroad retirementCAUTION
!
You may have taxable income from certain• The dollar amount for the period ($230 perbenefits received, that part is considered social
transactions even if no money changes hands.day for any period in 2004). security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-
For example, you may have taxable income iffits and may be taxable. For a discussion of theSee Section C of Form 8853 and its instructions you lend money at a below-market interest ratetaxability of these benefits, see Other Incomefor more information. or have a debt you owe cancelled.under Miscellaneous Income, later.
You can deduct the amount you spend to buyWorkers’ Compensation Barteringback sick leave for an earlier year to be eligible
for nontaxable FECA benefits for that period. It isAmounts you receive as workers’ compensation Bartering is an exchange of property or services.a miscellaneous deduction subject to the 2%for an occupational sickness or injury are fully You must include in your income, at the timelimit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you buy backexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’ received, the fair market value of property orsick leave in the same year you used it, thecompensation act or a statute in the nature of a services you receive in bartering. If you ex-amount reduces your taxable sick leave pay. Doworkers’ compensation act. The exemption also change services with another person and younot deduct it separately.applies to your survivors. The exemption, how- both have agreed ahead of time as to the value
ever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits of the services, that value will be accepted asOther compensation. Many other amountsyou receive based on your age, length of serv- fair market value unless the value can be shownyou receive as compensation for sickness orice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you to be otherwise.injury are not taxable. These include the follow-retired because of an occupational sickness oring amounts.  Generally, you report this income on Sched-injury. ule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). However,• Compensatory damages you receive for if the barter involves an exchange of somethingIf part of your workers’ compensationphysical injury or physical sickness,other than services, such as in Example 4 be-reduces your social security or whether paid in a lump sum or in periodiclow, you may have to use another form or sched-equivalent railroad retirement benefitsCAUTION
!
payments. See Court awards and dam- ule instead.received, that part is considered social securityages under Other Income, later.
(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and
• Benefits you receive under an accident orExample 1. You are a self-employed attor-may be taxable. For a discussion of the taxability
health insurance policy on which eitherney who performs legal services for a client, aof these benefits, see Other Income under Mis-
you paid the premiums or your employersmall corporation. The corporation gives youcellaneous Income, later.
paid the premiums but you had to includeshares of its stock as payment for your services.
them in your income. You must include the fair market value of theReturn to work. If you return to work after shares in your income on Schedule C or Sched-• Disability benefits you receive for loss ofqualifying for workers’ compensation, salary ule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receiveincome or earning capacity as a result ofpayments you receive for performing light duties them.injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-are taxable as wages.
icy. Example 2. You are a self-employed ac-
Disability pension.If your disability pension• Compensation you receive for permanent countant. You and a house painter are members
is paid under a statute that provides benefitsloss or loss of use of a part or function of of a barter club. Members get in touch with each
only to employees with service-connected disa-your body, or for your permanent disfig- other directly and bargain for the value of the
bilities, part of it may be workers’ compensation.urement. This compensation must be services to be performed. In return for account-
That part is exempt from tax. The rest of yourbased only on the injury and not on the ing services you provided, the house painter
pension, based on years of service, is taxable asperiod of your absence from work. These painted your home. You must report as your
pension or annuity income. If you die, the part ofbenefits are not taxable even if your em- income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
your survivors’ benefit that is a continuation ofployer pays for the accident and health 1040) the fair market value of the house painting
the workers’ compensation is exempt from tax.plan that provides these benefits. services you received. The house painter must
Page 16

Page 17 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
include in income the fair market value of the If you are a stockholder in a corporation andCanceled Debts
you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-accounting services you provided.
tion, you generally do not realize income. This isGenerally, if a debt you owe is canceled or
Example 3. You are self-employed and a because the canceled debt is considered as aforgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you
contribution to the capital of the corporationmember of a barter club. The club uses creditmust include the canceled amount in your in-
equal to the amount of debt principal that youunits as a means of exchange. It adds credit come. You have no income from the canceled
canceled.debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debtunits to your account for goods or services you
includes any indebtedness for which you areprovide to members, which you can use to
liable or which attaches to property you hold.purchase goods or services offered by other
ExceptionsIf the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report themembers of the barter club. The club subtracts
canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is acredit units from your account when you receive There are several exceptions to the inclusion ofbusiness debt, report the amount on Schedule Cgoods or services from other members. You canceled debt in income. These are explainedor Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on Schedulemust include in your income the value of the next.F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, ifcredit units that are added to your account, eventhe debt is farm debt and you are a farmer).though you may not actually receive goods or Student loans. Certain student loans contain
services from other members until a later tax a provision that all or part of the debt incurred toForm 1099-C. If a Federal Government
year. attend the qualified educational institution will beagency, financial institution, or credit union
canceled if you work for a certain period of timecancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 or
Example 4. You own a small apartment in certain professions for any of a broad class ofmore, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella-
building. In return for 6 months rent-free use of employers.tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt is
an apartment, an artist gives you a work of artshown in box 2. You do not have income if your student loan
she created. You must report as rental income is canceled after you agreed to this provisionInterest included in canceled debt.If anyon Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market value and then performed the services required. Tointerest is forgiven and included in the amount ofof the artwork, and the artist must report as qualify, the loan must have been made by:canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interestincome on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formalso will be shown in box 3. Whether or not you1. The Federal Government, a state or local1040) the fair rental value of the apartment.must include the interest portion of the canceledgovernment, or an instrumentality, agency,debt in your income depends on whether the or subdivision thereof,Form 1099-B from barter exchange.If you interest would be deductible if you paid it. See
exchanged property or services through a barterDeductible debt under Exceptions, later. 2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation
exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds from BrokerIf the interest would not be deductible (suchthat has assumed control of a state,
and Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similaras interest on a personal loan), include in yourcounty, or municipal hospital, and whose
statement from the barter exchange should beincome the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. Ifemployees are considered public employ-
sent to you by January 31, 2005. It should showthe interest would be deductible (such as on aees under state law, or
the value of cash, property, services, credits, orbusiness loan), include in your income the net3. An educational institution:scrip you received from exchanges during 2004.amount of the canceled debt (the amount shown
in box 2 less the interest amount shown in boxThe IRS will also receive a copy of Form 1099-B. a. Under an agreement with an entity de-
3). scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the
Backup withholding. The income you re- funds to the institution to make the loan,Discounted mortgage loan. If your financialceive from bartering generally is not subject to orinstitution offers a discount for the early paymentregular income tax withholding. However, of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-b. As part of a program of the institutionbackup withholding will apply in certain circum-count is canceled debt. You must include the designed to encourage students tostances to ensure that income tax is collected oncanceled amount in your income. serve in occupations or areas with un-this income. met needs and under which the serv-Mortgage relief upon sale or otherUnder backup withholding, the barter ex- ices provided are for or under thedisposition.If you are personally liable for achange must withhold, as income tax, 28% of direction of a governmental unit or amortgage (recourse debt), and you are relievedthe income if: tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-of the mortgage when you dispose of the prop- tion (defined later).erty, you may realize gain or loss up to the fair• You do not give the barter exchange your
market value of the property. To the extent thetaxpayer identification number (generally a A loan to refinance a qualified student loanmortgage discharge exceeds the fair marketsocial security number or an employer will also qualify if it was made by an educationalvalue of the property, it is income from dischargeidentification number), or institution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-of indebtedness unless it qualifies for exclusionzation under its program designed as described• The IRS notifies the barter exchange thatunder Excluded debt, later. Report any incomein (3)(b) above.you gave it an incorrect identification num-from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusiness
ber. An educational institution is an organizationdebt that does not qualify for exclusion as other
with a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu-income on Form 1040, line 21.If you join a barter exchange, you must certify larly enrolled body of students in attendance at If you are not personally liable for a mort-under penalties of perjury that your taxpayer the place where the educational activities aregage (nonrecourse debt), and you are relievedidentification number is correct and that you are carried on.of the mortgage when you dispose of the prop-not subject to backup withholding. If you do not A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor-erty (such as through foreclosure or reposses-make this certification, backup withholding may poration, community chest, fund, or foundationsion), that relief is included in the amount youbegin immediately. The barter exchange will organized and operated exclusively for one orrealize. You may have a taxable gain if thegive you a Form W-9, Request for Taxpayer more of the following purposes.amount you realize exceeds your adjusted basisIdentification Number and Certification, or a sim-in the property. Report any gain on nonbusinessilar form, for you to make this certification. • Charitable.property as a capital gain.
The barter exchange will withhold tax only up See Foreclosures and Repossessions in • Educational.
Publication 544 for more information.to the amount of any cash paid to you or depos- • Fostering national or international amateurited in your account and any scrip or creditStockholder debt.If you are a stockholder in sports competition (but only if none of theissued to you (and converted to cash). a corporation and the corporation cancels or organization’s activities involve providing
If tax is withheld from your barter in-forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a athletic facilities or equipment).
come, the barter exchange will reportconstructive distribution that is generally divi-• Literary.the amount of tax withheld on Formdend income to you. For more information, see
TIP
1099-B, or similar statement. • Preventing cruelty to children or animals.Publication 542.
Page 17

Page 18 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Religious. benefit payments that are more than the present party to the arrangement pays all or part of the
value of the payments at the time of death. premiums, and one of the parties paying the• Scientific. premiums is entitled to recover all or part ofProceeds received in installments.If you re-• Testing for public safety. those premiums from the proceeds of the con-ceive life insurance proceeds in installments,tract. There are two mutually exclusive regimesyou can exclude part of each installment fromException. You do have income if your stu- to tax split-dollar life insurance arrangements.your income.dent loan was made by an educational institu-To determine the excluded part, divide the1. Under the economic benefit regime, thetion and is canceled because of services youamount held by the insurance company (gener-owner of the life insurance contract isperformed for the institution or other organiza-ally the total lump sum payable at the death oftreated as providing current life insurancetion that provided the funds. the insured person) by the number of install-protection and other taxable economic
ments to be paid. Include anything over thisDeductible debt. You do not have income benefits to the non-owner of the contract.
excluded part in your income as interest.from the cancellation of a debt if your payment of 2. Under the loan regime, the non-owner ofthe debt would be deductible. This exception the life insurance contract is treated asExample. The face amount of the policy isapplies only if you use the cash method of ac- loaning premium payments to the owner of$75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re-counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of the contract.ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each.Publication 334.
The excluded part of each installment is $625Only one of these regimes applies to any onePrice reduced after purchase.Generally, if($75,000 ÷ 120), or $7,500 for an entire year.policy. For more information, see sectionsthe seller reduces the amount of debt you oweThe rest of each payment, $375 a month (or1.61-22 and 1.7872-15 of the regulations.for property you purchased, you do not have$4,500 for an entire year), is interest income to
income from the reduction. The reduction of theyou.
debt is treated as a purchase price adjustment Endowment Contract ProceedsInstallments for life.If, as the beneficiaryand reduces your basis in the property. under an insurance contract, you are entitled toAn endowment contract is a policy under whichreceive the proceeds in installments for the restExcluded debt. Do not include a canceled you are paid a specified amount of money on aof your life without a refund or period-certaindebt in your gross income in the following situa- certain date unless you die before that date, inguarantee, you figure the excluded part of eachtions. which case, the money is paid to your desig-installment by dividing the amount held by the• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid ininsurance company by your life expectancy. Ifunder title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi- a lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only ifthere is a refund or period-certain guarantee, thecation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. the proceeds are more than the cost of theamount held by the insurance company for thispolicy. To determine your cost, subtract anypurpose is reduced by the actuarial value of the• The debt is canceled when you are insol- amount that you previously received under theguarantee.vent. However, you cannot exclude any contract and excluded from your income fromamount of canceled debt that is more thanSurviving spouse. If your spouse died the total premiums (or other consideration) paidthe amount by which you are insolvent.before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-for the contract. Include the part of the lump sumSee Publication 908. ceeds paid to you because of the death of yourpayment that is more than your cost in your
spouse are received in installments, you can• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can- income.
exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 Endowment proceeds that you choose to
cluded in the installments. If you remarry, youof Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide. receive in installments instead of a lump-sum
can continue to take the exclusion. payment at the maturity of the policy are taxed• The debt is qualified real property busi- as an annuity. This is explained in Publicationness debt. See chapter 5 of PublicationInterest option on insurance.If an insurance575. For this treatment to apply, you must334. company pays you interest only on proceedschoose to receive the proceeds in installmentsfrom life insurance left on deposit, the interest• The cancellation is intended as a gift. before receiving any part of the lump sum. Thisyou are paid is taxable. election must be made within 60 days after theIf your spouse died before October 23, 1986,lump-sum payment first becomes payable toand you chose to receive only the interest fromEducation Loan Repayment you.your insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interestAssistance exclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply.
If you later decide to receive the proceeds fromBeginning in 2004, education loan repayments Accelerated Death Benefitsthe policy in installments, you can take the inter-made to you by the National Health Service
est exclusion from the time you begin to receiveCertain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-Corps Loan Repayment Program (NHSC Loan
the installments. efits under a life insurance contract or viaticalRepayment Program) or a state education loan
settlement before the insured’s death are ex-repayment program eligible for funds under theSurrender of policy for cash.If you surren-
cluded from income if the insured is terminally orPublic Health Service Act are not taxable if youder a life insurance policy for cash, you must
chronically ill.agree to provide primary health services ininclude in income any proceeds that are more
health professional shortage areas. For morethan the cost of the life insurance policy. InViatical settlement.This is the sale or assign-information, see Publication 970. general, your cost (or investment in the contract)ment of any part of the death benefit under a lifeis the total of premiums that you paid for the lifeinsurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,Life Insurance Proceeds vider. A viatical settlement provider is a personrebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that werewho regularly engages in the business of buyingLife insurance proceeds paid to you because ofnot included in your income. or taking assignment of life insurance contractsthe death of the insured person are not taxableYou should receive a Form 1099-R showingon the lives of insured individuals who are termi-unless the policy was turned over to you for athe total proceeds and the taxable part. Reportnally or chronically ill and who meets the require-price. This is true even if the proceeds were paidthese amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Formments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internalunder an accident or health insurance policy or1040 or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.Revenue Code.an endowment contract. For information on when the proceeds
are excluded from income, see Accel-Proceeds not received in installments.If Exclusion for terminal illness.Accelerated
erated Death Benefits, later.death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or death benefits are fully excludable if the insured
TIP
other than at regular intervals, include in your is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who
income only the benefits that are more than theSplit-dollar life insurance.Generally, a has been certified by a physician as having an
amount payable to you at the time of the insured split-dollar life insurance arrangement is an ar- illness or physical condition that can reasonably
person’s death. If the benefit payable at death is rangement between an owner and a non-owner be expected to result in death within 24 months
not specified, you include in your income the of a life insurance contract under which either from the date of the certification.
Page 18

Page 19 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exclusion for chronic illness.If the insured from the interest you paid in 2004. You may the recovery is for state or local income taxes
is a chronically ill individual who is not terminally have to include it in your income under the rules paid in 2003. Instead, use the worksheet in the
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis explained in the following discussions. 2004 Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure
of costs incurred for qualified long-term care the amount (if any) to include in your income.Interest on recovery.Interest on any of theservices are fully excludable. Accelerated death You cannot use the Form 1040 worksheetamounts you recover must be reported as inter-benefits paid on a per diem or other periodic and must use this discussion if any of the follow-est income in the year received. For example,basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit ing statements is true.report any interest you received on state or localapplies to the total of the accelerated deathincome tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a. • The recovery is for a tax year other thanbenefits and any periodic payments received 2003.from long-term care insurance contracts. ForRecovery and expense in same year.If the
information on the limit and the definitions of • The recovery is for a deducted item otherrefund or other recovery and the expense occur
chronically ill individual, qualified long-term care than state or local income taxes, such asin the same year, the recovery reduces the de-
services, and long-term care insurance con- real property taxes.duction or credit and is not reported as income.
tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con- • Your 2003 taxable income was less thanRecovery for 2 or more years.If you receivetracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits, zero.a refund or other recovery that is for amountsearlier.
you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must• You made your last payment of 2003 stateException. The exclusion does not apply toallocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovered or local estimated tax in 2004.any amount paid to a person (other than theamount between the years in which you paid it.insured) who has an insurable interest in the life • You owed alternative minimum tax forThis allocation is necessary to determine theof the insured because the insured: 2003.amount of recovery from any earlier years and to
determine the amount, if any, of your allowable• Is a director, officer, or employee of the • You could not deduct all your tax credits
deduction for this item for the current year.person, or for 2003 because their total was more
than the amount of tax shown on your• Has a financial interest in the person’sExample. You paid 2003 estimated state 2003 Form 1040, line 43.business. income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments.
• You could be claimed as a dependent byYou made your fourth payment in January 2004.
someone else in 2003.You had no state income tax withheld duringForm 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-
2003. In 2004, you received a $400 tax refundated death benefits made on a per diem or other
based on your 2003 state income tax return. Youperiodic basis, you must file Form 8853 with If you also recovered an amount de-claimed itemized deductions each year on youryour return. You do not have to file Form 8853 to ducted as a non-itemized deduction,federal income tax return.exclude accelerated death benefits paid on the figure the amount of that recovery toCAUTION
!
You must allocate the $400 refund betweenbasis of actual expenses incurred. include in your income and add it to your ad-2003 and 2004, the years in which you paid thejusted gross income before applying the rulestax on which the refund is based. You paid 75%explained here. See Non-Itemized DeductionRecoveries ($3,000 ÷ $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2003,Recoveries, later.so 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for A recovery is a return of an amount you de-
amounts you paid in 2003 and is a recoveryducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The Total recovery included in income.If youitem. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item,most common recoveries are refunds, reim- recover any amount that you deducted in anyou will include $300 on Form 1040, line 10, forbursements, and rebates of deductions itemized earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you2004, and attach a copy of your computationon Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may have generally must include the full amount of theshowing why that amount is less than therecoveries of non-itemized deductions (such as recovery in your income in the year you receiveamount shown on the Form 1099-G you re-payments on previously deducted bad debts) it. This rule applies if, for the earlier year, all ofceived from the state.and recoveries of items for which you previously the following statements are true.The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is forclaimed a tax credit.
your January 2004 estimated tax payment. 1. Your itemized deductions exceeded theTax benefit rule.You must include a recoveryWhen you figure your deduction for state andstandard deduction by at least the amountin your income in the year you receive it up to thelocal income taxes paid during 2004, you willof the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-amount by which the deduction or credit youreduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Yourtions did not exceed the standard deduc-took for the recovered amount reduced your taxdeduction for state and local income taxes paidtion by at least the amount of the recovery,in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-during 2004 will include the January net amountsee Standard deduction limit, later.)crease to an amount carried over to the currentof $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimated
year that resulted from the deduction or credit is 2. You had taxable income. (If you had nostate income taxes paid in 2004 for 2004, and
considered to have reduced your tax in the ear- taxable income, see Negative taxable in-any state income tax withheld during 2004.
lier year. come, later.)
Deductions not itemized.If you did not item-Federal income tax refund.Refunds of fed- 3. Your deduction for the item recoveredize deductions for the year for which you re-eral income taxes are not included in your in- equals or exceeds the amount recovered.ceived the recovery of an expense that wascome because they are never allowed as a (If your deduction was less than thedeductible only if you itemized, do not includededuction from income. amount recovered, see Recovery limited toany of the recovery amount in your income.
deduction, later.)State income tax refund.If you received a
Example. You claimed the standard deduc-state or local income tax refund (or credit or 4. Your itemized deductions were not subject
tion on your 2003 federal income tax return. Inoffset) in 2004, you generally must include it in to the limit on itemized deductions. (If your
2004 you received a refund of your 2003 stateincome if you deducted the tax in an earlier year. deductions were limited, see Itemized de-
income tax. Do not report any of the refund asThe payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain ductions limited, later.)
income because you did not itemize deductionsGovernment Payments, to you by January 31, 5. You had no unused tax credits. (If you hadfor 2003.2005. The IRS also will receive a copy of the unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred-Form 1099-G. Use the worksheet in the 2004 its, later.)Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure the
Itemized Deduction Recoveriesamount (if any) to include in your income. 6. You were not subject to alternative mini-
mum tax. (If you were subject to alternativeMortgage interest refund.If you received a The following discussion explains how to deter-minimum tax, see Subject to alternativerefund or credit in 2004 of mortgage interest paid mine the amount to include in your income fromminimum tax, later.)in an earlier year, the amount should be shown a recovery of an amount deducted in an earlier
in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interest year as an itemized deduction. However, you If any of the above statements is not true,
Statement. Do not subtract the refund amount generally do not need to use this discussion if see Total recovery not included in income, later.
Page 19

Page 20 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where to report.Enter your state or localYour total recoveries are less than theTotal recovery not included in income.If
income tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and amount by which your itemized deductions ex- one or more of the six statements listed in the
the total of all other recoveries as other incomeceeded the standard deduction ($11,000 − preceding discussion is not true, you may be
on Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form $9,500 = $1,500), so you must include your total able to exclude at least part of the recovery from
1040A or Form 1040EZ. recoveries in your income for 2004. Report the your income. If statements (4), (5), and (6) are
state and local income tax refund of $400 on true (your itemized deductions were not limited,
Example. For 2003, you filed a joint return.Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your you had no unused tax credits, and you were not
Your taxable income was $60,000 and you wererecoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21. subject to the alternative minimum tax), you can
not entitled to any tax credits. Your standard use Worksheet 2 to determine the part of your
deduction was $9,500, and you had itemized recovery to include in your income.
deductions of $11,000. In 2004, you received
the following recoveries for amounts deducted
on your 2003 return:
Medical expenses.............. $200
State and local income tax refund.... 4 0 0
Refund of mortgage interest........ 3 2 5
Total recoveries................ $925
None of the recoveries were more than the de-
ductions taken for 2003.
Page 20

Page 21 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in
income on your 2004 Form 1040, see Total recovery not included in income under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If
you recovered amounts from more than one year, such as a state income tax refund from 2003 and a casualty loss
reimbursement from 2002, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use information from Schedule A (Form
1040) for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year
(year of the deduction). If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to
zero, see Unused tax credits and Subject to alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your
recovery was for an itemized deduction that was limited, you should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized
Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit
1 ....................................... 1 .
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)1 .................................. 2 .
3. Add lines 1 and 2........................................................ 3 .
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year
(for example, line 28 of Schedule A for 2003).................. 4 .
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2).................. 5 .
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4................................ 6 .
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. (The standard deduction
amounts for 2003, 2002, and 2001 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4.) 7.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here.
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable.................................. 8 .
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8........................................... 9 .
10. Taxable income for prior year2 (for example, line 41, Form 1040 for
2003)................................................ 1 0 .
11. Amount to include in income for 2004:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result
(but not less than zero).3 ............................................... 1 1 .
If line 11 equals line 3—
Enter the amount from line 1 on line 10, Form 1040.
Enter the amount from line 2 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero—
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on line 10, Form 1040.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following
worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the
percentage......................................... A .
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A.
Enter the result here and on line 10, Form 1040.............................. B .
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11.
Enter the result here and on line 21, Form 1040.............................. C .
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year.
2 If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. Taxable income will have
to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Publication 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and
Trusts.
3 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Page 21

Page 22 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most
People*
IF Your Filing Status is ...
Your Standard
Deduction is ...
Single or Married filing separate return
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Head of household
$4,750
9,500
7,000
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People
Age 65 or Older or Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status is ...
THEN Your
Standard
Deduction is ...
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,900
7,050
10,450
11,400
12,350
13,300
5,700
6,650
7,600
8,550
8,150
9,300
10,450
11,600
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III instead.
AND the Number
in the Box
Above is ...
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if
claiming spouse’s
exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if
claiming spouse’s
exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
2. Additional amount 2.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status. 6.
● Single or Married filing separately—
$4,750
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child—
$9,500
● Head of household—$7,000
7. Standard deduction.
7a.
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
b. If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,150 ($950 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2003. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$250
Table 2. 2003 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien,
you cannot take the standard deduction even if you were 65
or older or blind.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $750
Example. In 2004 you recovered $2,500 ofStandard deduction for earlier years.To
your 2003 itemized deductions, but the recov-determine if amounts recovered in 2004 must be
eries you must include in your 2004 income areincluded in your income, you must know the
Allocating the included part.If you are notonly $1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500standard deduction for your filing status for the
required to include all of your recoveries in yourwas due to your state income tax refund. Theyear the deduction was claimed. The standard
income, and you have both a state income taxamount you report as a state tax refund on Formdeduction tables for 2003, 2002, and 2001 are
refund and other itemized deduction recoveries,1040, line 10, is $300 [($500 ÷ $2,500) × shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4. If you need the
$1,500]. The balance of the taxable recoveries,you must allocate the taxable recoveries be- standard deduction amounts for years before
$1,200, is reported as other income on Formtween the state tax refund you report on Form 2001, see the copy of your return for that year.1040, line 21.1040, line 10, and the amount you report as
other income on Form 1040, line 21. If you do Example. You filed a joint return for 2003Standard deduction limit.You generally arenot use Worksheet 2, make the allocation as with taxable income of $45,000. Your itemizedallowed to claim the standard deduction if you dofollows. deductions were $10,350. The standard deduc-not itemize your deductions. Only your itemizedtion that you could have claimed was $9,500. Indeductions that are more than your standard1. Divide your state income tax refund by the 2004, you recovered $2,400 of your 2003 item-deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-ized deductions. None of the recoveries weretotal of all your itemized deduction recov-less you are required to itemize your deduc-
more than the actual deductions for 2003. In-eries. tions). If your total deductions on the earlier year
clude $850 of the recoveries in your 2004 in-return were not more than your income for that2. Multiply the amount of taxable recoveries come. This is the smaller of your recoveriesyear, include in your income this year the lesserby the percentage in (1). This is the ($2,400) or the amount by which your itemizedof:amount you report as a state income tax deductions were more than the standard deduc-refund. • Your recoveries, or tion ($10,350 − $9,500 = $850).
3. Subtract the result in (2) above from the• The amount by which your itemized de-
amount of taxable recoveries. This is the Negative taxable income.If your taxable in-ductions exceeded the standard deduc-
amount you report as other income. come was a negative amount, reduce the recov-tion.
Page 22

Page 23 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF Your Filing Status is . . .
Your Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,700
7,850
3,925
6,900
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status
is . . .
THEN Your
Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,850
7,000
8,750
9,650
10,550
11,450
4,825
5,725
6,625
7,525
8,050
9,200
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box Above
is . . .
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,700
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,925
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,850
● Head of household, enter $6,900
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,150 ($900 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2002.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$750
Table 3. 2002 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
$250
ery you must otherwise include in your income tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted If the limit applied, your itemized deductions
by the negative amount. were reduced by the smaller of the followinggross income. Your actual medical expense de-
amounts.duction was $200. In 2004, you received a $500
Example. The facts are the same as in thereimbursement from your medical insurance for• 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-previous example except you had a negativeyour 2003 expenses. The only amount of the ceeded the base amount.taxable income of $200 in 2003. You must in-$500 reimbursement that must be included in
clude $650 in your 2004 income, rather than • 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc-your income for 2004 is $200—the amount ac-
$850. tions other than medical and dental ex-tually deducted.
penses, investment interest expense,Recovery limited to deduction.You do not nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,Itemized deductions limited.You were sub-include in your income any amount of your re- and gambling losses.ject to the limit on itemized deductions in thecovery that is more than the amount you de-
earlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI)ducted in the earlier year. The amount you If the amount you recovered was deducted inwas more than a base amount. For example,include in your income is limited to the smaller a year in which your itemized deductions werethis amount was:of: limited, you must include it in income up to the
• For 2003, $139,500 ($69,750 if marrieddifference between the amount of itemized de-• The amount deducted on Schedule A
filing separately), ductions actually allowed that year and the(Form 1040), or
amount you would have been allowed (the• For 2002, $137,300 ($68,650 if married• The amount recovered. greater of your itemized deductions or your stan-filing separately), and dard deduction) if you had figured your deduc-
• For 2001, $132,950 ($66,475 if marriedExample. During 2003, you paid $1,700 for tions using only the net amount of the recovery
filing separately).medical expenses. From this amount you sub- item.
Page 23

Page 24 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF Your Filing Status is ...
Your Standard
Deduction is ...
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,550
7,600
3,800
6,650
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status is ...
THEN Your
Standard
Deduction is ...
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,650
6,750
8,500
9,400
10,300
11,200
4,700
5,600
6,500
7,400
7,750
8,850
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box
Above is ...
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,550
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,800
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,600
● Head of household, enter $6,650
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,100 ($900 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2001.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$750
Table 4. 2001 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
$250
To determine the part of the recovery you 2. Subtract the amount in step 1 from the tions on her federal income tax return for 2003.
must include in income, follow the two steps She was not subject to alternative minimum taxamount of itemized deductions actually al-
below. and was not entitled to any credit against incomelowed in the earlier year after applying the
tax. Her only allowable deduction was $40,000limit on itemized deductions.1. Figure the greater of: of state income taxes. However, Eileen de-
The result of step 2 is the amount of the recov-ducted only $10,000 in 2003 because her other-a. The standard deduction for the earlierery to include in your income for the year youwise allowable deductions of $40,000 wereyear, or receive the recovery. If your taxable income forreduced by $30,000. In 2004, she received a
b. The amount of itemized deductions you $5,000 refund of her state income taxes forthe earlier year was a negative amount, reduce
would have been allowed for the earlier 2003.your recovery by the negative amount.
year (after taking into account the limit The following shows how Eileen figured theIf you had unused tax credits in the earlieron itemized deductions) if you had fig- $30,000 reduction and other amounts from the
year, see Unused tax credits on page 24.ured them using only the net amount of Itemized Deduction Worksheet in the 2003
the recovery item. The net amount is Schedule A (Form 1040) instructions. TheseFor more information on this computation,
the amount you actually paid reduced amounts are needed to figure the part of thesee Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is inby the recovery amount. $5,000 refund that Eileen must include in herCumulative Bulletin 1993-2. income for 2004.Note. If you were required to itemize your
Example. Eileen Martin is single. She haddeductions in the earlier year, use step 1(b)
and not step 1(a). an AGI of $1,137,300 and itemized her deduc-
Page 24

Page 25 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
AGI for 2003................ $1,137,300 regular tax, as shown in the preceding example, for Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture of In-
State income taxes paid in 2003 . . . $40,000and a recomputation of your alternative mini- vestment Credit, for details.
3% reduction (amount on mum tax. If inclusion of the recovery does not2003 Itemized Deduction change your total tax, you do not include theSurvivor BenefitsWorksheet, line 8), recovery in your income. However, if your total [($1,137,300 − $137,300) × 3%] . . . $30,000 tax increases by any amount, you received a taxGenerally, payments made by or for an em-80% reduction not applied (amount
benefit from the deduction and you must includeployer because of an employee’s death must beon 2003 Itemized
the recovery in your income up to the amount ofincluded in income. The following discussionsDeduction Worksheet, line 4)
($40,000 × 80%) ............. $32,000 the deduction that reduced your tax in the earlierexplain the tax treatment of certain payments
2003 deduction (amount on year. made to survivors. For additional information,
2003 Itemized Deduction see Publication 559.Worksheet, line 10)
($40,000 − $30,000).......... $10,000 Lump-sum payments. Lump-sum paymentsNon-Itemized DeductionRefund received in 2004 of 2003 you receive from a decedent’s employer as theRecoveriesstate income tax............. $5,000 surviving spouse or beneficiary may be accrued
Net amount of 2003 state income salary payments; distributions from employeeThis section discusses recovery of deductionstax ($40,000 − $5,000)......... $35,000 profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or stock bonusother than those deducted on Schedule A (Form
plans; or other items that should be treated sep-If Eileen had used the $35,000 net amount of1040).
arately for tax purposes. The tax treatment ofstate income tax to figure her itemized deduc-
these lump-sum payments depends on the typetions for 2003, the deduction allowed wouldTotal recovery included in income.If you
of payment.have been $7,000. This is her otherwise allowa-recover an amount that you deducted in an ear-
ble deduction of $35,000 reduced by $28,000lier year in figuring your adjusted gross income,Salary or wages.Salary or wages received($35,000 × 80%). By deducting the full $10,000you must generally include the full amount of theafter the death of the employee are usually ordi-paid in 2003, she derived a tax benefit of $3,000recovery in your income in the year received.nary income to you.($10,000 − $7,000). Therefore, only $3,000 of
Qualified employee retirement plans.Total recovery not included in income.Ifthe $5,000 refund is included in her income for
Lump-sum distributions from qualified employeeany part of the deduction you took for the recov-2004.
retirement plans are subject to special tax treat-ered amount did not reduce your tax, you may
Unused tax credits.If you recover an item ment. For information on these distributions, seebe able to exclude at least part of the recovery
deducted in an earlier year in which you had Publication 575 (or Publication 721 if you are thefrom your income. You must include the recov-
unused tax credits, you must refigure the earlier survivor of a federal employee or retiree).ery in your income only up to the amount of the
year’s tax to determine if you must include thededuction that reduced your tax in the year ofPublic safety officer killed in the line of duty.recovery in your income. To do this, add thethe deduction. (See Tax benefit rule, earlier.) If you are a survivor of a public safety officer whoamount of the recovery to your earlier year’s was killed in the line of duty, you may be able totaxable income and refigure the tax and theNegative taxable income.If your taxable in-exclude from income certain amounts you re-credits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-come was a negative amount, reduce the recov-ceive. For this purpose, the term public safetyputed tax, after application of the credits, is moreery by that negative amount. Include thisofficer includes law enforcement officers,than the actual tax in the earlier year, include thereduced recovery in your income. firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad andrecovery in your income up to the amount of the ambulance crew members. For more informa-Unused tax credits.If you recover an itemdeduction that reduced the tax in the earlier tion, see Publication 559.deducted in an earlier year in which you hadyear. For this purpose, any increase to a credit
unused tax credits, you must refigure the earliercarried over to the current year that resulted
Unemployment Benefitsyear’s tax to determine if you must include thefrom deducting the recovered credit in the earlier
recovery in your income. To do this, add theyear is considered to have reduced your tax in
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits youamount of the recovery to your earlier year’sthe earlier year. If the recovery is for an itemized
receive depends on the type of program payingtaxable income and refigure the tax and thededuction claimed in a year in which the deduc-
the benefits.credits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-tions were limited, see Itemized deductions lim-
puted tax, after application of the credits, is moreited, earlier. Unemployment compensation. You must in-
than the actual tax in the earlier year, include theIf your tax, after application of the credits, clude in your income all unemployment compen-
recovery in your income up to the amount of thedoes not change, you did not have a tax benefit sation you receive. You should receive a Form
deduction that reduced the tax in the earlierfrom the deduction. Do not include the recovery 1099-G showing the amount paid to you. Gener-
year. For this purpose, any increase to anin your income. ally, you enter unemployment compensation on
amount carried over to the current year thatline 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or
Example. In 2003, Jean Black filed as headresulted from deducting the recovered amountline 3 of Form 1040EZ.
of household and itemized her deductions. Herin the earlier year is considered to have reduced
Types of unemployment compensation.taxable income was $5,260 and her tax wasyour tax in the earlier year.
Unemployment compensation generally in-$528. She claimed a child care credit of $1,200.If your tax, after application of the credits,
cludes any amount received under an unem-The credit reduced her tax to zero and she haddoes not change, you did not have a tax benefit
ployment compensation law of the United Statesan unused tax credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). Infrom the deduction. Do not include the recovery
or of a state. It includes the following benefits.2004, Jean recovered $1,000 of her itemizedin your income.
deductions. She reduces her 2003 itemized de- • Benefits paid by a state or the District of
ductions by $1,000 and recomputes that year’s Columbia from the Federal Unemployment
Amounts Recovered for Creditstax on taxable income of $6,260. However, the Trust Fund.
child care credit exceeds the recomputed tax of
If you received a recovery in 2004 for an item for• State unemployment insurance benefits.$628. Jean’s tax liability for 2003 is not changed
which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier year,by reducing her deductions by the recovery. She • Railroad unemployment compensationyou must increase your 2004 tax by the amountdid not have a tax benefit from the recovered benefits.of the recovery, up to the amount by which thededuction and does not include any of the recov-
credit reduced your tax in the earlier year. You• Disability payments from a governmentery in her income for 2004.
had a recovery if there was a downward price program paid as a substitute for unem-
Subject to alternative minimum tax.If you adjustment or similar adjustment on the item for ployment compensation. (Amounts re-
were subject to the alternative minimum tax in which you claimed a credit. ceived as workers’ compensation for
the year of the deduction, you will have to re- This rule does not apply to the investment injuries or illness are not unemployment
compute your tax for the earlier year to deter- credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries of compensation. See Workers’ Compensa-
mine if the recovery must be included in your these credits are covered by other provisions oftion under Sickness and Injury Benefits,
income. This will require a recomputation of your the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit earlier.)
Page 25

Page 26 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Trade readjustment allowances under the repaid. For information on this, see Repay- Disaster relief grants. Do not include
ments, later. post-disaster grants received under the DisasterTrade Act of 1974.
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in your• Unemployment assistance under the Dis-Private unemployment fund. Unemploy- income if the grant payments are made to helpaster Relief and Emergency Assistancement benefit payments from a private (nonun-you meet necessary expenses or serious needsAct. ion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute arefor medical, dental, housing, personal property,taxable only if the amounts you receive are moretransportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de-Governmental program. If you contributethan your total payments into the fund. Reportduct casualty losses or medical expenses thatto a governmental unemployment compensa- the taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.are specifically reimbursed by these disastertion program and your contributions are not de- relief grants. Unemployment assistance pay-Payments by a union.Benefits paid to you asductible, amounts you receive under the ments under the Act are taxable unemploymentan unemployed member of a union from regularprogram are not included as unemployment compensation. See Unemployment compensa-union dues are included in your income on Formcompensation until you recover your contribu- tion under Unemployment Benefits, earlier.1040, line 21. However, if the unemploymenttions. benefits are paid from a special fund to whichDisaster relief payments.You can excludeRepayment of unemployment compensa- you contributed, your payments to the fund arefrom income any amount you receive that is ation. If you repaid in 2004 unemployment not deductible, and the benefit payments arequalified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis-compensation you received in 2004, subtractincludible in your income only to the extent theyaster relief payment is an amount paid to you: the amount you repaid from the total amount youare more than your contributions.
received and enter the difference on line 19 of 1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re-Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of essary personal, family, living, or funeralceive from your employer during periods of un-Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your expenses that result from a qualified disas-employment, under a union agreement thatentry, enter “Repaid” and the amount you re- ter,guarantees you full pay during the year, arepaid. If you repaid unemployment compensationtaxable as wages. Include them on line 7 of2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-in 2004 that you included in your income in anForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formessary expenses incurred for the repair orearlier year, you can deduct the amount repaid1040EZ. rehabilitation of your home or repair or re-on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22, if you item-
placement of its contents to the extent it isize deductions. If the amount is more thanState employees. Payments similar to a
due to a qualified disaster,$3,000, see Repayments, later. state’s unemployment compensation may be
made by the state to its employees who are not3. By a person engaged in the furnishing orTax withholding.You can choose to have covered by the state’s unemployment compen- sale of transportation as a common carrierfederal income tax withheld from your unem-sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-because of the death or personal physicalployment compensation. To make this choice,able, do not report them as unemployment injuries incurred as a result of a qualifiedcomplete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholdingcompensation. Report these payments on Form disaster, orRequest, and give it to the paying office. Tax will1040, line 21.be withheld at 10% of your payment. 4. By a federal, state, or local government, or
agency, or instrumentality in connectionIf you do not choose to have tax with-Welfare and Other with a qualified disaster in order to pro-held from your unemployment com- Public Assistance Benefits mote the general welfare.pensation, you may be liable forCAUTION
!
estimated tax. For more information on esti- You can only exclude this amount to the extentDo not include in your income governmental
mated tax, see Publication 505, Tax Withholding any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-benefit payments from a public welfare fund
and Estimated Tax. ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not applybased upon need, such as payments due to
if you were a participant or conspirator in ablindness. Payments from a state fund for the
terrorist action or his or her representative.Supplemental unemployment benefits. victims of crime should not be included in the
A qualified disaster is:victims’ incomes if they are in the nature ofBenefits received from an employer-financed
welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-fund (to which the employees did not contribute) • A disaster which results from a terrorist orpenses that are reimbursed by such a fund. Youare not unemployment compensation. They are military action.must include in your income any welfare pay-taxable as wages and are subject to withholding
• A Presidentially declared disaster.ments that are compensation for services or thatfor income tax. They may be subject to social
are obtained fraudulently.security and Medicare taxes. For more informa- • A disaster which results from an accident
tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefits involving a common carrier, or from anyWork-training program. Payments you re-in Publication 15-A, section 5, Employer’s Sup- other event, which is determined to be cat-ceive from a state welfare agency for taking partplemental Tax Guide. Report these payments astrophic by the Secretary of the Treasuryin a work-training program are not included inon line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line or his or her delegate.your income, as long as the payments (exclu-1 of Form 1040EZ. sive of extra allowances for transportation or
For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster isother costs) do not total more than the publicRepayment of benefits.You may have to
qualified if it is determined by an applicablewelfare benefits you would have received other-repay some of your supplemental unemploy-
federal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-wise. If the payments are more than the welfarement benefits to qualify for trade readjustment tance from the federal, state, or local govern-benefits you would have received, the entireallowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you ment, agency, or instrumentality.amount must be included in your income asrepay supplemental unemployment benefits in
wages.the same year you receive them, reduce the Mortgage assistance payments. Paymentstotal benefits by the amount you repay. If youPersons with disabilities.If you have a disa-made under section 235 of the National Housingrepay the benefits in a later year, you mustbility, you must include in income compensationAct for mortgage assistance are not included ininclude the full amount of the benefits in youryou receive for services you perform unless thethe homeowner’s income. Interest paid for theincome for the year you received them. compensation is otherwise excluded. However,homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-
Deduct the repayment in the later year as anyou do not include in income the value of goods,gram cannot be deducted.
adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (Youservices, and cash that you receive, not in return
cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In-for your services, but for your training and reha-Replacement housing payments. Replace-
clude the repayment on Form 1040, line 35, andbilitation because you have a disability. Excluda- ment housing payments made under the Uni-
enter “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on theble amounts include payments for transportation form Relocation Assistance and Real Property
dotted line next to line 35. If the amount youand attendant care, such as interpreter services Acquisition Policies Act for Federal and Feder-
repay in a later year is more than $3,000, youfor the deaf, reader services for the blind, and ally Assisted Programs are not includible in
may be able to take a credit against your tax forservices to help mentally retarded persons do gross income, but are includible in the basis of
the later year instead of deducting the amounttheir work. the newly acquired property.
Page 26

Page 27 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Relocation payments and home rehabilita- Alimony. Include in your income on Form Car pools. Do not include in your income
tion grants.A relocation payment under sec-1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re- amounts you receive from the passengers for
tion 105(a)(11) of the Housing and Communityceive. Amounts you receive for child support are driving a car in a car pool to and from work.
Development Act made by a local jurisdiction tonot income to you. For complete information, These amounts are considered reimbursement
a displaced individual moving from a flood-dam-see Publication 504, Divorced or Separated In- for your expenses. However, this rule does not
aged residence to another residence is not in-dividuals. apply if you have developed car pool arrange-
cludible in gross income. Home rehabilitation ments into a profit-making business of transport-
Below-market loans. A below-market loan isgrants received by low-income homeowners in a ing workers for hire.
a loan on which no interest is charged or ondefined area under the same act are also not Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive fromwhich the interest is charged at a rate below theincludible in gross income. a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy isapplicable federal rate. If you make a
Indian financing grants.Nonreimbursable not income, but you must reduce your basis bybelow-market gift or demand loan, you must
grants under title IV of the Indian Financing Act the amount of the rebate.include the forgone interest (at the federal rate)
of 1974 to Indians to expand profit-makingas interest income on your return. These loans
Example. You buy a new car for $9,000Indian-owned economic enterprises on or nearare considered a transaction in which you, the
cash and receive a $400 rebate check from thereservations are not includible in gross income.lender, are treated as having made:
manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you.Medicare. Medicare benefits received under• A loan to the borrower in exchange for aYour basis in the car is $8,600. This is your basistitle XVIII of the Social Security Act are notnote that requires the payment of intereston which you figure gain or loss if you sell theincludible in the gross income of the individualsat the applicable federal rate, and car, and depreciation if you use it for business.for whom they are paid. This includes basic (part• An additional payment to the borrower,Casualty insurance and otherA (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged))which the borrower transfers back to youreimbursements. You generally should notand supplementary (part B (Supplementary as interest. report these reimbursements on your return.Medical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).
See Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, andDepending on the transaction, the additionalOld-age, survivors, and disability insurance Thefts, for more information.payment to the borrower is treated as a:benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under
Charitable gift annuities.If you are the bene-section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act• Gift,
ficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you must in-are not includible in the gross income of the• Dividend, clude the yearly annuity or fixed percentageindividuals for whom they are paid. This applies
payment in your income.to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance• Contribution to capital,
The payer will report the types of income youbenefits for wives, husbands, children, widows,• Payment of compensation, or received on Form 1099-R. Report the gross dis-widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, as
tribution from box 1 on Form 1040, line 16a, orwell as the lump-sum death payment. • Another type of payment.
on Form 1040A, line 12a, and the part taxed as
The borrower may have to report this paymentNutrition Program for the Elderly.Food ordinary income (box 2a minus box 3) on Form
as income, depending on its classification.benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro- 1040, line 16b, or on Form 1040A, line 12b.
gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre- Report the portion taxed as capital gain (box 3)For more information on below-market loans,pare and serve free meals for the program, on Schedule D, line 8.see chapter 1 of Publication 550.include in your income as wages the cash pay
Child support payments.You should not re-you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodBribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in yourport these payments on your return. See Publi-benefits. income. cation 504 for more information.
Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.Campaign contributions. These contribu- Court awards and damages. To determine ifPayments made by a state to qualified people totions are not income to a candidate unless theysettlement amounts you receive by compromisereduce their cost of winter energy use are notare diverted to his or her personal use. To beor judgment must be included in your income,taxable. exempt from tax, the contributions must beyou must consider the item that the settlementspent for campaign purposes or kept in a fundreplaces. Include the following as ordinary in-Other Income for use in future campaigns. However, interestcome.earned on bank deposits, dividends received onThe following brief discussions are arranged incontributed securities, and net gains realized on1. Interest on any award.alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-sales of contributed securities are taxable and2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profitscussed in greater detail in another publicationmust be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In- in most cases.include a reference to that publication. come Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza-
tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to an3. Punitive damages. It does not matter ifActivity not for profit.You must include on
office account must be included in the they relate to a physical injury or physicalyour return income from an activity from which
officeholder’s income on Form 1040, line 21, insickness.you do not expect to make a profit. An example
the year transferred.of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you 4. Amounts received in settlement of pensionoperate mostly for recreation and pleasure. rights (if you did not contribute to the plan).Canceled sales contract.If you sell propertyEnter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc-(such as land or a residence) under a contract,5. Damages for:tions for expenses related to the activity arebut the contract is canceled and you return thelimited. They cannot total more than the incomebuyer’s money in the same tax year as the a. Patent or copyright infringement,you report, and can be taken only if you itemizeoriginal sale, you have no income from the sale.deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). See b. Breach of contract, orIf the contract is canceled and you return theNot-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica-buyer’s money in a later tax year, you must c. Interference with business operations.tion 535, Business Expenses, for information oninclude your gain in your income for the year ofwhether an activity is considered carried on for athe sale. When you return the money and take6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-profit. back the property in the later year, you treat thetress received to satisfy a claim under Title
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend.If you re- transaction as a purchase that gives you a newVII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
ceived a payment from Alaska’s mineral income basis in the property equal to the funds you7. Attorney fees and costs where the underly-fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report return to the buyer. ing recovery is included in gross income.it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 of Special rules apply to the reacquisition of
Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The real property where a secured indebtedness  Do not include in your income compensatory
state of Alaska sends each recipient a document (mortgage) to the original seller is involved. For damages for personal physical injury or physical
that shows the amount of the payment with the further information, see Repossession in Publi- sickness (whether received in a lump sum or
check. The amount is also reported to the IRS. cation 537, Installment Sales. installments).
Page 27

Page 28 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emotional distress.Emotional distress it- vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili- as a corporation, the payment may be taxable to
self is not a physical injury or physical sickness, ties for the purchase or installation of an energyyou depending upon your relationship with that
but damages you receive for emotional distress conservation measure for a dwelling unit.person and the nature of the payment. But if the
due to a physical injury or sickness are treated payment makes up for a loss caused by thatEnergy conservation measure. This in-as received for the physical injury or sickness. person, and only restores you to the position youcludes installations or modifications that are pri-Do not include them in your income. were in before the loss, the payment is notmarily designed to reduce consumption ofIf the emotional distress is due to a personal includible in your income.electricity or natural gas, or improve the man-injury that is not due to a physical injury oragement of energy demand. Fees for services.Include all fees for yoursickness (for example, unlawful discrimination
services in your income. Examples of these feesDwelling unit.This includes a house, apart-or injury to reputation), you must include the
are amounts you receive for services you per-ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-damages in your income, except for any dam-
lar property. If a building or structure contains form as:ages you receive for medical care due to that
both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustemotional distress. Emotional distress includes • A corporate director,be properly allocated.physical symptoms that result from emotional
distress, such as headaches, insomnia, and • An executor, administrator, or personalEstate and trust income. An estate or trust,stomach disorders. representative of an estate,unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal
Deduction for costs involved in unlawful • A notary public, orincome tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estate
discrimination suits.Beginning after Octo-or trust, you may be taxed on your share of its• An election precinct official.ber 22, 2004, you may be able to deduct attor-income distributed or required to be distributed
ney fees and court costs paid to recover ato you. However, there is never a double tax.
judgement or settlement for a claim of unlawful If you are not an employee and the feesEstates and trusts file their returns on Form
discrimination under various provisions of fed- for your services from the same payer1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and
eral, state, and local law listed in Internal Reve- total $600 or more for the year, youTrusts, and your share of the income is reported
TIP
nue Code section 62(e), a claim against the may receive a Form 1099-MISC.to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041),
United States government, or a claim under sec-Beneficiary’s Share of Income, Deductions,
Corporate director. Corporate directortion 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act.Credits, etc.
fees are self-employment income. Report theseYou can claim this deduction as an adjustmentCurrent income required to be distributed.payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZto income on Form 1040, line 35. The followingIf you are the beneficiary of an estate or trust(Form 1040).rules apply. that must distribute all of its current income, you
Personal representatives. All personal• The attorney fees and court costs may bemust report your share of the distributable net
representatives must include in their gross in-paid by you or on your behalf in connec-income, whether or not you actually received it.
come fees paid to them from an estate. If paid totion with the claim for unlawful discrimina-Current income not required to be distrib-a professional executor or administrator,tion, the claim against the United Statesuted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate orself-employment tax also applies to such fees.government, or the claim under sectiontrust and the fiduciary has the choice of whetherFor a nonprofessional executor or administrator1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act.to distribute all or part of the current income, you(a person serving in such capacity in an isolated• The deduction you are claiming cannot bemust report: instance, such as a friend or relative of themore than the amount of the judgement or decedent), self-employment tax only applies if a• All income that is required to be distributedsettlement you are including in income for trade or business is included in the estate’sto you, whether or not it is actually distrib-the tax year. assets, the executor actively participates in theuted, plus
• You must pay the attorney fees and costs business, and the fees are related to operation• All other amounts actually paid or creditedafter October 22, 2004. of the business.to you, The fee is not includible in income if it is• The judgement or settlement to which yourup to the amount of your share of distributablewaived.attorney fees and court costs apply mustnet income.occur after October 22, 2004. Notary public.Report payments for these
How to report. Treat each item of incomeservices on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ
Pre-existing agreement. If you receive the same way that the estate or trust would treat(Form 1040). These payments are not subject to
damages under a written binding agreement,it. For example, if a trust’s dividend income isself-employment tax. (See the separate instruc-
court decree, or mediation award that was indistributed to you, you report the distribution astions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details.)
effect (or issued on or before) September 13,dividend income on your return. The same ruleElection precinct official.You should re-1995, do not include in income any of thoseapplies to distributions of tax-exempt interestceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-damages received on account of personal inju-and capital gains.
ices performed as an election official or electionries or sickness. The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell
worker. Report these payments on line 7 ofyou the type of items making up your share ofCredit card insurance.Generally, if you re- Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formthe estate or trust income and any credits youceive benefits under a credit card disability or 1040EZ.are allowed on your individual income tax return.unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are
taxable to you. These plans make the minimumLosses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-Food program payments to daycare
monthly payment on your credit card account if ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.providers. If you operate a daycare service
you cannot make the payment due to injury, and receive payments under the Child and AdultGrantor trust.Income earned by a grantorillness, disability, or unemployment. Report on Care Food Program administered by the Depart-trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits you ment of Agriculture that are not for your services,ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overreceived during the year that is more than the the payments generally are not included in yourthe trust. (The grantor is the one who transferredamount of the premiums you paid during the income. However, you must include in your in-property to the trust.) This rule applies if theyear. come any part of the payments you do not use toproperty (or income from the property) put intoprovide food to individuals eligible for help underthe trust will or may revert (be returned) to theEmployment agency fees. If you get a job the program.grantor or the grantor’s spouse.through an employment agency, and the fee is
Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if thepaid by your employer, the fee is not includible in Foreign currency transactions.If you havegrantor has a reversionary interest valued (atyour income if you are not liable for it. However, a gain on a personal foreign currency transac-the date of transfer) at more than 5% of theif you pay it and your employer reimburses you tion because of changes in exchange rates, youvalue of the transferred property.for it, it is includible in your income. do not have to include that gain in your income
unless it is more than $200. If the gain is moreEnergy conservation subsidies. You can Expenses paid by another.If your personal
exclude from gross income any subsidy pro- expenses are paid for by another person, such than $200, report it as a capital gain.
Page 28

Page 29 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Foster-care providers.Payments you re- Lotteries and raffles.Winnings from lotter- the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest
ceive from a state, political subdivision, or a ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-earned on the payments, including interest
qualified foster care placement agency for pro- tion to cash winnings, you must include in your earned on amounts held in certain escrow ac-
viding care to qualified foster individuals in your income the fair market value of bonds, cars, counts or funds, are not taxable. You also do not
home generally are not included in your income. houses, and other noncash prizes. However, the include them in any computations in which you
However, you must include in your income pay- difference between the fair market value and the would ordinarily add excludable income to your
ments received for the care of more than 5 cost of an oil and gas lease obtained from the adjusted gross income, such as the computation
individuals age 19 or older and certain government through a lottery is not includible in to determine the taxable part of social security
difficulty-of-care payments. income. benefits. If the payments are made in property,
A qualified foster individual is a person who: your basis in the property is its fair market valueInstallment payments. Generally, if youwhen you receive it.win a state lottery prize payable in installments,1. Is living in a foster family home, and Excludable restitution payments are pay-you must include in your gross income the an-ments or distributions made by any country or2. Was placed there by: nual payments and any amounts you receiveany other entity because of persecution of andesignated as interest on the unpaid install-a. An agency of a state or one of its politi- individual on the basis of race, religion, physicalments. If you sell future lottery payments for acal subdivisions, or or mental disability, or sexual orientation by Nazilump sum, you must report the amount you re-Germany, any other Axis regime, or any otherb. A qualified foster care placement ceive from the sale as ordinary income (FormNazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whetheragency. 1040, line 21) in the year you receive it.the payments are made under a law or as a
Form W-2G. You may have received a result of a legal action. They include compensa-
Difficulty-of-care payments.These are Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show-tion or reparation for property losses resulting
additional payments that are designated by theing the amount of your gambling winnings andfrom Nazi persecution, including proceeds
payer as compensation for providing the addi-any tax taken out of them. Include the amountunder insurance policies issued before and dur-
tional care that is required for physically, men-from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include theing World War II by European insurance compa-
tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified fosteramount shown in box 2 on Form 1040, line 63,nies.
individuals. A state must determine that the ad-as federal income tax withheld. Illegal income.Illegal income, such as moneyditional compensation is needed, and the care from dealing illegal drugs, must be included inGifts and inheritances.Generally, propertyfor which the payments are made must be pro- your income on Form 1040, line 21, or onyou receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance isvided in your home. Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) ifnot included in your income. However, if prop-You must include in your income from your self-employment activity.erty you receive this way later produces incomedifficulty-of-care payments received for more
such as interest, dividends, or rents, that incomethan: Indian fishing rights.If you are a member ofis taxable to you. If property is given to a trusta qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights• 10 qualified foster individuals under ageand the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of19, or tributed to you, that income is also taxable toCongress as of March 17, 1988, do not includeyou. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or in your income amounts you receive from activi-income from the property, that income is taxableolder. ties related to those fishing rights. The income isto you. not subject to income tax, self-employment tax,
Maintaining space in home.If you are paid or employment taxes.Inherited pension or IRA.If you inherited a
to maintain space in your home for emergencypension or an individual retirement arrangementInterest on frozen deposits.In general, youfoster care, you must include the payment in(IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-exclude from your income the amount of interestyour income. ited amount in your income. See Survivors and earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is frozenBeneficiaries in Publication 575 if you inherited aReporting taxable payments. If you re- if, at the end of the calendar year, you cannotpension. See What If You Inherit an IRA inceive payments that you must include in your withdraw any part of the deposit because:Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-income, you are in business as a foster-care
ments (IRAs), if you inherited an IRA. • The financial institution is bankrupt or in-provider and you are self-employed. Report the
solvent, orpayments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ Expected inheritance.If you sell an inter-
(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Businessest in an expected inheritance from a living per-• The state where the institution is locatedUse of Your Home (Including Use by Daycareson, include the entire amount you receive inhas placed limits on withdrawals becauseProviders), to help you determine the amountgross income on Form 1040, line 21. other financial institutions in the state areyou can deduct for the use of your home. bankrupt or insolvent.Bequest for services.If you receive cash
Found property. If you find and keep propertyor other property as a bequest for services youExcludable amount. The amount of inter-that does not belong to you that has been lost orperformed while the decedent was alive, theest you exclude from income for the year is theabandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to youvalue is taxable compensation. interest that was credited on the frozen depositat its fair market value in the first year it is your
for that tax year minus the sum of:Historic preservation grants.Do not includeundisputed possession.
in your income any payment you receive under1. The net amount withdrawn from the de-Free tour. If you received a free tour from athe National Historic Preservation Act to pre-posit during that year, andtravel agency for organizing a group of tourists,serve a historically significant property.you must include its value in your income. Re- 2. The amount that could have been with-port the fair market value of the tour on FormHobby losses. Losses from a hobby are not drawn at the end of that tax year (not re-1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade ordeductible from other income. A hobby is an duced by any penalty for prematurebusiness of organizing tours. You cannot deductactivity from which you do not expect to make awithdrawals of a time deposit).your expenses in serving as the voluntary leaderprofit. See Activity not for profit, earlier under
The excluded part of the interest is included inof the group at the group’s request. If you organ-Other Income.
your income in the tax year it becomes with-ize tours as a trade or business, report the tour’sIf you collect stamps, coins, or otherdrawable.value on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form items as a hobby for recreation and1040). Interest on qualified savings bonds.Youpleasure, and you sell any of the items,CAUTION
!
Gambling winnings. You must include your may be able to exclude from income the interestyour gain is taxable as a capital gain. However, if
gambling winnings in your income on Form from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem ifyou sell items from your collection at a loss, you
1040, line 21. If you itemize your deductions on you pay qualified higher educational expensescannot deduct the loss.
Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam- in the same year. Qualified higher educational
bling losses you had during the year, but only upHolocaust victims restitution.Restitution expenses are those you pay for tuition and re-
to the amount of your winnings. payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (or quired fees at an eligible educational institution
Page 29

Page 30 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for you, your spouse, or your dependent. A qual-Moving expense reimbursements. You gen- c. In the case of an unexpected presenta-
ified U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond tion, you must return the prize or awarderally should not report these benefits on your
issued after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond before using it (or spending, depositing,return. See Publication 521 for more informa-
must have been issued to you when you were 24 investing it, etc., in the case of money)tion.
years of age or older. For more information on and then prepare the statement as de-
this exclusion, see Education Savings Bond scribed in (b).Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in a
Program in chapter 1 of Publication 550. lucky number drawing, television or radio quizd. After the transfer, you should receiveprogram, beauty contest, or other event, you from the payer a written response stat-Interest on state and local government must include it in your income. For example, ifing when and to whom the designatedobligations.This interest is usually exemptyou win a $50 prize in a photography contest, amounts were transferred.from federal tax. However, you must show the
you must report this income on Form 1040, lineamount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed-
21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not includeThese rules do not apply to scholarship oreral income tax return. For more information,
its value in your income. fellowship awards. See Scholarships and fellow-see State or Local Government Obligations in
Prizes and awards in goods or services mustships, later.chapter 1 of Publication 550.
be included in your income at their fair market
Job interview expenses.If a prospective em- Qualified tuition program (QTP).A qualifiedvalue.ployer asks you to appear for an interview and tuition program (also known as a 529 program)
Employee awards or bonuses. Casheither pays you an allowance or reimburses you is a program set up to allow you to either prepay,
awards or bonuses given to you by your em-for your transportation and other travel ex- or contribute to an account established for pay-
ployer for good work or suggestions generallypenses, the amount you receive generally is not ing, a student’s qualified higher education ex-
must be included in your income as wages.taxable. You include in income only the amount penses at an eligible educational institution. A
However, certain noncash employee achieve-you receive that is more than your actual ex- program can be established and maintained by
ment awards can be excluded from income. Seepenses. a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state,
Bonuses and awards under Miscellaneous or an eligible educational institution.Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must beCompensation, earlier. The part of a distribution representing theincluded in your income on Form 1040, line 21. If amount paid or contributed to a QTP is notPrize points.If you are a salesperson andyou must give the pay to your employer because included in income. This is a return of the invest-receive prize points redeemable for merchan-your employer continues to pay your salary ment in the program.dise, that are awarded by a distributor or manu-while you serve on the jury, you can deduct the The beneficiary generally does not include infacturer to employees of dealers, you mustamount turned over to your employer as an income any earnings distributed from a QTPinclude their fair market value in your income.adjustment to income. Include the amount you established and maintained by a state (or anThe prize points are taxable in the year they arerepay your employer on Form 1040, line 35. agency or instrumentality of the state) if the totalpaid or made available to you, rather than in theEnter “Jury Pay” and the amount on the dotted distribution is less than or equal to adjustedyear you redeem them for merchandise.line next to line 35. qualified higher education expenses. See Publi-
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If you cation 970, Tax Benefits for Education, for moreKickbacks. You must include kickbacks, side
were awarded a prize in recognition of accom-information.commissions, push money, or similar payments
plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-you receive in your income on Form 1040, line Railroad retirement annuities.The followingtistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form types of payments are treated as pension orgenerally must include the value of the prize in1040) if from your self-employment activity. annuity income and are taxable under the rulesyour income. However, you do not include thisexplained in Publication 575.prize in your income if you meet all of the follow-Example. You sell cars and help arrange
ing requirements.car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay • Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are
back part of their commissions to you for refer- more than the social security equivalent
1. You were selected without any action onring customers to them. You must include the benefit.
your part to enter the contest or proceed-kickbacks in your income. • Tier 2 benefits.ing.Manufacturer incentive payments. You • Vested dual benefits.2. You are not required to perform substantialmust include as other income on Form 1040, line
future services as a condition for receiving21 (or Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
the prize or award.1040) if you are self-employed) incentive pay- Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing
ments from a manufacturer that you receive as a information, include it in your income.3. The prize or award is transferred by thesalesperson. This is true whether you receivepayer directly to a governmental unit orSale of home. You may be able to excludethe payment directly from the manufacturer ortax-exempt charitable organization as des-from income all or part of any gain from the salethrough your employer. ignated by you. The following conditionsor exchange of a personal residence. See Publi-
apply to the transfer. cation 523.Example. You sell cars for an automobile
dealership and receive incentive payments froma. You cannot use the prize or award Sale of personal items.If you sold an item
the automobile manufacturer every time you sellbefore it is transferred. you owned for personal use, such as a car,
a particular model of car. You report the incen- refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, orb. You should provide the designationtive payments on Form 1040, line 21. silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.before the prize or award is presentedReport it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs and to prevent a disqualifying use. The des-not deduct a loss.Medicare+Choice MSAs). You generally do ignation should contain: However, if you sold an item you held fornot include in income amounts you withdraw
investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,i. The purpose of the designation byfrom your Archer MSA or Medicare+Choice
or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gainmaking a reference to sectionMSA if you use the money to pay for qualified
and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.74(b)(3) of the Internal Revenuemedical expenses. Generally, qualified medical
Code,expenses are those you can deduct on Sched- Example. You sold a painting on an online
ule A (Form 1040). For more information about auction website for $100. You bought the paint-ii. A description of the prize or award,Archer MSAs or Medicare+Choice MSAs, see ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Reportiii. The name and address of the organ-Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and your $80 gain as a capital gain on Schedule Dization to receive the prize or award,Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. (Form 1040).
iv. Your name, address, and taxpayerNote. Any reference in this publication to a Scholarships and fellowships.A candidateidentification number, andMedicare+Choice MSA includes a Medicare Ad- for a degree can exclude amounts received as a
v. Your signature and the date signed.vantage MSA. qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified
Page 30

Page 31 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re- If you received other railroad retirement ben- if you itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form
ceive that is for: efits, see Railroad retirement annuities, earlier. 1040). For more information, get Publication
529, Miscellaneous Deductions.Joint return.If you are married and file a• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend an
joint return, you and your spouse must combineStrike and lockout benefits.Benefits paideducational institution, or
your incomes and your social security and to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-equivalent railroad retirement benefits when fig- including both cash and the fair market value ofquired for courses at the educational insti-uring whether any of your combined benefits are other property, usually are included in your in-tution. taxable. Even if your spouse did not receive any come as compensation. You can exclude these
benefits, you must add your spouse’s income to benefits from your income only when the factsAmounts used for room and board do not qualify
yours when figuring if any of your benefits are clearly show that the union intended them asfor the exclusion. See Publication 970 for more
taxable. gifts to you.information on qualified scholarships and fellow-
ship grants. Reimbursed union convention expenses.Taxable amount. Use the worksheet in the
If you are a delegate of your local union chapterForm 1040 or Form 1040A instruction packagePayment for services.Generally, you must
and you attend the annual convention of theto determine the amount of your benefits toinclude in income the part of any scholarship or
international union, do not include in your in-include in your income. Publication 915 also hasfellowship that represents payment for past,
come amounts you receive from the interna-worksheets you can use. However, you mustpresent, or future teaching, research, or other
tional union to reimburse you for expenses ofuse the worksheets in Publication 915 if any ofservices. This applies even if all candidates for a
traveling away from home to attend the conven-the following situations apply.degree must perform the services to receive the
tion. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex-degree. • You received a lump-sum benefit paymentpenses, even if you are reimbursed in a laterDo not include in income the part of any during the year that is for one or moreyear. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, youscholarship or fellowship representing paymentearlier years. must include that reimbursement in your in-for teaching, research, or other services if you
come.• You exclude employer-provided adoptionreceive the amount under the National Health
benefits or interest from qualified U.S. sav-Service Corps Scholarship Program or the
Utility rebates.If you are a customer of anings bonds.Armed Forces Health Professions Scholarship
electric utility company and you participate in theand Financial Assistance Program. • You take the foreign earned income exclu-utility’s energy conservation program, you mayFor information about the rules that apply tosion, the foreign housing exclusion or de-receive on your monthly electric bill either:a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided toduction, the exclusion of income from U.S.employees and their families by an educational • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-possessions, or the exclusion of incomeinstitution, see Publication 970. tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), orfrom Puerto Rico by bona fide residents of
Puerto Rico.VA payments. Allowances paid by the De- • A nonrefundable credit against the
partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in purchase price of the electricity.Benefits may affect your IRA deduction.your income. These allowances are not consid- The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-You must use the special worksheets in appen-ered scholarship or fellowship grants. able credit is not included in your income.dix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxable
Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestbenefits and your IRA deduction if all of the
are not scholarships or fellowships if you do notfollowing conditions apply.
have to use the prizes for educational purposes.
• You receive social security or equivalentYou must include these amounts in your income Repaymentsrailroad retirement benefits.on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you use
the amounts for educational purposes. If you had to repay an amount that you included• You have taxable compensation.
in your income in an earlier year, you may be• You contribute to your IRA.Social security and equivalent railroad re- able to deduct the amount repaid from yourtirement benefits. Social security or • You or your spouse is covered by a retire- income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, ifequivalent railroad retirement benefits, if tax-ment plan at work. the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, youable, must be included in the income of the may be able to take a credit against your tax forperson who has the legal right to receive theHow to report. If any of your benefits arethe year in which you repaid it. Generally, youbenefits. Whether any of your benefits are tax-taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or Formcan claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-able, and the amount that is taxable, depends on1040A to report the taxable part. You cannot usement qualifies as an expense or loss incurred inthe amount of the benefits and your other in-Form 1040EZ. Report your net benefits (theyour trade or business or in a for-profit transac-come. amount in box 5 of your Forms SSA-1099 andtion.Social security benefits include any monthlyRRB-1099) on line 20a of Form 1040 or line 14abenefit under Title II of the Social Security Act Type of deduction.The type of deduction youof Form 1040A. Report the taxable part (from theand any part of a tier I railroad retirement benefit are allowed in the year of repayment dependslast line of the worksheet) on line 20b of Formtreated as a social security benefit. Social secur- on the type of income you included in the earlier1040 or on line 14b of Form 1040A.ity benefits do not include any supplemental year. You generally deduct the repayment on
Stolen property.If you steal property, yousecurity income (SSI) payments. the same form or schedule on which you previ-
must report its fair market value in your incomeously reported it as income. For example, if youForm SSA-1099. If you received social se-in the year you steal it unless in the same year,reported it as self-employment income, deduct itcurity benefits during the year, you will receiveyou return it to its rightful owner. as a business expense on Schedule C or Sched-Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State-
ule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Formment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed withTransporting school children.Do not in-
1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deductyour Form SSA-1099. This notice includes aclude in your income a school board mileage
it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). Ifworksheet you can use to figure whether any ofallowance for taking children to and from school
you reported it as wages, unemployment com-your benefits are taxable. if you are not in the business of taking children to
pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deductschool. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-For an explanation of the information found
it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction oning this transportation.on your Form SSA-1099, see Publication 915.
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Form RRB-1099. If you received equivalentUnion benefits and dues.Amounts deducted If you repaid social security or equivalent
railroad retirement or special guaranty benefitsfrom your pay for union dues, assessments,railroad retirement benefits, see Publication
during the year, you will receive Form contributions, or other payments to a union can-915.
RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire-not be excluded from your income.
ment Board. You may be able to deduct some of theseRepayment of $3,000 or less.If the amount
For an explanation of the information found payments as a miscellaneous deduction subject you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from
on your Form RRB-1099, see Publication 915. to the 2% limit if they are related to your job and your income in the year you repaid it. If you must
Page 31

Page 32 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction, • Check the status of your 2004 refund.• Deductions for bad debts,enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22. Click on Where’s My Refund. Be sure to
• Deductions from sales to customers, such wait at least 6 weeks from the date you
Repayment over $3,000. If the amount you as returns and allowances, and similar filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-
repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct items, or tronically). Have your 2004 tax return
the repayment (as explained earlier under Type available because you will need to know• Deductions for legal and other expensesof deduction). However, you can choose instead your filing status and the exact whole dol-of contesting the repayment.to take a tax credit for the year of repayment if lar amount of your refund.
you included the income under a claim of right. • Download forms, instructions, and publica-This means that at the time you included theYear of deduction (or credit).If you use the tions.income, it appeared that you had an unrestrictedcash method, you can take the deduction (or
right to it. If you qualify for this choice, figure yourcredit, if applicable) for the tax year in which you• Order IRS products online.
tax under both methods and compare the re-actually make the repayment. If you use any• Research your tax questions online.sults. Use the method (deduction or credit) thatother accounting method, you can deduct the
results in less tax. repayment or claim a credit for it only for the tax• Search publications online by topic or
year in which it is a proper deduction under yourkeyword.Method 1. Figure your tax for 2004 claimingaccounting method. For example, if you use ana deduction for the repaid amount. If you must • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)accrual method, you are entitled to the deduc-deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction, published in the last few years.tion or credit in the tax year in which the obliga-enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27.tion for the repayment accrues. • Figure your withholding allowances using
Method 2. Figure your tax for 2004 claiming our Form W-4 calculator.
a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these • Sign up to receive local and national taxsteps. news by email.How To Get Tax Help
1. Figure your tax for 2004 without deducting • Get information on starting and operating
the repaid amount. a small business.You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year
tions, and get more information from the IRS inwithout including in income the amount
several ways. By selecting the method that is Fax. You can get over 100 of the mostyou repaid in 2004.
best for you, you will have quick and easy ac- requested forms and instructions 243. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax showncess to tax help. hours a day, 7 days a week, by fax.on your return for the earlier year. This is Just call 703-368-9694 from the telephone con-Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If youthe credit. nected to your fax machine. When you call, youhave attempted to deal with an IRS problemwill hear instructions on how to use the service.4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forunsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-The items you request will be faxed to you.2004 figured without the deduction (steppayer Advocate.
1). For help with transmission problems, callThe Taxpayer Advocate independently rep-
703-487-4608.resents your interests and concerns within theIf method 1 results in less tax, deduct the Long-distance charges may apply.IRS by protecting your rights and resolvingamount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,
problems that have not been fixed through nor-claim the credit for the amount figured in (4) Phone. Many services are available bymal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-above on Form 1040, line 69, and enter “I.R.C. phone.not change the tax law or make a technical tax1341” next to line 69.
decision, they can clear up problems that re-
sulted from previous contacts and ensure that• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-Example. For 2003 you filed a return and
your case is given a complete and impartial tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to orderreported your income on the cash method. In
review. current-year forms, instructions, and publi-2004 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2003
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate: cations and prior-year forms and instruc-income under a claim of right. Your filing status
tions. You should receive your order withinin 2004 and 2003 is single. Your income and tax• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at 10 days.for both years are as follows: 1-877-777-4778.2003 • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate With Income  Without Income your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.office in your area.Taxable
Income $15,000 $10,000 • Solving problems. You can get• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a face-to-face help solving tax problemsTax $ 1,904 $ 1,154 TTY/TDD user. every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-
• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. sistance Centers. An employee can ex-2004
plain IRS letters, request adjustments toWithout Deduction With Deduction
For more information, see Publication 1546,your account, or help you set up a pay-Taxable
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS— ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-Income $49,950 $44,950
How To Get Help With Unresolved Tax tance Center for an appointment. To findTax $ 9,231 $ 7,981 Problems. the number, go to
www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in theYour tax under method 1 is $7,981. Your taxFree tax services.To find out what services phone book under United States Govern-under method 2 is $8,481, figured as follows:are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide toment, Internal Revenue Service.Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free taxTax previously determined for 2003 $1,904publications and an index of tax topics. It also• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessLess: Tax as refigured.......... − 1,154 describes other free tax information services, to TTY/TDD equipment, callDecrease in 2003 tax $ 750 including tax education and assistance pro- 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toRegular tax liability for 2004....... $9,231 grams and a list of TeleTax topics. order forms and publications.Less: Decrease in 2003 tax....... − 750
Refigured tax for 2004 $8,481 Internet. You can access the IRS web- • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 and
site 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, at press 2 to listen to pre-recordedYou pay less tax using method 1, so you should www.irs.gov to: messages covering various tax topics.take a deduction for the repayment in 2004.
• E-file your return. Find out about commer-• Refund information. If you would like to
Repayment rules do not apply.This discus- cial tax preparation and e-file services check the status of your 2004 refund, call
sion does not apply to: available free to eligible taxpayers. 1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for auto-
Page 32

Page 33 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
mated refund information or call with a tax problem. An employee can ex- CD-ROM for tax products. You can
1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6 plain IRS letters, request adjustments to order Publication 1796, IRS Federal
weeks from the date you filed your return your account, or help you set up a pay- Tax Products CD-ROM, and obtain:
(3 weeks if you filed electronically). Have ment plan. You can set up an appointment• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-your 2004 tax return available because by calling your local Center and, at the lications.you will need to know your filing status prompt, leaving a message requesting
and the exact whole dollar amount of your Everyday Tax Solutions help. A represen-• Prior-year forms and instructions.
refund. tative will call you back within 2 business • Frequently requested tax forms that maydays to schedule an in-person appoint- be filled in electronically, printed out forment at your convenience. To find theEvaluating the quality of our telephone serv- submission, or saved for recordkeeping.number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontactsices. To ensure that IRS representatives give or look in the phone book under United • Internal Revenue Bulletins.accurate, courteous, and professional answers,States Government, Internal Revenuewe use several methods to evaluate the qualityService. Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical In-of our telephone services. One method is for a formation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/second IRS representative to sometimes listen cdorders for $22 (no handling fee) or callMail. You can send your order forin on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the CD-ROM forforms, instructions, and publications tosome callers to complete a short survey at the
$22 (plus a $5 handling fee). The first release isthe Distribution Center nearest to youend of the call.
available in early January and the final release isand receive a response within 10 business days
after your request is received. Use the addressavailable in late February.Walk-in. Many products and servicesthat applies to your part of the country.are available on a walk-in basis. CD-ROM for small businesses. Pub-
• Western part of U.S.: lication 3207, The Small Business Re-
Western Area Distribution Center source Guide, CD-ROM 2004, is a• Products. You can walk in to many post Rancho Cordova, CA 95743-0001 must for every small business owner or anyoffices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up
taxpayer about to start a business. This handy,certain forms, instructions, and publica-• Central part of U.S.:
interactive CD contains all the business taxtions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery Central Area Distribution Center
forms, instructions, and publications needed tostores, copy centers, city and county gov- P.O. Box 8903
successfully manage a business. In addition, theernment offices, credit unions, and office Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
CD provides other helpful information, such assupply stores have a collection of products• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-available to print from a CD-ROM or pho- addresses: ing for your business, and much more. The de-tocopy from reproducible proofs. Also, Eastern Area Distribution Center sign of the CD makes finding information easysome IRS offices and libraries have the P.O. Box 85074Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter- and quick and incorporates file formats andRichmond, VA 23261-5074nal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative browsers that can be run on virtually any
Bulletins available for research purposes. desktop or laptop computer.
It is available in early April. You can get a• Services. You can walk in to your local
free copy by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visit-Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
ing www.irs.gov/smallbiz.ness day to ask tax questions or get help
Page 33

Page 34 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Athletic facilities, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title Depletion allowance ......... 1 4
employer-provided......... 4 VII: Directors’ fees.............. 2 81231 property sale.......... 1 4
Back pay and damages forAutomobile (See Vehicle, Disability:401(k) plans.................. 8
emotional distressemployer-provided) Military.................... 1 3Excess contributions......... 9 under.................... 2 7Awards  (See Prizes and awards) Pensions .................. 1 5403(b) plans.................. 8 Clergy....................... 1 2 Workers’Limit for..................... 8 compensation.......... 1 6Coal ......................... 1 4457 plans..................... 8B Person with................ 2 6Colleges and universities:Limit for deferrals under...... 8 Baby-sitting.................. 3 Unemployment compensation,Faculty lodging.............. 6501(c)(18)(D) plans........... 8 paid as substitute for..... 2 6Back pay, award for.......... 3 Scholarships andContributions................ 8 Disaster relief:fellowships............... 3 0Backup withholding:501(c)(3) organizations...... 1 7 Disaster Relief and EmergencyComments on publication.... 2Barter exchange529 program ................ 3 0 Assistance Act:transactions............. 1 7Commissions:83(b) election................ 1 1 Grants................... 2 6Advance .................... 3Bankruptcy:
UnemploymentCommuter highwayCanceled debt not deemed to benefits............... 2 6vehicles.................... 7be income............... 1 8A Payments .................. 2 6Compensation:Barter income............... 1 6Academic health centers: Discounts:Employee ................... 3Below-market loans......... 2 7Meals and lodging when Employee discounts......... 5Miscellaneous............... 3Bequest for services........ 2 9teaching and research Employee stock purchaseUnemployment ............. 2 5Black lung benefitorganization.............. 6 plans.................... 1 0Workers’................... 1 6payments ................. 1 6Accelerated death Mortgage loan for earlyCompensatory damages ... 1 6 ,Bonuses ..................3 ,  3 0benefits................... 1 8 payment ................. 1 727Breach of contract:Accident insurance........... 4 Dividends:Constructive receipt ofDamages as income........ 2 7 Restricted stock............ 1 1Accidental death benefits.... 5 income ..................... 2Bribes....................... 2 7 Divorced taxpayers:Accrual method taxpayers... 2 Copyrights: Stock options exercised incidentBusiness expenses:Accrued leave payment: Infringement damages...... 2 7 to divorce................ 1 0Reimbursements ............ 3At time of retirement or Royalties.................. 1 4
resignation................ 3Business income.........13-14 Corporate directors......... 2 8Disability retirement and.... 1 5 ECost-of-living allowances.... 3Activity not for profit........ 2 7 Educational assistance:Court awards: (See alsoCAdoption: Employer-provided.......... 5Damages from lawsuits).... 2 7Cafeteria plans.............. 1 5Employer assistance........ 4 Scholarships andCredit card Insurance....... 2 8Campaign contributions..... 2 7Advance commissions ....... 3 fellowships............... 3 0Credits:Campus lodging .............. 6Aircraft....................... 7 Educational institutions:Recoveries, refiguring ofCancellation of debt......... 1 7 Faculty lodging.............. 6Airlines: unused credits........... 2 5Cancellation of sales Elderly persons:No-additional-cost Currency transactions,contracts.................. 2 7 Nutrition Program for theservices.................. 6 foreign.................... 2 8Capital gains or losses: Elderly................... 2 7Valuation of flights on
Employee stock option plans Tax Counseling for theemployer-provided
(ESOPs) ................. 1 1 Elderly................... 1 3aircraft.................... 7 D
Incentive stock options Election precinctAlaska Permanent Fund Damages from lawsuits..... 2 7
(ISOs)................... 1 0 officials................... 2 8dividend .................. 2 7 Back pay awards............ 3
Sale of personal Breach of contract.......... 2 7Elective deferrals............. 8Alien status, waiver of....... 1 3
property................. 3 0Compensatory Catch-up contributions ....... 8Alimony ..................... 2 7
damages ............16, 27 Excess annual additions..... 9Car (See Vehicle,Alternative minimum tax (AMT):
Emotional distress under Title Excess contributions......... 9employer-provided)Recoveries, refiguring of.... 2 5 VII, Civil Rights Act of Excess deferrals ............ 8Car pools ................... 2 7Stock options.............. 1 0 1964 .................... 2 7Increased limit for last 3 yearsCash or deferred arrangementsAnnuities: Punitive damages.......... 2 7 prior to retirement age..... 8(CODAs) ................... 8Charitable gift.............. 2 7 Limit on..................... 8Daycare providers: (See alsoCash rebates................ 2 7Railroad retirement......... 3 0 Reporting by employer....... 8Childcare providers)......... 3Casualty insurance:Tax-sheltered............... 8 Food program payments Emotional distressReimbursements from...... 2 7Archer MSAs ..............4 ,  3 0 t o ....................... 2 8damages .................. 2 8Catch-up contributions....... 8Armed forces................ 1 3 De minimis benefits........4 ,  6Employee achievementCharitable gift annuities..... 2 7Disability................... 1 3 awards ..................... 3Death benefits: (See also LifeChild and Adult Care FoodDisability pensions......... 1 5 insurance)................. 1 8Employee awards orProgram:Military action as cause of Accelerated................ 1 8 bonuses .................. 3 0
Payments to daycaredisability injuries......... 1 5 Debts: Employeeproviders................ 2 8Rehabilitative program Canceled .................. 1 7compensation ...........3-12
Child support payments..... 2 7payments ................ 1 3 Excluded debt.............. 1 8 Fringe benefits............ 4 - 7
Childcare providers.......3 ,  2 8Retirement pay............. 1 3 Nonrecourse debts......... 1 7 Restricted property......11-12
Veterans’ benefits.......... 1 3Chronic illness.............. 1 5 Recourse .................. 1 7Retirement plan
Armed Forces Health Accelerated death benefits paid Stockholder’s.............. 1 7 contributions............ 7 - 9
Professions t o ....................... 1 9 Stock options............9-11Deduction:
Scholarship................ 7Citizens outside U.S.: Costs of discrimination Employee discounts ......... 5
Assistance (See Tax help) suits..................... 2 8Exclusion of foreign Employee stock purchase
Astronauts................... 2 income ................... 2Dependent care benefits..... 4 plans...................... 1 0
Page 34

Page 35 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employer, foreign........... 1 2 Employment ............... 1 2Form 1099-B: Stock options from
employers............... 1 0Barter exchangeGovernments, employeesEmployer-provided educational
transactions............. 1 7 Wage and tax statement..... 3o f ....................... 1 3assistance................. 5
Income ..................... 2Form 1099-C: Form W–2G:Employer-provided
Cancellation of debt........ 1 7Service.................... 1 5 Gambling winnings......... 2 9vehicles.................... 7
Form 1099–DIV:Form 1040: Form W-4V:Employment:
Restricted stockAbroad .................... 1 3 Unemployment compensation,Excess contributions to elective
dividends................ 1 1 voluntary withholdingAgency fees............... 2 8 deferrals.................. 9
request.................. 2 6Contracts: Form 1099–G:Recoveries................ 2 0
Severance pay for State income tax Form W-9:Unemployment
cancellation of.......... 3 refunds.................. 1 9compensation............ 2 5 Request for taxpayer
identification number..... 1 7Endowment proceeds ....... 1 8 Form 1099-G:Wages from Form W–2 ..... 3
Unemployment Foster care.................. 2 9Energy: Form 1040, Schedule A:
compensation............ 2 5Assistance................. 2 7 Foster GrandparentOutplacement services,
Form 1099–MISC:Conservation: Program .................. 1 3deduction for.............. 3
Services totaling $600 orSubsidies................ 2 8 Repayment of commissions Found property ............. 2 9
more .................... 2 8Utility rebates............ 3 1 paid in advance........... 3 Free tax services............ 3 2
Stock options exercised incidentEstate income............... 2 8Form 1040, Schedule B: Fringe benefits............. 4 - 7to divorce................ 1 0Estimated tax: Restricted stock Accident and health
Form 1099-R:Unemployment dividends................ 1 1 insurance................. 4
Charitable gift annuities..... 2 7compensation............ 2 6Form 1040, Schedule C: Adoption, employer
Form 1099–R:Excess: assistance................ 4Bartering................... 1 6
Excess annual additions..... 9Annual additions............ 9 Athletic facilities............. 4Childcare providers to
Excess contributionContributions................ 9 u s e....................... 3 Commuter highway
amounts .................. 9Deferrals.................... 8 vehicles.................. 7Personal property rental,
Form 1099-R:Expected inheritance........ 2 9 De minimis benefits.......4 ,  6reporting income from.... 1 4
Excess deferral amounts..... 9 Dependent care benefits..... 4Expenses paid by Royalties.................. 1 4
Surrender of life insuranceanother ................... 2 8 Educational assistance...... 5Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:
policy for cash........... 1 8 Employee discounts......... 5Bartering................... 1 6
Form 1120-POL: Faculty lodging.............. 6Form 1040, Schedule C–EZ:F Political organizations...... 2 7 Financial counseling fees.... 5Childcare providers toFaculty lodging.............. 6 Form 1120S: Holiday gifts................. 4u s e....................... 3
S corporation return........ 1 4Fair market value (FMV)...... 7 Meals and lodging........... 6Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:Stock options............... 9 Form 1120S, Schedule K-1: Moving expenses (See MovingPersonal property rental,
Shareholder’s share of income,Farming: expenses)reporting income from.... 1 4
credits, deductions,Qualified farm debt, cancellation No-additional-costRoyalties.................. 1 4 etc....................... 1 4o f ....................... 1 8 services.................. 6Form 1040, Schedule D: Form 2441:Federal employees: Parking..................... 7Stock options reported Child and dependent careAccrued leave payment...... 3 Retirement planning (Seeo n....................... 1 0 expenses ................. 4Compensation Act (FECA) Retirement planning services)Form 1040, Schedule E:payments ................ 1 6 Form 4255: Transit pass................. 7Partner’s return............ 1 4Cost-of-living allowances.... 3 Recapture of investment Tuition reduction............ 7Royalties.................. 1 4Disability pensions......... 1 5 credit.................... 2 5Valuation of...............7 ,  7Form 1040A:Thrift Savings Plan for....... 8 Form 6251: Working conditionRecoveries................ 2 0Federal income tax: Alternative minimum tax.... 1 0 benefits................... 7UnemploymentRefunds ................... 1 9 Form 8839: Frozen deposits:compensation............ 2 5Fees for services............ 2 8 Adoption assistance......... 4 Interest on................. 2 9Wages from Form W–2 ..... 3Financial counseling fees.... 5 Form 8853:Form 1040A, Schedule 1:Fellowships................. 3 0 Accelerated deathRestricted stock GFICA withholding: benefits.................. 1 9dividends................ 1 1 Gambling winnings andForeign employers, U.S. Archer MSAs and long-termForm 1040A, Schedule 2: losses..................... 2 9citizens working for in care insuranceChild and dependent care Gas:U.S...................... 1 2 contracts................. 4expenses ................. 4Paid by employer............ 3 Royalties from............. 1 4Form RRB-1099:Form 1040EZ:Fiduciaries: Gifts........................ 2 9Railroad retirement boardRecoveries................ 2 0Fees for services........... 2 8 payments ................ 3 1 Holiday gifts from
Unemployment employer ................. 4Financial counseling fees: (See Form SSA-1099:compensation............ 2 5also Retirement planning Government employees  (SeeSocial security benefitWages from Form W–2 ..... 3services).................... 5 State employees)statement................ 3 1
Form 1041:Fitness programs: Grantor trusts............... 2 8Form W–2:
Estates and trusts.......... 2 8Employer-provided.......... 4 501(c)(18)(D) Group-term life insurance:
Form 1041, Schedule K-1: contributions.............. 8Flights: Worksheets...............5 ,  6
Beneficiary’s share of income, Accrued leave payment at timeEmployer-provided
deductions, credits, of retirement oraircraft.................... 7
etc....................... 2 8 Hresignation................ 3No-additional-cost
Form 1065: Back pay awards............ 3services.................. 6 Health:
Partnership return.......... 1 4 Bonuses or awards.......... 3 Flexible spendingFood benefits:
Form 1065, Schedule K–1: arrangement.............. 4Form W-2:Daycare providers, food
Insurance................... 4Partner’s share ofprogram payments to..... 2 8 Elective deferrals, reporting by
income .................. 1 4 Reimbursementemployer ................. 8Nutrition Program for the
arrangement.............. 4Elderly................... 2 7Form 1098: Form W–2:
Savings account............ 2Foreign: Mortgage interest Fringe benefits reported
Currency transactions...... 2 8 statement................ 1 9 o n........................ 4Help (See Tax help)
Page 35

Page 36 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Highly compensated Interview expenses .......... 3 0Medicare: Pensions:
employees: +Choice MSAs ............. 3 0 Clergy..................... 1 2Investment counseling fees:
Excess contributions to elective Benefits ................... 2 7Disability pensions......... 1 5(See also Retirement planning
deferrals.................. 9 Tax paid by employer........ 3 Inherited pensions.......... 2 9services).................... 5
Military.................... 1 3Historic preservation Medicare tax  (See Social securityInvestment income......13, 14
grants..................... 2 9 and Medicare taxes) Personal property:IRAs (See Individual retirement
Rental income andHobby losses ............... 2 9 Military (See Armed forces)arrangements (IRAs))
expense ................. 1 3Holiday gifts................. 4 Minerals:Iron ore..................... 1 4 Sale of..................... 3 0Royalties from............. 1 4Holocaust victims Itemized deductions: Personal representatives (Seerestitution................. 2 9 Miscellaneous:Limited.................... 2 3 Fiduciaries)Compensation .............. 3Home, sale of............... 3 0 Recoveries................ 1 9
Prepaid income .............. 2Income .................... 1 6Hotels:
Price reduced afterMissing children, photographsNo-additional-cost J purchase .................. 1 8of .......................... 2services.................. 6Job interview expenses..... 3 0 Prizes and awards.........3 ,  3 0More information (See Tax help)Housing (See Lodging) Joint returns: Achievement awards........ 3Mortgage:Social security benefits or Employee awards orAssistance payment........ 2 6railroad retirement bonuses ................. 3 0I Discounted loan............ 1 7payments ................ 3 1 Length-of-service awards.... 3Illegal income............... 2 9 Interest refund............. 1 9
Jury duty pay............... 3 0 Pulitzer, Nobel, and similarRelief...................... 1 7Important changes and
prizes................... 3 0reminders: Motor vehicle, Safety achievement......... 3Astronauts.................. 2 employer-provided......... 7K Scholarship prizes.......... 3 1Elective deferrals............ 2 Moving expenses:Kickbacks ................... 3 0 Profit-sharing plan.......... 1 5Foreign income, reporting Reimbursements .........3 ,  3 0
Public assistanceo f ........................ 2 MSAs (Medical savings benefits................... 2 6LHealth savings accounts..... 2 accounts) ................. 3 0
Smallpox vaccine injuries.... 2 Public Health Service........ 1 5Labor unions:
Terrorist attacks, assistance orConvention expenses, Public safety officers killed inNpayments due to.......... 2 reimbursed.............. 3 1 line of duty................ 2 5
National Health Service CorpsDues ...................... 3 1Incentive stock options Public transportation passes,Scholarship Program ...... 7Strike and lockout(ISOs)..................... 1 0 employer-provided......... 7
National Oceanic andbenefits.................. 3 1Income: Publications (See Tax help)AtmosphericUnemployment benefits paidAssigned ................... 2 Pulitzer prize................ 3 0Administration............ 1 5from..................... 2 6Business and Punitive damages........... 2 7National Senior ServiceLast day of tax year, incomeinvestment...........13, 14
Corps ..................... 1 3received on................ 2Constructive receipt of....... 2
No-additional-costEstate and trust............ 2 8Leave (See Accrued leave Q
services.................... 6Foreign employers......... 1 2 payment) Qualified tuition program
Illegal...................... 2 9 No-fault car insurance:Length-of-service awards.... 3 (QTP) ..................... 3 0
Miscellaneous.............. 1 6 Disability benefits under.... 1 6Life insurance:
Other...................... 2 7 Nobel prize.................. 3 0Proceeds .................. 1 8
Partnership................ 1 4 RSurrender of policy for Nonrecourse debt........... 1 7
Prepaid..................... 2 Raffles...................... 2 9cash..................... 1 8Nonstatutory stockS corporation.............. 1 4 Railroads:Loans: (See also options .................... 9
Indian fishing rights......... 2 9 Retirement annuities........ 3 0Mortgage) ................. 1 7Nontaxable income........... 2
Individual retirement Retirement benefits......... 3 1Below-market.............. 2 7Not-for-profit activities...... 2 7arrangements (IRAs): Sick pay................... 1 6Student.................... 1 7Notary fees.................. 2 8Deduction.................. 3 1 Unemployment compensationLockout benefits............ 3 1Notes received forInherited IRA............... 2 9 benefits.................. 2 5Lodging: services.................... 3Inheritance.................. 2 9 Real estate:Campus lodging............. 6Nutrition Program for theI R A........................ 2 9 Qualified real property businessClergy..................... 1 2Elderly.................... 2 7Property not substantially debt, cancellation of...... 1 8Employer-paid or
vested................... 1 2 Rebates:reimbursed............... 6
OInjury benefits............14-16 Cash ...................... 2 7Faculty lodging.............. 6
Utility...................... 3 1Oil:Insurance: Replacement housing
Royalties from............. 1 4Credit card................. 2 8 Recovery of amountspayments ................ 2 6
Health...................... 4 previously deducted...... 1 9Old-age, survivors, andLong-term care
Life (See Life insurance) Itemized deductions........ 1 9disability insurance benefitsinsurance ...............4 ,  1 5
Long-term care (See Long-term Non-itemized(OASDI) ................... 2 7Lotteries and raffles......... 2 9
care insurance) deductions............... 2 5Options, stock............9 ,  1 1Lump-sum distributions: Unused tax credits, refiguringInterest: Outplacement services....... 3Survivor benefits........... 2 5 o f ....................... 2 5Canceled debt including.... 1 7 Overseas work ............... 2 Worksheet of itemizedFrozen deposits............ 2 9
M deductions............... 2 0Mortgage refunds.......... 1 9
POption on insurance........ 1 8Manufacturer incentive Refunds:
Parking fees:Recovery amounts......... 1 9 payments ................. 3 0 Federal income tax......... 1 9
Employer-paid orSavings bond.............. 2 9 Mortgage interest.......... 1 9Meals:
reimbursed............... 7State and local government State income tax........... 1 9Employer-paid or
obligations............... 3 0 Partner and partnershipreimbursed............... 6 Rehabilitative program
income .................... 1 4Interference with business Nutrition Program for the payments ................. 1 3
operations: Elderly................... 2 7Patents: Reimbursements:
Damages as income........ 2 7 Infringement damages...... 2 7Medical: Business expenses.......... 3
Royalties.................. 1 4International organizations, Care reimbursements....... 1 6 Casualty losses............ 2 7
employees of ............. 1 2 Savings accounts.......... 3 0Peace Corps ................ 1 3 Meals and lodging........... 6
Page 36

Page 37 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reimbursements: (Cont.) Service Corps of Retired TU
Medical expenses.......... 1 6 Executives (SCORE) ...... 1 3Tables and figures: Unemployment
Moving expenses........3 ,  3 0Severance pay ............... 3 Group-term life insurance compensation ............. 2 5
Related party transactions: Outplacement services...... 3 (Table 1)................. 5Unions (See Labor unions)
Stock option transfer........ 1 0 Standard deduction (TablesSick pay...................... 3 Unlawful discrimination suits:
2-4)..................... 2 2Religious order Sickness and injury Deduction for costs......... 2 8
members .................. 1 2 Tax benefit rule............. 1 9benefits...............14, 16
Rental income and expenses: Tax Counseling for theSIMPLE plans ................ 8 VPersonal property rental.... 1 3 Elderly.................... 1 3Limit for deferrals under...... 8 VA payments ................ 3 1Reporting of................ 1 4 Tax help..................... 3 2Social security and Medicare Valuation:Repayments ..............31-32 taxes: Tax-sheltered annuity plans Fringe benefits.............. 7Repossession ............... 2 7 Foreign employers, U.S. (403(b) plans).............. 8 Stock options............... 9citizens working for in Limit for..................... 8Restricted property......11, 12 Vehicle:U.S...................... 1 2Taxpayer Advocate.......... 3 2Retired Senior Volunteer Commuter highway.......... 7Paid by employer............ 3Program (RSVP) ........... 1 3 Terminal illness............. 1 8 Employer-provided.......... 7Social security benefits..... 3 1Retirement planning Terrorist attacks: Veterans’ benefits........... 1 3Standard deduction:services..................5 ,  6 Disability payments for injuriesDisability compensation..... 1 5Recoveries and............ 2 2 from..................... 1 5Retirement plans: (See also Viatical settlements......... 1 8Tables (2003-2001)...... 2 2 Victims of, tax relief.......... 2Pensions).................. 1 3 Volunteer work.............. 1 3State employees:Contributions..............7 ,  9 Thrift Savings Plan........... 8 Tax counseling (VolunteerUnemployment benefits paidElective deferrals (See Elective Title VII, Civil Rights Act of Income Tax Assistancet o ....................... 2 6deferrals) 1964: Program) ................ 1 3State or local governments:Rewards .................... 3 0 Back pay and damages for Volunteers in Service toInterest on obligations of.... 3 0 emotional distressRoyalties.................... 1 4 America (VISTA).......... 1 3State or local income taxes: under.................... 2 7
Refunds ................... 1 9Tour guides, free toursS WStock appreciation rights..... 4 for ........................ 2 9S corporations.............. 1 4 W-2 form (See Form W-2)Stock options.............9 ,  1 1Trade Act of 1974:Safety achievement Welfare benefits............. 2 6Trade readjustment allowancesStockholder debts........... 1 7awards ..................... 3 under.................... 2 6Winter energy payments.... 2 7Stolen property............. 3 1Salary reduction simplified Transferable property....... 1 1Withholding:Strike benefits............... 3 1employee pension plans (See Barter exchangeTransit passes............... 7Student loans:SARSEPs) transactions............. 1 7Travel agencies:Cancellation of debt........ 1 7Sale of home................ 3 0 UnemploymentFree tour to organizer of groupSubstantial risk ofSales contracts: compensation............ 2 6of tourists................ 2 9forfeiture.................. 1 1Cancellation of............. 2 7 Work-training programs..... 2 6Travel and transportationSubstantially vestedSARSEPs .................... 8 Workers’ compensation..... 1 6expenses:property................... 1 1Excess contributions......... 9 Free tours from travel Working conditionSuggestions forSavings bonds .............. 2 9 agencies ................ 2 9 benefits.................... 7publication................. 2Savings incentive match plans Fringe benefits.............. 7Worksheets:Supplemental security incomefor employees (See SIMPLE Reimbursements ............ 3 Group-term life insurance(SSI) payments............ 3 1plans) School children, transporting (Worksheet 1)...........5 ,  6Supplemental unemploymentScholarships and o f ....................... 3 1Recoveries of itemizedbenefits................... 2 6fellowships................ 3 0 Trusts: deductions (WorksheetSurviving spouse:Self-employed persons: Grantor trusts.............. 2 8 2 ) ....................... 2 0Life insurance proceeds paidU.S. citizens working for foreign Income .................... 2 8t o ....................... 1 8 ■employers in U.S. treated TTY/TDD information........ 3 2Survivor benefits............ 2 5a s....................... 1 2 Tuition program, qualified
Senior Companion (QTP) ..................... 3 0
Program .................. 1 3 Tuition reduction............. 7
Page 37

Page 38 of 38 of Publication 525 14:14 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2005
Highlights of 2004 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service—How
to Get Help With Unresolved Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465 14842
Page 38