Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P535.sgm ( 1-Nov-2001) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535 ContentsCat. No. 15065Z
Introduction ..................... 1Department
of the
Important Changes for 2001 ......... 2BusinessTreasury
Internal Important Changes for 2002 ......... 2
Revenue Expenses
Service Important Reminders .............. 2
1. Deducting Business
Expenses ................... 2For use in preparing
2. Employees’ Pay ............... 6
2001 Returns 3. Retirement Plans .............. 8
4. Rent Expense ................. 13
5. Interest ..................... 15
6. Taxes ...................... 21
7. Insurance ................... 23
8. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize ................... 25
9. Amortization ................. 30
10. Depletion .................... 37
11. Business Bad Debts ............ 42
12. Electric and Clean-Fuel
Vehicles .................... 44
13. Other Expenses ............... 48
14. How To Get Tax Help ........... 55
Index .......................... 56
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web site
at www.irs.gov.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications Branch
W:CAR:MP:FP:P
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.

Page 2 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
Important Changes Important Reminders Form (and Instructions)
for 2001 Photographs of missing children. The Inter- ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theThe following items highlight some changes in ❏ 5213 Election To PostponeNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-the tax law for 2001. Determination as To Whether thedren. Photographs of missing children selected Presumption Applies That anby the Center may appear in this publication onStandard mileage rate. The standard mile- Activity Is Engaged in for Profitpages that would otherwise be blank. You canage rate for the cost of operating your car, van,
help bring these children home by looking at thepickup, or panel truck in 2001 is 34 1/2 cents a See chapter 14 for information about gettingphotographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOSTmile for all business miles. See chapter 13. publications and forms.(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child.
Marginal production of oil and gas. The
suspension of the taxable income limit on per-
centage depletion from the marginal production
What Can I Deduct?of oil and natural gas scheduled to expire for tax
years beginning after 1999 has been extended
To be deductible, a business expense must beto tax years beginning before 2002. For more
both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex-1.information on marginal production, see section
pense is one that is common and accepted in613A(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
your trade or business. A necessary expense is
Third party designee. Beginning with your one that is helpful and appropriate for your trade
tax return for 2001, you can check the “Yes” box or business. An expense does not have to beDeducting
in the “Third Party Designee” area of your return indispensable to be considered necessary.
to authorize the IRS to discuss your return with a It is important to separate business ex-
Businessfriend, family member, or any other person you penses from the following expenses.
choose. This allows the IRS to call the person • The expenses used to figure the cost ofyou identified as your designee to ask any ques- Expenses goods sold.tions that may arise during the processing of
your return. It also allows your designee to per- • Capital expenses.
form certain actions. See your income tax pack- • Personal expenses.age for details. Introduction
This chapter covers the general rules for deduct- If you have an expense that is partly foring business expenses. Business expenses are business and partly personal, separatethe costs of carrying on a trade or business. the personal part from the businessImportant Changes
TIP
These expenses are usually deductible if the part.business is operated to make a profit.for 2002
Topics Cost of Goods SoldThe following items highlight some changes in
This chapter discusses:the tax law for 2002. If your business manufactures products or
purchases them for resale, some of your ex-Health insurance deduction for the self-em- • What you can deduct
penses may be included in figuring cost of goodsployed. For 2002, this deduction is 70% of the • How much you can deduct sold. You deduct cost of goods sold from youramount you pay for health insurance for yourself
gross receipts to figure your gross profit for theand your family. See chapter 7. • When to deduct
year. You must maintain inventories to be able• Not-for-profit activitiesMeal expense deduction subject to “hours of to determine your cost of goods sold. If you use
service” limits. In 2002, this deduction in- an expense to figure the cost of goods sold, you
creases to 65% of the reimbursed meals your cannot deduct it again as a business expense.Useful Itemsemployees consume while they are subject to The following are types of expenses that goYou may want to see:the Department of Transportation’s “hours of into figuring cost of goods sold.
service” limits. See chapter 13. Publication • The cost of products or raw materials in
your inventory, including the cost of havingRetirement plans. Many changes to the tax ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business them shipped to you.laws for retirement plans were made by the
Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car • The cost of storing the products you sell.Act of 2001 that was enacted on June 7, 2001. Expenses
• Direct labor costs (including contributionsHowever, most of those changes do not take ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income to pension or annuity plans) for workerseffect until after December 31, 2001, and are not
who produce the products.covered in this publication. For information ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
about those changes, see Publication 560, Re- • Factory overhead expenses.❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) fortirement Plans for Small Business, or Publica- Individuals, Estates, and Truststion 553, Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes. Under the uniform capitalization rules, you❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods must capitalize the direct costs and part of theMaximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction.
indirect costs for production or resale activities.❏ 542 CorporationsThe maximum deduction clean-fuel vehicle and
Indirect costs include rent, interest, taxes, stor-qualified electric vehicle credit limit are lower for ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts age, purchasing, processing, repackaging, han-2002 than they were for 2001. They will be
dling, and administrative costs. This rule does❏ 587 Business Use of Your Homecompletely phased out by 2005. See chapter 12.
not apply to personal property you acquire for(Including Use by Day-Care
resale if your average annual gross receipts (orProviders)
those of your predecessor) for the preceding 3❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules tax years are not more than $10 million.
❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest For more information, see the following
Deduction sources.
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ful, you may be able to deduct all investigatory cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-• Cost of goods sold— chapter 6 of Publica- costs as a loss. crete one are capital expenses you may be abletion 334. The costs of any assets acquired during your to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a private
• Inventories— Publication 538. unsuccessful attempt to go into business are a road on your business property is a deductible
part of your basis in the assets. You cannot take expense.• Uniform capitalization rules— section a deduction for these costs. You will recover the263A of the Internal Revenue Code and Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rulescosts of these assets when you dispose of them.the related regulations. apply, amounts spent for tools used in your
business are deductible expenses if the tools
have a life expectancy of less than 1 year.
Business AssetsCapital Expenses
Machinery parts. Unless the uniform capitali-The cost of any asset you use in your businessYou must capitalize, rather than deduct, some zation rules apply, the cost of replacingis a capital expense. There are many differentcosts. These costs are a part of your investment short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in goodkinds of business assets, such as land, build-in your business and are called “capital ex- working condition and not add to its life is aings, machinery, furniture, trucks, patents, andpenses.” There are, in general, three types of deductible expense.franchise rights. You must capitalize the full costcosts you capitalize. of the asset, including freight and installation Heating equipment. The cost of changingcharges.1) Going into business. from one heating system to another is a capitalIf you produce certain property for use in expense.2) Business assets. your trade or business, capitalize the production
costs under the uniform capitalization rules. See3) Improvements. Personal Expensessection 1.263A– 2 of the regulations for informa-
tion on those rules.Recovery. Although you generally cannot Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, or
take a current deduction for a capital expense, family expenses. However, if you have an ex-
you may be able to take deductions for the pense for something that is used partly for busi-Improvements
ness and partly for personal purposes, divideamount you spend through depreciation, amorti-
the total cost between the business and per-zation, or depletion. These allow you to deduct The costs of making improvements to a busi-
sonal parts. You can deduct as a business ex-part of your cost each year over a number of ness asset are capital expenses if the improve-
pense only the business part.years. In this way you are able to “recover” your ments add to the value of the asset, appreciably
For example, if you borrow money and uselengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to acapital expense. See Amortization (chapter 9)
70% of it for business and the other 30% for adifferent use. You can deduct repairs that keepand Depletion (chapter 10) in this publication.
family vacation, generally you can deduct as ayour property in a normal efficient operating con-For information on depreciation, see Publication
business expense only 70% of the interest youdition as a business expense.946.
pay on the loan. The remaining 30% is personalImprovements include new electric wiring, a
interest that is not deductible. See chapter 5 fornew roof, a new floor, new plumbing, bricking up
information on deducting interest and the alloca-Going Into Business windows to strengthen a wall, and lighting im-
tion rules.provements.
The costs of getting started in business, before
Restoration plan. Capitalize the cost of re- Business use of your home. If you use partyou actually begin business operations, are cap-
conditioning, improving, or altering your prop- of your home for business, you may be able toital expenses. These costs may include ex-
erty as part of a general restoration plan to make deduct expenses for the business use of yourpenses for advertising, travel, or wages for
it suitable for your business. This applies even if home. These expenses may include mortgagetraining employees.
some of the work would by itself be classified as interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre-
repairs.If you go into business. When you go into ciation.
business, treat all costs you had to get your To qualify to claim expenses for the businessReplacements. You cannot deduct the cost of
business started as capital expenses. use of your home, you must meet the followinga replacement that stops deterioration and adds
tests.Usually you recover costs for a particular to the life of your property. Capitalize that cost
asset through depreciation. Generally, you can- and depreciate it. 1) The business part of your home must benot recover other costs until you sell the busi- Treat as repairs amounts paid to replace used exclusively and regularly for yourness or otherwise go out of business. However, parts of a machine that only keep it in a normal trade or business.you can choose to amortize certain costs for operating condition. However, if your equipment
setting up your business. See Going Into Busi- 2) The business part of your home must behas a major overhaul, capitalize and depreciate
ness in chapter 9 for more information on busi- one of the following.the expense.
ness start-up costs.
a) Your principal place of business.
If you do not go into business. If you are an Capital or Deductible Expenses b) A place where you meet or deal withindividual and your attempt to go into business is patients, clients, or customers in theTo help you distinguish between capital andnot successful, the expenses you had in trying to normal course of your trade or busi-deductible expenses, several different items areestablish yourself in business fall into two cate- ness.discussed below.gories.
c) A separate structure (not attached toBusiness motor vehicles. You usually capi-1) The costs you had before making a deci- your home) you use in connection withtalize the cost of a motor vehicle you buy to usesion to acquire or begin a specific busi- your trade or business.in your business. You can recover its costness. These costs are personal and through annual deductions for depreciation.nondeductible. They include any costs in- You generally do not have to meet the exclu-There are dollar limits on the depreciationcurred during a general search for, or pre- sive use test for the part of your home that youyou can claim each year on passenger automo-liminary investigation of, a business or regularly use in either of the following ways.biles used in your business. See Publicationinvestment possibility. 463. • For the storage of inventory or product
2) The costs you had in your attempt to ac- Repairs you make to your business vehicle samples.
quire or begin a specific business. These are deductible expenses. However, amounts • As a day-care facility.costs are capital expenses and you can you pay to recondition and overhaul a business
deduct them as a capital loss. vehicle are capital expenses. Your home office qualifies as your principal
If you are a corporation and your attempt to Roads and driveways. The costs of building place of business if you meet the following re-
go into a new trade or business is not success- a private road on your business property and the quirements.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
included in the cost of goods sold, do not deduct• You use the office exclusively and regu- 1) The all-events test has been met. The testthem as a business expense.larly for administrative or management ac- is met when:
tivities of your trade or business. Limits on losses. If your deductions for an
a) All events have occurred that fix theinvestment or business activity are more than• You have no other fixed location where fact of liability, andthe income it brings in, you have a net loss.you conduct substantial administrative or There may be limits on how much, if any, of the b) The liability can be determined withmanagement activities of your trade or loss you can use to offset income from other reasonable accuracy.business. sources.
2) Economic performance has occurred.For more information, see Publication 587. Not-for-profit limits. If you do not carry on
your business activity with the intention of mak-
Business use of your car. If you use your car Economic performance. You generallying a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offset
in your business, you can deduct car expenses. cannot deduct or capitalize a business expenseother income. See Not-for-Profit Activities, later.
If you use your car for both business and per- until economic performance occurs. If your ex-At-risk limits. Generally, a deductible losssonal purposes, you must divide your expenses pense is for property or services provided to you,from a trade or business or other income-pro-based on mileage. Only your expenses for the or for your use of property, economic perform-ducing activity is limited to the investment youmiles you drove the car for business are deducti- ance occurs as the property or services arehave “at risk” in the activity. You are “at risk” inble as business expenses. provided, or the property is used. If your ex-any activity for the following items.You can deduct actual car expenses, which pense is for property or services you provide to
include depreciation (or lease payments), gas others, economic performance occurs as you1) The money and adjusted basis of propertyand oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, and provide the property or services.you contribute to the activity.registration fees. Instead of figuring the busi-
2) Amounts you borrow for use in the activity Example. Your tax year is the calendarness part of these actual expenses, you may be
if: year. In December 2001, the Field Plumbingable to use the standard mileage rate to figure
Company did some repair work at your place ofyour deduction. For 2001, the standard mileage a) You are personally liable for repay- business and sent you a bill for $150. You paid itrate is 34 1/2 cents a mile for all business miles ment, or by check in January 2002. If you use an accrualdriven.
method of accounting, deduct the $150 on yourb) You pledge property (other than prop-If you are self-employed, you can also de-
tax return for 2001 because all events occurrederty used in the activity) as security forduct the business part of interest on your car
to fix the fact of liability and economic perform-the loan.loan, state and local personal property tax on the
ance occurred in that year. If you use the cashcar, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not you
method of accounting, you can deduct the ex-For more information, see Publication 925.claim the standard mileage rate. You can use
pense on your 2002 return.the nonbusiness part of the personal property Passive activities. Generally, you are in atax to determine your deduction for taxes on passive activity if you have a trade or business Prepayment. You generally cannot deductSchedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize your activity in which you do not materially participate expenses in advance, even if you pay them indeductions. during the year, or a rental activity. In general, advance. This rule applies to both the cash andFor more information on car expenses and deductions for losses from passive activities accrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,the rules for using the standard mileage rate, only offset your income from passive activities. prepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex-see Publication 463. You cannot use any excess deductions to offset pense paid far enough in advance to, in effect,
your other income. In addition, passive activity create an asset with a useful life extending sub-
credits can only offset the tax on net passive stantially beyond the end of the current tax year.
income. Any excess loss or credits are carried
How Much over to later years. For more information, see Example. In 2001, you sign a 10-year lease
Publication 925. and immediately pay your rent for the first 3Can I Deduct? years. Even though you paid the rent for 2001,Net operating loss. If your deductions are 2002, and 2003, you can deduct only the rent formore than your income for the year, you mayYou cannot deduct more for a business expense 2001 on your current tax return. You can deducthave a “net operating loss.” You can use a netthan the amount you actually spend. There is on your 2002 and 2003 tax returns the rent foroperating loss to lower your taxes in other years.usually no other limit on how much you can those years.See Publication 536 for more information. Seededuct if the amount is reasonable. However, if
Publication 542 for information about net operat-your deductions are large enough to produce a Contested liability. Under the cash method,ing losses of corporations.net business loss for the year, the tax loss may you can deduct a contested liability only in the
be limited. year you pay the liability. Under an accrual
method, you can deduct contested liabilities,
Recovery of amount deducted. If you re- such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses-
cover part of an expense in the same tax year for When Can I sion income, war profits, and excess profits
which you would have claimed a deduction, re- taxes), in the tax year you pay the liability (or
Deduct an Expense?duce your expense deduction by the amount of transfer money or other property to satisfy the
the recovery. If you have a recovery in a later obligation) or in the tax year you settle the con-
When you deduct an expense depends on youryear, include the recovered amount in income. test. However, to take the deduction in the year
accounting method. An accounting method is aHowever, if part of the deduction for the expense of payment or transfer, you must meet certain
set of rules used to determine when and howdid not reduce your tax, you do not have to conditions. See Contested Liability in Publica-
income and expenses are reported. The twoinclude all the recovery in income. Exclude the tion 538 for more information.
basic methods are the cash method and anpart that did not reduce your tax.
accrual method. Related person. Under an accrual method ofFor more information on recoveries and the
For more information on accounting meth- accounting, you generally deduct expensestax benefit rule, see Publication 525.
ods, see Publication 538. when you incur them, even if you have not paid
Payments in kind. If you provide services to them. However, if you and the person you oweCash method. Under the cash method of ac-pay a business expense, the amount you can are related and the person uses the cashcounting, you generally deduct business ex-deduct is the amount you spend to provide the method of accounting, you must pay the ex-penses in the tax year you actually paid them,services. It is not what you would have paid in pense before you can deduct it. The deductioneven if you incurred them in an earlier year.cash. by an accrual method payer is allowed when the
Similarly, if you pay a business expense in Accrual method. Under an accrual method of corresponding amount is includible in income by
goods or other property, you can deduct only the accounting, you generally deduct business ex- the related cash method payee. See Related
amount the property costs you. If these costs are penses when both of the following apply. Persons in Publication 538.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can choose to do this by filing Form depreciation and these other deductions propor-
5213. Filing this form postpones any determina- tionally among those assets.Not-for-Profit Activities
tion that your activity is not carried on for profit Individuals must claim the amounts inuntil 5 (or 7) years have passed since youIf you do not carry on your business or invest- categories (2) and (3) as miscellane-started the activity.ment activity to make a profit, there is a limit on ous deductions on Schedule A (Form
TIP
The benefit gained by making this choice isthe deductions you can take. You cannot use a 1040). They are subject to thethat the IRS will not immediately questionloss from the activity to offset other income. 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-whether your activity is engaged in for profit.Activities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport cation 529 for information on this limit.Accordingly, it will not restrict your deductions.or recreation, come under this limit. So does an
Rather, you will gain time to earn a profit in 3 (orinvestment activity intended only to produce tax
Example. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profit2) out of the first 5 (or 7) years you carry on thelosses for the investors.
activity. The income and expenses of the activityactivity. If you show 3 (or 2) years of profit at theThe limit on not-for-profit losses applies to
are as follows.end of this period, your deductions are not lim-individuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S
ited under these rules. If you do not have 3 (or 2)corporations. It does not apply to corporations Gross income .................... $3,200years of profit, the limit can be applied retroac-other than S corporations.
Minus expenses:tively to any year in the 5-year (or 7-year) periodIn determining whether you are carrying on Real estate taxes ........... $700with a loss.an activity for profit, all the facts are taken into Home mortgage interest ....... 9 0 0Filing Form 5213 automatically extends theaccount. No one factor alone is decisive. Among Insurance ................ 4 0 0period of limitations on any year in the 5-year (orthe factors to consider are whether: Utilities .................. 7 0 0
7-year) period to 2 years after the due date of Maintenance .............. 2 0 0
1) You carry on the activity in a businesslike the return for the last year of the period. The Depreciation on an automobile . . . 600
Depreciation on a machine ..... 2 0 0 3,700manner, period is extended only for deductions of the
activity and any related deductions that might be2) The time and effort you put into the activity Loss ......................... $ 500affected.indicate you intend to make it profitable, Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200, theYou must file Form 5213 within 3 years3) You depend on income from the activity for gross income she earned from the activity. Theafter the due date of your return for theyour livelihood, limit is reached in category (3), as follows.year in which you first carried on the
TIP
4) Your losses are due to circumstances be- activity, or, if earlier, within 60 days after receiv- Limit on deduction ................. $3,200
yond your control (or are normal in the ing written notice from the Internal Revenue Category 1: Taxes and interest .... $1,600start-up phase of your type of business), Service proposing to disallow deductions attrib- Category 2: Insurance, utilities, and
utable to the activity. maintenance ............... 1,300 2,9005) You change your methods of operation in
Available for Category 3 ............ $ 300an attempt to improve profitability,
Limit on The $300 for depreciation is divided between6) You, or your advisors, have the knowledge
the automobile and machine as follows.needed to carry on the activity as a suc- Deductions and Losses
cessful business,
$600If your activity is not carried on for profit, take x $300 = $225 depreciation for the automobile$8007) You were successful in making a profit in deductions only in the following order, only to thesimilar activities in the past, extent stated in the three categories, and, if you
$200are an individual, only if you itemize them on8) The activity makes a profit in some years, x $300 = $75 depreciation for the machine$800Schedule A (Form 1040).and how much profit it makes, and
The basis of each asset is reduced accord-Category 1. Deductions you can take for per-9) You can expect to make a future profit ingly.sonal as well as for business activities are al-from the appreciation of the assets used in The $1,600 for category (1) is deductible inlowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusinessthe activity. full on the appropriate lines for taxes and interestdeductions, such as those for home mortgage on Schedule A (Form 1040). Ida deducts theinterest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong inPresumption of Profit remaining $1,600 (the total of categories (2) andthis category. Deduct them on the appropriateAn activity is presumed carried on for profit if it (3)) as other miscellaneous deductions onlines of Schedule A (Form 1040). You can de-produced a profit in at least 3 of the last 5 tax Schedule A (Form 1040) subject to theduct a casualty loss on property you own foryears, including the current year. Activities that 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.personal use only to the extent it is more thanconsist primarily of breeding, training, showing,
$100 and all these losses are more than 10% of Partnerships and S corporations. If a part-or racing horses are presumed carried on for
your adjusted gross income. See Publication nership or S corporation carries on aprofit if they produced a profit in at least 2 of the
547 for more information on casualty losses. For not-for-profit activity, these limits apply at thelast 7 tax years, including the current year. The
the limits that apply to mortgage interest, see partnership or S corporation level. They are re-activity must be substantially the same for each
Publication 936. flected in the individual shareholder ’s oryear within this period. You have a profit when
partner’s distributive shares.the gross income from an activity is more than Category 2. Deductions that do not result in
the deductions for it. an adjustment to the basis of property are al- More than one activity. If you have severalIf a taxpayer dies before the end of the lowed next, but only to the extent your gross undertakings, each may be a separate activity or5-year (or 7-year) period, the period ends on the income from the activity is more than the deduc- several undertakings may be one activity. Thedate of the taxpayer’s death. tions you take (or could take) under the first following are the most significant facts and cir-If your business or investment activity category. Most business deductions, such as cumstances in making this determination.passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, pre- those for advertising, insurance premiums, in- • The degree of organizational and eco-sume it is carried on for profit. This means the terest, utilities, wages, etc., belong in this cate- nomic interrelationship of various under-limits discussed here will not apply. You can gory. takings.take all your business deductions from the activ-
Category 3. Business deductions that de-ity, even for the years that you have a loss. You • The business purpose that is (or might be)crease the basis of property are allowed last, butcan rely on this presumption in every case, un- served by carrying on the various under-only to the extent the gross income from theless the IRS shows it is not valid. takings separately or together in a busi-activity is more than deductions you take (or ness or investment setting.Using the presumption later. If you are start- could take) under the first two categories. The
ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) years deductions for depreciation, amortization, and • The similarity of various undertakings.
showing a profit, you may want to elect to have the part of a casualty loss an individual could not
the presumption made after you have the 5 (or deduct in category (1) belong in this category. The IRS will generally accept your characteri-
7) years of experience allowed by the test. Where more than one asset is involved, divide zation of several undertakings as one a ctivity, or
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
more than one activity, if supported by facts and ❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe • Your policy regarding pay for all your em-
circumstances. Benefits ployees.
If you are carrying on two or more dif- • The history of pay for each employee.See chapter 14 for information about gettingferent activities, keep the deductions publications and forms.and income from each one separate.
TIP
Individual pay. You must base the test ofFigure separately whether each is a whether an individual ’s pay is reasonable onnot-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on each individual’s pay and the service performed,deductions and losses separately for each activ- not on the total amount paid to all officers or allTests fority that is not for profit. employees. For example, even if the total
amount you pay to your officers is reasonable,Deducting Pay
you cannot deduct the part of an individual
officer’s pay that is not reasonable based on theTo be deductible, your employees’ pay must be
items listed above.an ordinary and necessary expense and you
must pay or incur it in the tax year. These and
other requirements that apply to all business
Test 2— For Services2. expenses are explained in chapter 1. Performed
In addition, the pay must meet both the fol-
lowing tests. You must be able to prove the payment was
made for services actually performed.Employees’ Pay • Test 1. The pay must be reasonable.
• Test 2. The pay must be for services
performed.
Introduction Kinds of PayIf these tests are met, the form or method of
You can generally deduct the pay you give your figuring the pay does not affect its deductibility.
Some of the ways you may provide pay to youremployees for the services they perform for your For example, bonuses and commissions based
business. The pay may be in cash, property, or employees are discussed next.on sales or earnings and paid under an agree-
services. It may include wages, salaries, vaca- ment made before the services were performedtion allowances, bonuses, commissions, and Awardsare generally deductible.fringe benefits. This chapter provides informa-
tion about deductions allowed for various kinds You can generally deduct amounts you pay toEmployee-shareholder salaries. If a corpo-
of pay. your employees as awards, whether paid inration pays an employee who is also a share-
For information about determining who is an cash or property. (For awards paid in property,holder a salary that is unreasonably high
employee and about employment taxes on your see Property, later.) If you give property to anconsidering the services actually performed, the
employees’ pay, see Publication 15, Circular E, employee as an employee achievement award,excessive part of the salary may be treated as a
Employer’s Tax Guide,  Publication 15 – A, your deduction may be limited.constructive distribution of earnings to the
Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide, and Publi- employee-shareholder. For more information oncation 15 – B, Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Achievement awards. An achievementcorporate distributions to shareholders, seeBenefits. For information about deducting em- award is an item of tangible personal propertyPublication 542, Corporations.ployment taxes paid on your employees ’ pay, that meets all the following requirements.see chapter 6. Test 1— Reasonable • It is given to an employee for length ofYou can claim the following employ- service or safety achievement.Determine the reasonableness of pay by thement credits if you hire individuals who
facts. Generally, reasonable pay is the amountmeet certain requirements. • It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres-
TIP
that like enterprises ordinarily would pay for the entation.• Empowerment zone employment credit. services under similar circumstances. • It is awarded under conditions and circum-• Indian employment credit. You must be able to prove the pay is reason- stances that do not create a significantable. Base this test on the circumstances that• Welfare-to-work credit. likelihood of disguised pay.exist when you contract for the services, not
• Work opportunity credit. those existing when the reasonableness is Length-of-service award. An award willquestioned. If the pay is excessive, you canHowever, you must reduce your deduction for not qualify as a length-of-service award if eitherdeduct only the part that is reasonable.employee wages by the amount of any employ- of the following applies.
ment credits you claim. For more information
Factors to consider. To determine if pay is • The employee receives the award duringabout these credits, see Publication 954, Tax
reasonable, consider the following items and his or her first 5 years of employment.Incentives for Empowerment Zones and Other
any other pertinent facts.Distressed Communities. • The employee received another
length-of-service award (other than one of• The duties performed by the employee.
very small value) during the same year orTopics • The volume of business handled. in any of the prior 4 years.This chapter discusses:
• The character and amount of responsibil-
Safety achievement award. An award willity.• Tests for deducting pay
not qualify as a safety achievement award if• The complexities of your business.• Kinds of pay either of the following applies.
• The amount of time required.
1) It is given to a manager, administrator,Useful Items • The general cost of living in the locality. clerical employee, or other professionalYou may want to see: employee.• The ability and achievements of the indi-
vidual employee performing the service.Publication 2) During the tax year, more than 10% of
your employees, excluding those listed in• The pay compared with the gross and net❏ 15 Circular E, Employer’s Tax Guide (1), have already received a safetyincome of the business, as well as with
achievement award (other than one of verydistributions to shareholders if the busi-❏ 15–A Employer’s Supplemental Tax
ness is a corporation. small value).Guide
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay

Page 7 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduction limit. Your deduction for the are more than its qualified cost, you can carryFringe Benefits
cost of employee achievement awards given to the excess over to the next tax year.
A fringe benefit is a form of pay provided to anyany one employee during the tax year is limited Generally, the fund ’s qualified cost is the
person for the performance of services by thatto the following amounts. total of the following amounts, reduced by theperson. The following are examples of fringe after-tax income of the fund.• $400 for awards that are not qualified plan benefits.
awards. • The cost you would have been able to• Benefits under employee benefit pro-• $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual- deduct using the cash method of account-grams.ified plan awards. ing if you had paid for the benefits directly.
• Meals and lodging.Deduct achievement awards as a nonwage • The contributions added to a reserve ac-
• Use of a car.business expense on your return or business count that are needed to fund claims in-
schedule. curred but not paid as of the end of the• Flights on airplanes.
year for supplemental unemployment ben-A qualified plan award is an achievement • Discounts on property or services. efits, severance pay, or disability, medical,award given as part of an established written
or life insurance benefits.• Memberships in country clubs or other so-plan or program that does not favor highly com-
cial clubs.pensated employees as to eligibility or benefits.
For more information, see sections 419(c) andA highly compensated employee for 2001 is • Tickets to entertainment or sporting 419A of the Internal Revenue Code and thean employee who meets either of the following events. related regulations.tests.
You can generally deduct the cost of fringe
1) The employee was a 5% owner at any benefits you provide on your tax return or busi- Meals and lodging. You can usually deduct
time during the year or the preceding year. ness schedule in whatever category the cost the cost of furnishing meals and lodging to your
falls. For example, if you allow an employee to employees. However, you can generally deduct2) The employee received more than use a car or other property you lease, deduct the only 50% of the cost of furnishing meals.$85,000 in pay for the preceding year. cost of the lease as a rent or lease expense. If Deduct the cost on your tax return or busi-You can choose to ignore test (2) if the em- you own the property, include your deduction for ness schedule in whatever category the ex-ployee was not also in the top 20% of employees its cost or other basis as a section 179 deduction pense falls. For example, if you operate aranked by pay for the preceding year. or a depreciation deduction.
restaurant, deduct the cost of the meals youAn award is not a qualified plan award if the You may not owe employment taxes furnish to your employees as part of the cost ofaverage cost of all the employee achievement on the value of the fringe benefits you goods sold. If you operate a nursing home,awards given during the tax year (that would be provide to an employee. See Publica-
TIP
motel, or rental property, deduct the cost ofqualified plan awards except for this limit) is tion 15– B. furnishing lodging to an employee as expensesmore than $400. To figure this average cost, do
for utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation,not take into account awards of very small value.
etc.Employee benefit programs. Employee ben-You may not owe employment taxes efit programs include the following. Deduction limit on meals. You can gener-on the value of achievement awards
ally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishingyou provide to the employee. See Pub-
TIP
• Accident and health plans. meals to your employees. However, you canlication 15– B.
• Adoption assistance. deduct the full cost of the following meals.
• Cafeteria plans.Bonuses • Meals whose value you must include in an
• Dependent care assistance. employee’s pay. For more information,
You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an see section 2 in Publication 15– B.• Educational assistance.employee if you intended the bonus as addi-
• Meals that qualify as a de minimis fringetional pay for services, not as a gift, and the • Group-term life insurance coverage.
benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi-services were actually performed. However, the • Welfare benefit funds. cation 15– B. This generally includestotal bonuses, salaries, and other pay must be
meals you furnish to employees at yourreasonable for the services performed. If the You can generally deduct amounts you spend place of business if more than half thosebonus is paid in property, see Property, later. on employee benefit programs on the “em- employees are provided the meals forployee benefit programs” line of your tax return your convenience.Gifts of nominal value. If, to promote em- or business schedule. However, you may de-
ployee goodwill, you distribute turkeys, hams, or • Meals you furnish to your employees atduct certain costs on other lines. For example, if
other merchandise of nominal value to your em- you provide dependent care by operating a de- the work site when you operate a restau-
ployees at holidays, you can deduct the cost of pendent care facility for your employees, deduct rant or catering service.
these items as a nonwage business expense. your costs in whatever categories they fall (de- • Meals you furnish to your employees asYour deduction for de minimis gifts of food or preciation, utilities, salaries, etc.). part of the expense of providing recrea-drink are not subject to the 50% deduction limit Group-term life insurance coverage. You tional or social activities, such as a com-that generally applies to meals. For more infor- cannot deduct the cost of group-term life insur- pany picnic.mation on this deduction limit, see Meals and ance coverage if you are directly or indirectly thelodging, later. • Meals you are required by federal law tobeneficiary of the policy. See Nondeductible
furnish to crew members of certain com-Premiums in chapter 7.
Education Expenses mercial vessels (or would be required toWelfare benefit funds. A welfare benefit furnish if the vessels were operated atfund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangementIf you pay or reimburse education expenses for sea.) This does not include meals you fur-having the effect of a plan) that provides welfarean employee, you can deduct the payments. nish on vessels primarily providing luxurybenefits to your employees, independent con-Deduct the payments on the “employee benefit water transportation.tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefitsprograms” line of your tax return or business
are any benefits other than deferred compensa- • Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platformschedule if they are part of a qualified educa-
tion or transfers of restricted property. or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska.tional assistance program. For information on
This includes meals you furnish at a sup-educational assistance programs, see Educa- Your deduction for contributions to a welfare
port camp that is near and integral to antional Assistance in section 2 of Publication benefit fund is limited to the fund’s qualified cost
oil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.15– B. for the tax year. If your contributions to the fund
Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
behalf, deduct this payment as a travel expenseLoans or Advances
on your tax return or business schedule. See the IntroductionYou generally can deduct as wages a loan or instructions for the form you file for information
This chapter discusses retirement plans you canadvance you make to an employee that you do on which lines to use.
set up and maintain for yourself and your em-not expect the employee to repay if it is for If you make the payment under a nonac- ployees. Retirement plans are savings planspersonal services actually performed. The total countable plan, deduct it as wages on your tax that offer you tax advantages to set aside moneymust be reasonable when you add the loan or return or business schedule. for your own and your employees’ retirement.advance to the employee’s other pay. However,
See Travel, Meals, and Entertainment in In general, a sole proprietor or a partner isif the employee performs no services, treat the
chapter 13 for more information about deducting treated as an employee for participating in aamount you advanced to the employee as a
reimbursements and an explanation of account- retirement plan.loan, which you cannot deduct unless it be-
able and nonaccountable plans.comes a bad debt. For information on the deduc- SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you
tion for bad debts, see chapter 11. and your employees a tax favored way to save
for retirement. You can deduct contributions youSick PayBelow-market interest rate loans. On cer- make to the plan for your employees. If you are atain loans you make to an employee or share- You can deduct amounts you pay to your em- sole proprietor, you can deduct contributionsholder, you are treated as having received ployees for sickness and injury, including you make to the plan for yourself. You can alsointerest income and as having paid compensa- deduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the planlump-sum amounts, as wages. However, yourtion or dividends equal to that interest. See do not cover them. Earnings on the contributionsdeduction is limited to amounts not compen-Below-Market Loans in chapter 5 for more infor- are generally tax free until you or your employ-sated by insurance or other means.mation. ees receive distributions from the plan in later
years.Vacation PayProperty Under certain plans, employees can have
you contribute limited amounts of theirVacation pay is an amount you pay to an em-If you transfer property (including your before-tax pay to a plan. These amounts (andployee while the employee is on vacation. Itcompany’s stock) to an employee as payment the earnings on them) are generally tax free untilincludes an amount you pay an employee forfor services, you can generally deduct it as your employees receive distributions from theunused vacation leave. Vacation pay does notwages. The amount you can deduct is its fair plan in later years.include any sick pay or holiday pay.market value on the date of the transfer minus In general, individuals who are employed orany amount the employee paid for the property. You can ordinarily deduct vacation pay only self-employed can also set up and contribute toYou can claim the deduction only for the tax in your tax year in which the employee actually individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).year in which your employee includes the receives it. This rule applies regardless of
property’s value in income. Your employee is whether you use the cash method or an accrual Topicsdeemed to have included the value in income if method of accounting. This chapter discusses:you report it on Form W– 2 in a timely manner. However, you can deduct vacation pay in You treat the deductible amount as received your tax year in which the employee earns it if it • Simplified employee pension (SEP)in exchange for the property, and you must rec- is vested by the end of that year and the em-ognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer. • SIMPLE retirement planployee actually receives it within 2 1/2 monthsYour gain or loss is the difference between the
after the end of that year. Generally, vacation • Qualified planfair market value of the property and its adjusted
pay is vested if it is payable under an oral orbasis on the date of transfer. • Individual retirement arrangement (IRA)written vacation pay plan that you told your em-
A corporation recognizes no gain or ployees about before the tax year and itsloss when it pays for services with its amount and your liability for it are certain. Useful Itemsown stock.CAUTION
!
You may want to see:
These rules also apply to property trans-
Publicationferred to an independent contractor, generally
reported on Form 1099– MISC. ❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Small
Business (SEP, SIMPLE, andRestricted property. If the property you
Qualified Plans)transfer for services is subject to restrictions that 3.
affect its value, you generally cannot deduct it ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangementsand do not report gain or loss until it is substan- (IRAs)tially vested in the recipient. However, if the
recipient pays for the property, you must report Form (and Instructions)Retirementany gain at the time of the transfer up to the
amount paid. ❏ W–2 Wage and Tax Statement
“Substantially vested” means the property is Plans
not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. The See chapter 14 for information about getting
recipient is not likely to have to give up his or her publications and forms.
rights in the property in the future.
Important Changes
Reimbursements for 2002 Simplified Employeefor Business Expenses
Many changes to the tax laws for retirementYou can generally deduct the amount you pay or Pension (SEP)plans were made by the Economic Growth andreimburse employees for business expenses
Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 that wasthey incur for you for items such as travel and A simplified employee pension (SEP) is a written
enacted on June 7, 2001. However, most ofentertainment. However, your deduction for plan that allows you to make deductible contri-
those changes do not take effect until after De-meal and entertainment expenses is usually lim- butions toward your own and your employees ’
cember 31, 2001, and are not covered in thisited to 50% of the payment. retirement without getting involved in more com-
chapter. For information about those changes,If you make the payment under an account- plex retirement plans. A corporation also can
see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Smallable plan, deduct it in the category of the ex- have a SEP and make deductible contributions
Business, or Publication 553, Highlights of 2001pense paid. For example, if you pay an toward its employees ’ retirement. But certain
Tax Changes.employee for travel expenses incurred on your advantages available to qualified plans, such as
Page 8 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 9 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the special tax treatment that may apply to to the SEP-IRAs of those participating in both employee ’s pay, not to any contributions from
lump-sum distributions, do not apply to SEPs. the SEP plan and the profit-sharing plan. employer funds.
Under a SEP, you make the contributions to SEP and another qualified plan. If you also Employment taxes. Elective deferrals thata traditional individual retirement arrangement contributed to any other type of qualified plan, meet the ADP test are not subject to income tax(called a SEP-IRA) set up for each eligible em- treat the SEP as a separate profit-sharing plan in the year of deferral, but they are included inployee. when applying the overall 25% deduction limit wages for social security, Medicare, and federalSEP-IRAs are set up for, at a minimum, each described in section 404(h)(3) of the Internal unemployment (FUTA) tax.eligible employee. A SEP-IRA may have to be Revenue Code.set up for a leased employee, but need not be
set up for an excludable employee. For more If your SEP contribution is more than Reporting SEP Contributions
information, see Publication 560. the deduction limit (nondeductible con- on Form W–2tribution), you can carry over and de-
TIP
Form 5305 –SEP. You may be able to use duct the difference in later years. However, the Your contributions to an employee ’s SEP-IRAForm 5305 – SEP, Simplified Employee contribution carryover, when combined with the are excluded from the employee ’s income. Un-Pension-Individual Retirement Accounts Contri- contribution for the later year, is subject to the less there are contributions under a salary re-bution Agreement, in setting up your SEP. deduction limit for that year. duction arrangement, do not include these
contributions in your employee’s wages on FormContribution Limits Employee contributions. Employees can W– 2 for income, social security, or Medicare tax
also make contributions of up to $2,000 for 2001 purposes. Your SEP contributions under a sal-Contributions you make for a year to a to their SEP-IRAs independent of the ary reduction arrangement are included in yourcommon-law employee’s SEP-IRA are limited to employer’s SEP contributions. However, the employee’s wages for social security and Medi-the lesser of $35,000 or 15% of the employee’s employee’s deduction for IRA contributions may care tax purposes only.compensation. Compensation generally does be reduced or eliminated because the employeenot include your contributions to the SEP, but is covered by an employer retirement plan (the Example. Jim’s salary reduction arrange-does include certain elective deferrals unless SEP plan). See Publication 590 for details. ment calls for 10% of his salary to be contributedyou choose not to include them. by his employer as an elective deferral to Jim ’s
Annual compensation limit. You generally SEP-IRA. Jim ’s salary for the year is $30,000Salary Reduction
cannot consider the part of an employee’s com- (before reduction for the deferral). The employerSimplified Employeepensation over $170,000 when you figure your did not choose to treat deferrals as compensa-
Pension (SARSEP)contribution limit for that employee. tion under the arrangement. To figure the defer-
ral, the employer multiplies Jim ’s salary ofMore than one plan. If you also contribute to a An employer is no longer allowed to set $30,000 by 9.0909%, the reduced ratedefined contribution retirement plan (defined up a SARSEP. However, participants equivalent of 10%, to get the deferral oflater), annual additions to all a participant ’s ac- in a SARSEP set up before 1997 (in- $2,727.27. (This method is the same one you,CAUTION
!
counts are limited to the lesser of $35,000 or cluding employees hired after 1996) can con- as a self-employed person, use to figure the25% of the participant ’s compensation. When tinue to have their employer contribute part of contributions you make on your own behalf. Seeyou figure this limit, you must add your contribu- their pay to the plan. Rate Worksheet for Self-Employed under Quali-tions to all defined contribution plans. A SEP is fied Plan.)A SARSEP is a SEP set up before 1997 thatconsidered a defined contribution plan for this On Jim ’s Form W – 2, his employer showsincluded a salary reduction arrangement. Underlimit. total wages of $27,272.73 ($30,000 −the arrangement, employees can choose to $2,727.27), social security wages of $30,000,Contributions for yourself. The annual limits have you contribute part of their pay to their and Medicare wages of $30,000. Jim reportson your contributions to a common-law SEP-IRAs rather than receive it in cash. This $27,272.73 as wages on his individual incomeemployee’s SEP-IRA also apply to contributions contribution is called an “elective deferral” be- tax return.you make to your own SEP-IRA. cause employees choose (elect) to set aside the If his employer does not make the choicemoney and the tax on the money is deferred until explained above, Jim’s deferral would be $3,000Deduction Limit it is distributed. ($30,000 x 10%). In this case, the employerThis choice is available only if all the follow- uses the rate called for under the arrangementThe most you can deduct for employer contribu- ing requirements are met. (not the reduced rate) to figure the deferral andtions for a common-law employee is 15% of the
• The SARSEP was set up before 1997. the ADP test. On Jim’s Form W– 2, the employercompensation paid to him or her during the year
shows total wages of $27,000 ($30,000 −from the business that has the plan. • At least 50% of the eligible employees $3,000), social security wages of $30,000, andchoose the salary reduction arrangement.Deduction of contributions for yourself. Medicare wages of $30,000. Jim reportsWhen figuring the deduction for employer contri- • You had 25 or fewer eligible employees $27,000 as wages on his return.butions made to your own SEP-IRA, compensa- (or employees who would have been eligi- In either case, the maximum deductible con-tion is your net earnings from self-employment ble if you had maintained a SEP) at any tribution would be $3,913.05 ($30,000 xminus the following amounts. time during the preceding year. 13.0435%).
1) The deduction for one-half your self-em- • Each eligible highly compensated More information. For more information onployment tax. employee’s deferral percentage each year employer withholding requirements, see Publi-is no more than 125% of the average2) The deduction for contributions to your cation 15.deferral percentage (ADP) of all nonhighlyown SEP-IRA. For more information on SEPs, see Publica-compensated employees eligible to partici- tion 560.The deduction for contributions to your own pate (the ADP test). See Publication 560
SEP-IRA and your net earnings depend on each for the definition of a highly compensated
other. For this reason, you determine the deduc- employee and information on how to figure
tion for contributions to your own SEP-IRA indi- the deferral percentage. SIMPLErectly by reducing the contribution rate called for
in your plan. Use the Rate Worksheet for Limit on elective deferrals. In general, the Retirement PlansSelf-Employed shown under Qualified Plan, total income an employee can defer under alater, to figure the rate. SARSEP and certain other elective deferral ar- A Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees
SEP and profit-sharing plan. If you also con- rangements for 2001 is limited to the lesser of (SIMPLE plan) is a written arrangement that
tributed to a qualified profit-sharing plan, you $10,500 or 15% of the employee ’s compensa- provides you and your employees with a simpli-
must reduce the 15% deduction limit for that tion (as defined in Publication 560). This limit fied way to make contributions to p rovide retire-
plan by the allowable deduction for contributions applies only to amounts that reduce the ment income. Under a SIMPLE plan, employees
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 9

Page 10 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can choose to make salary reduction contribu- • The SIMPLE IRA plan would have contin- How To Set Up a SIMPLE IRA Plan
tions to the plan rather than receiving these ued to qualify after the transaction if you
You can use Form 5304–SIMPLE or Formamounts as part of their regular pay. In addition, had remained a separate employer.
5305–SIMPLE to set up a SIMPLE IRA plan.you will contribute matching or nonelective con-
Each form is a model savings incentive matchtributions. The grace period for acquisitions, dis- plan for employees (SIMPLE) plan document.SIMPLE plans can only be maintained on a positions, and similar transactions also Which form you use depends on whether youcalendar-year basis. applies if, because of these types of select a financial institution or your employees
CAUTION
!
A SIMPLE plan can be set up in either of the transactions, you do not meet the rules ex- select the institution that will receive the contri-
following ways. plained under Other qualified plan, next, or Who butions.
Can Participate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan, later. Use Form 5304 – SIMPLE if you allow each• Using SIMPLE IRAs (SIMPLE IRA plan).
plan participant to select the financial institution
• As part of a 401(k) plan (SIMPLE 401(k) for receiving his or her SIMPLE IRA plan contri-Other qualified plan. The SIMPLE IRA planplan). butions. Use Form 5305– SIMPLE if you requiregenerally must be the only retirement plan to that all contributions under the SIMPLE IRA planSee Publication 560 for information on SIMPLE which you make contributions, or benefits ac- be deposited initially at a designated financial401(k) plans. crue, for service in any year beginning with the institution.year the SIMPLE IRA plan becomes effective. The SIMPLE IRA plan is adopted when youMany financial institutions will help you
Exception. If you maintain a qualified plan (and the designated financial institution, if any)set up a SIMPLE plan.
for collective bargaining employees, you are have completed all appropriate boxes and
TIP
blanks on the form and you have signed it. Keeppermitted to maintain a SIMPLE IRA plan for
the original form. Do not file it with the IRS.other employees.
SIMPLE IRA Plan
Other uses of the forms. If you set up a
SIMPLE IRA plan using Form 5304– SIMPLE orA SIMPLE IRA plan is a retirement plan that Who Can Participate
Form 5305 – SIMPLE, you can use the form touses SIMPLE IRAs for each eligible employee. in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?
satisfy other requirements, including the follow-Under a SIMPLE IRA plan, a SIMPLE IRA must
ing.be set up for each eligible employee. For the Eligible employee. Any employee who re-
definition of an eligible employee, see Who Can ceived at least $5,000 in compensation during • Meeting employer notification require-
Participate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan, next. any 2 years preceding the current calendar year ments for the SIMPLE IRA plan. Page 3 of
and is reasonably expected to receive at least Form 5304– SIMPLE and Page 3 of Form
5305– SIMPLE contain a Model Notifica-$5,000 during the current calendar year is eligi-Who Can Set Up tion to Eligible Employees that providesble to participate. The term “employee” includesa SIMPLE IRA Plan? the necessary information to the em-a self-employed individual who received earned
ployee.income.You can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan if you meet
You can use less restrictive eligibility require- • Maintaining the SIMPLE IRA plan recordsboth the following requirements.
ments (but not more restrictive ones) by elimi- and proving you set up a SIMPLE IRA
• You meet the employee limit. nating or reducing the prior year compensation plan for employees.
requirements, the current year compensation• You do not maintain another qualified plan
requirements, or both. For example, you canunless the other plan is for collective bar- Deadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA plan.
allow participation for employees who receivedgaining employees. You can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan effective on
at least $3,000 in compensation during any pre- any date between January 1 and October 1 of a
ceding calendar year. However, you cannot im- year, provided you did not previously maintain aEmployee limit. You can set up a SIMPLE pose any other conditions on participating in a SIMPLE IRA plan. If you previously maintainedIRA plan only if you had 100 or fewer employees SIMPLE IRA plan. a SIMPLE IRA plan, you can set up a SIMPLEwho received $5,000 or more in compensation IRA plan effective only on January 1 of a year.from you for the preceding year. Under this rule, This requirement does not apply if you are a newExcludable employees. The following em-you must take into account all employees em- employer that comes into existence after Octo-ployees do not need to be covered under aployed at any time during the calendar year ber 1 of the year the SIMPLE IRA plan is set upSIMPLE IRA plan.regardless of whether they are eligible to partici- and you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan as soon aspate. Employees include self-employed individ- • Employees who are covered by a union administratively feasible after you come into ex-uals who received earned income, and leased agreement and whose retirement benefits istence. A SIMPLE IRA plan cannot have anemployees. were bargained for in good faith by the effective date that is before the date you actually
Once you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan, you employees’ union and you. adopt the plan.
must continue to meet the 100-employee limit • Nonresident alien employees who haveeach year you maintain the plan. Setting up a SIMPLE IRA. SIMPLE IRAs arereceived no U.S. source wages, salaries, the individual retirement accounts or annuitiesGrace period for employers who cease to or other personal services compensation into which the contributions are deposited. Ameet the 100-employee limit. If you maintain from you. SIMPLE IRA must be set up for each eligiblethe SIMPLE IRA plan for at least 1 year and you employee. Forms 5305–S, SIMPLE Individualcease to meet the 100-employee limit in a later Retirement Trust Account, and 5305–SA,Compensation. Compensation for employ-year, you will be treated as meeting it for the 2 SIMPLE Individual Retirement Custodial Ac-ees is the total wages required to be reported oncalendar years immediately following the calen- count, are model trust and custodial accountForm W – 2. Compensation also includes thedar year for which you last met it. documents the participant and the trustee (orsalary reduction contributions made under thisA different rule applies if you do not meet the custodian) can use for this purpose.plan, compensation deferred under a section100-employee limit because of an acquisition, A SIMPLE IRA cannot be designated as a457 plan, and the employees’ elective deferralsdisposition, or similar transaction. Under this Roth IRA. Contributions to a SIMPLE IRA willunder a section 401(k) plan, a SARSEP, or arule, the SIMPLE IRA plan will be treated as not affect the amount an individual can contrib-section 403(b) annuity contract. If you aremeeting the 100-employee limit for the year of ute to a Roth IRA.self-employed, compensation is your net earn-the transaction and the 2 following years if both ings from self-employment (line 4 of Short Deadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA. Athe following conditions are satisfied. Schedule SE (Form 1040)) before subtracting SIMPLE IRA must be set up for an employee
any contributions made to the SIMPLE IRA plan• Coverage under the plan has not signifi- before the first date by which a contribution is
for yourself.cantly changed during the grace period. required to be deposited into the employee ’s
Page 10 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 11 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Salary reduction contributionsIRA. See Time limits for contributing funds later annual limit on exclusion of salary reductions
(maximum amount) ............. $6,500under Contribution Limits. and other elective deferrals.
2% nonelective contributionsIf the other plan is a deferred compensation ($75,000 × .02) ................ 1,500plan of a state or local government or a tax-ex- Total contributions ............. $8,000Notification Requirement empt organization, the limit on elective deferrals
is $8,500.If you adopt a SIMPLE IRA plan, you must notify Time limits for contributing funds. Youeach employee of the following information must make the salary reduction contributions tobefore the beginning of the election period. Employer matching contributions. You are the SIMPLE IRA within 30 days after the end of
generally required to match each employee ’s the month in which the amounts would other-1) The employee ’s opportunity to make or salary reduction contributions on a wise have been payable to the employee inchange a salary reduction choice under a dollar-for-dollar basis up to 3% of the cash. You must make matching contributions orSIMPLE IRA plan. employee’s compensation. This requirement nonelective contributions by the due date (in-
does not apply if you make nonelective contribu-2) Your choice to make either reduced cluding extensions) for filing your federal income
matching contributions or nonelective con- tax return for the year.tions as discussed later.
tributions (discussed later).
Example. In 2001, your employee, John3) A summary description and the location of When To Deduct ContributionsRose, earned $25,000 and chose to defer 5% ofthe plan. The financial institution should his salary. You make a 3% matching contribu-provide you with this information. You can deduct SIMPLE IRA contributions in thetion. The total contribution you can make for tax year with or within which the calendar year4) Written notice that his or her balance can John is $2,000, figured as follows. for which contributions were made ends. Yoube transferred without cost or penalty if
can deduct contributions for a particular tax yearyou use a designated financial institution. Salary reduction contributions if they are made for that tax year and are made($25,000 × .05) ............... $1,250
by the due date (including extensions) of yourEmployer matching contributionElection period. The election period is gener- federal income tax return for that year.($25,000 × .03) ............... 7 5 0ally the 60-day period immediately preceding Total contributions ............ $2,000January 1 of a calendar year (November 2 to Example 1. Your tax year is the fiscal year
December 31 of the preceding calendar year). ending June 30. Contributions under a SIMPLELower percentage. If you choose a match-However, the dates of this period are modified if IRA plan for the calendar year 2001 (includinging contribution less than 3%, the percentageyou set up a SIMPLE IRA plan in mid-year (for contributions made in 2001 before July 1, 2001)must be at least 1%. You must notify the em-example, on July 1) or if the 60-day period falls are deductible in the tax year ending June 30,ployees of the lower match within a reasonablebefore the first day an employee becomes eligi- 2002.period of time before the 60-day election periodble to participate in the SIMPLE IRA plan. (discussed earlier) for the calendar year. You Example 2. You are a sole proprietor whoseA SIMPLE IRA plan can provide longer peri- cannot choose a percentage less than 3% for tax year is the calendar year. Contributionsods for permitting employees to enter into salary more than 2 years during the 5-year period that under a SIMPLE IRA plan for the calendar yearreduction agreements or to modify prior agree- ends with (and includes) the year for which the 2001 (including contributions made in 2002 byments. For example, a SIMPLE IRA plan can choice is effective. April 15, 2002) are deductible in the 2001 taxprovide a 90-day election period instead of the
year.60-day period. Similarly, in addition to the
Nonelective contributions. Instead of60-day period, a SIMPLE IRA plan can provide
matching contributions, you can choose to makequarterly election periods during the 30 days
Where To Deduct Contributionsnonelective contributions of 2% of compensa-before each calendar quarter, other than the first
tion on behalf of each eligible employee who hasquarter of each year. Deduct contributions you make for yourat least $5,000 of compensation (or some lower common-law employees on your tax return. Foramount of compensation that you select) from example, sole proprietors deduct them onContribution Limits you for the year. If you make this choice, you Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Formmust make nonelective contributions whether or 1040), partnerships deduct them on Form 1065,Contributions are made up of salary reduction not the employee chooses to make salary re- and corporations deduct them on Form 1120,contributions and employer contributions. You, duction contributions. Only $170,000 of the Form 1120– A, or Form 1120S.as the employer, must make either matching employee’s compensation can be taken into ac-contributions or nonelective contributions, dis- Sole proprietors and partners deduct contri-count to figure the contribution limit.cussed later. No other contributions can be butions for themselves on line 29 of Form 1040.
If you choose this 2% contribution formula,made to the SIMPLE IRA plan. These contribu- (If you are a partner, contributions for yourself
you must notify the employees within a reasona-tions, which you can deduct, must be made are shown on the Schedule K – 1 (Form 1065)
ble period of time before the 60-day electiontimely. See Time limits for contributing funds, you receive from the partnership).
period (discussed earlier) for the calendar year.later.
Example 1. In 2001, your employee, JaneSalary reduction contributions. The amount Tax Treatment of Contributions
Wood, earned $36,000 and chose to have youthe employee chooses to have you contribute to
You can deduct your contributions and your em-contribute 10% of her salary. You make a 2%a SIMPLE IRA on his or her behalf cannot be
ployees can exclude these contributions fromnonelective contribution. The total contributionsmore than $6,500 for 2001. These contributions
their gross income. SIMPLE IRA contributionsmust be expressed as a percentage of the you can make for her are $4,320, figured as
are not subject to federal income tax withhold-employee’s compensation unless you permit the follows.
ing. However, salary reduction contributions areemployee to express them as a specific dollar
subject to social security, Medicare, and federalSalary reduction contributionsamount. You cannot place restrictions on the
unemployment (FUTA) taxes. Matching and($36,000 × .10) ................ $3,600contribution amount (such as limiting the contri-
nonelective contributions are not subject to2% nonelective contributionsbution percentage), except to comply with the
($36,000 × .02) ................ 7 2 0 these taxes.$6,500 limit.
Total contributions ............. $4,320If an employee is a participant in any other Reporting on Form W –2. Do not include
employer plan during the year and has elective SIMPLE IRA contributions in the “Wages, tips,
Example 2. Using the same facts as in Ex-salary reductions or deferred compensation other compensation” box of Form W – 2. How-
ample 1, above, the maximum contribution youunder those plans, the salary reduction contribu- ever, salary reduction contributions must be in-
can make for Jane if she earned $75,000 istions under a SIMPLE IRA plan also are elective cluded in the boxes for social security and
$8,000, figured as follows.deferrals that count toward the overall $10,500 Medicare wages. Also include the proper code
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 11

Page 12 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in Box 12. For more information, see the instruc- More than one job. If you are self-employed Individually designed plan. If you prefer, you
tions for Forms W– 2 and W– 3. and also work for someone else, you can partici- can set up an individually designed plan to meet
pate in retirement plans for both jobs. Generally, specific needs. Although advance IRS approval
your participation in a retirement plan for one job is not required, you can apply for approval by
Distributions (Withdrawals) does not affect your participation in a plan for the paying a fee and requesting a determination
other job. However, if you have an IRA, you may letter. You may need professional help with this.
Distributions from a SIMPLE IRA are subject to not be allowed to deduct part or all of your IRA The following revenue procedure and an-
IRA rules and generally are includible in income contributions. See Publication 590. nouncement will help you decide whether to
for the year received. Tax-free rollovers can be apply for approval.
made from one SIMPLE IRA into another
Kinds of Qualified Plans • Revenue Procedure 2001– 6 in InternalSIMPLE IRA. A rollover from a SIMPLE IRA to
Revenue Bulletin 2001– 1another IRA can be made tax free only after a There are two basic kinds of qualified retirement2-year participation in the SIMPLE IRA plan. • Announcement 2001– 77 in Internal Reve-plans: defined contribution plans and definedEarly withdrawals generally are subject to a nue Bulletin 2001– 30.benefit plans.10% additional tax. However, the additional tax
is increased to 25% if funds are withdrawn within
2 years of beginning participation.
Deduction LimitDefined Contribution Plan
More information. See Publication 590 for in- The deduction limit for contributions to a quali-This plan provides for a separate account forformation about IRA rules, including those on fied plan depends on the kind of plan you have.each person covered by the plan. Benefits arethe tax treatment of distributions, rollovers, re- based only on amounts contributed to or allo- In figuring the deduction for contribu-quired distributions, and income tax withholding. cated to each account. tions to these plans, you cannot take
There are two types of defined contribution into account any contributions or bene-CAUTION
!
plans: profit-sharing and money purchase pen- fits that are more than the limits discussed underMore Information
sion. Limits on Contributions and Benefits in Publica-on SIMPLE IRA Plans
tion 560.
Profit-sharing plan. This plan lets your em-If you need more help to set up and maintain a
ployees or their beneficiaries share in the profitsSIMPLE IRA plan, see the following IRS notice Defined contribution plans. The deduction
of your business. The plan must have a definiteand revenue procedure. limit for a defined contribution plan depends on
formula for allocating the contribution among the whether it is a profit-sharing plan or a moneyNotice 98 –4. This notice contains questions participating employees and for distributing the purchase pension plan.and answers about the implementation and op- accumulated funds in the plan.eration of SIMPLE IRA plans, including the elec- Profit-sharing plan. Your deduction for
tion and notice requirements for these plans. contributions to a profit-sharing plan cannot beMoney purchase pension plan. Under this
Notice 98– 4 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1998– 1. more than 15% of the compensation paid (orplan, contributions are fixed and are not based
accrued) during the year to the eligible employ-on your business profits. For example, if the planRevenue Procedure 97 –29. This revenue ees participating in the plan. You must reducerequires contributions be 10% of each participat-procedure provides guidance to drafters of pro- this limit in figuring the deduction for contribu-ing employee ’s compensation regardless oftotype SIMPLE IRAs on obtaining opinion let- tions you make for your own account. See De-whether you have a profit, the plan is a moneyters. Revenue Procedure 97 – 29 is in duction of contributions for yourself, later.purchase pension plan.Cumulative Bulletin 1997– 1.
Money purchase pension plan. Your de-
duction for contributions to a money purchaseDefined Benefit Plan pension plan is generally limited to 25% of the
compensation paid during the year to a partici-
Qualified Plan This is any plan that is not a defined contribution pating eligible employee. You must reduce thisplan. In general, contributions to a qualified de- limit in figuring the deduction for contributionsA qualified retirement plan is a written plan you fined benefit plan are based on what is needed you make for yourself, as discussed later.can set up for the exclusive benefit of your em- to provide definitely determinable benefits toployees and their beneficiaries. It is sometimes plan participants. Your contributions to the plan Defined benefit plans. An actuary must fig-called a Keogh or H.R.10 plan. are based on actuarial assumptions. Generally, ure the deduction for contributions to a definedYou, or you and your employees, can make you will need continuing professional help to benefit plan since it is based on actuarial as-contributions to the plan. If your plan meets the administer a defined benefit plan. sumptions and computations.qualification requirements, you can generally
Deduction of contributions for yourself. Todeduct your contributions to the plan. For more Setting Up a Plan take a deduction for contributions you make to ainformation, see Publication 560.
plan for yourself, you must have net earningsYour employees generally are not taxed on You must adopt a written plan. The plan can be from the trade or business for which the planyour contributions or increases in the plan’s as- an IRS-approved master or prototype plan of- was set up.sets until they are distributed. However, certain fered by a sponsoring organization. Or it can beloans made from qualified plans are treated as an individually designed plan. Limit on deduction. If the qualified plan is ataxable distributions. For more information, see profit-sharing plan, your deduction for yourself isPublication 575. Master or prototype plans. The following limited to the lesser of $35,000 or 13.0435%
sponsoring organizations generally can provide (15% reduced as discussed later) of your netQualification requirements. To be a quali-
IRS-approved master or prototype plans. earnings from the trade or business that has thefied plan, the plan must meet many require-
plan. If the plan is a money purchase pensionments. They include requirements that • Trade or professional organizations. plan, the deduction is limited to the lesser ofdetermine the following.
$35,000 or 20% (25% reduced as discussed• Banks (including savings and loan as-• Who must be covered by the plan. later) of your net earnings.sociations and federally insured credit un-
• How contributions to the plan are to be ions). Net earnings. Your net earnings must beinvested. from self-employment in a trade or business in• Insurance companies.
which your personal services are a material• How contributions to the plan and benefits • Mutual funds. income-producing factor. Your net earnings dounder the plan are to be determined.
Adoption of a master or prototype plan does not not include items excluded from income (or de-• How much of an employee’s interest in the mean your plan is automatically qualified. It ductions related to that income), other than for-plan must be guaranteed (vested). must still meet all the qualification requirements eign earned income and foreign housing cost
For more information, see Publication 560. stated in the law. amounts.
Page 12 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 13 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Step 4Your net earnings are your business gross year taxpayers), plus extensions, of your tax
Subtract step 3 from step 2 andincome minus the allowable business deduc- return for that year.
enter the result ..............tions from that business. Allowable business
More information. See Publication 560 forStep 5deductions include contributions to SEP and
Multiply step 4 by step 1 and enter more information on retirement plans for smallqualified plans for common-law employees and
the result .................. business owners, including the self-employed.the deduction for one-half your self-employment
Step 6 Publication 560 also discusses the reportingtax. Multiply $170,000 by your plan forms that must be filed for these plans.Net earnings include a partner ’s distributive contribution rate. Enter the result,share of partnership income or loss (other than but not more than $35,000 ......separately stated items such as capital gains Step 7and losses) and any guaranteed payments. If Enter the lesser of step 5 or step 6. Individual Retirementyou are a limited partner, net earnings include This is your maximum deductible
only guaranteed payments for services ren- contribution. Enter your deduction Arrangement (IRA)dered to or for the partnership. For more infor- on line 29, Form 1040 .........
mation, see Partners under Who Must Pay
An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is aSelf-Employment Tax in Publication 533. Example. You are a self-employed farmer personal savings plan that allows you to setNet earnings do not include income passed and you have employees. The terms of your aside money for your retirement or for certainthrough to shareholders of S corporations. plan provide that you contribute 8 1/2% (.085) of education expenses. You do not have to set up
Adjustments. You must reduce your net your compensation (defined earlier) and 81/2% of IRAs for your employees or make contributions
earnings by the deduction for one-half your for them. You may be able to deduct your contri-your participants’ compensation. Your net earn-
self-employment tax. Also, net earnings must be butions, depending on the type of IRA and yourings from line 36, Schedule F (Form 1040) are
reduced by the deduction for contributions you circumstances. Generally, amounts in an IRA,$200,000. In figuring this, you deducted your
make for yourself. This reduction is made indi- including earnings and gains, are not taxed untilparticipants’ pay of $100,000 and contributions
rectly, as explained next. they are distributed. In certain cases, your earn-for them of $8,500 (8 1/2% x $100,000). You fig-
ings and gains may not be taxed at all if they areure your self-employed rate and maximum de-Net earnings reduced by adjusting contri- distributed according to the rules. For more in-duction for contributions on behalf of yourself asbution rate. You must reduce net earnings by formation on IRAs, see Publication 590.follows.your deduction for contributions for yourself. The
deduction and the net earnings depend on each
Rate Worksheet for Self-Employedother. You make the adjustment indirectly by
reducing the contribution rate called for in the 1) Plan contribution rate as a decimalplan and using the reduced rate to figure your (for example, 101/2% = .105) ..... 0.085maximum deduction for contributions for your- 2) Rate in line 1 plus 1self. (for example, .105 + 1 = 1.105) . . . 1.085 4.
3) Self-employed rate as a decimalAnnual compensation limit. You generally
rounded to at least 3 decimal placescannot take into account more than $170,000 of
(line 1 ÷ line 2) .............. 0.078your compensation in figuring your contribution Rent Expenseto a defined contribution plan.
Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed
Figuring Your Deduction
Step 1 Introduction
Enter the rate shown on line 3Use the following worksheet to find the reduced This chapter discusses the tax treatment of rentabove ................... 0.078contribution rate for yourself. Make no reduction or lease payments you make for property youStep 2to the contribution rate for any common-law em- use in your business but do not own. It alsoEnter your net earnings (net profit)ployees. discusses how to treat other kinds of paymentsfrom line 31, Schedule C (Form
you make that are related to your use of this1040); line 3, Schedule C– EZRate Worksheet for Self-Employed
property. These include payments you make for(Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F
taxes on the property, improvements to the(Form 1040); or line 15a,1) Plan contribution rate as a decimal
Schedule K– 1 (Form 1065) .... $200,000 property, and getting a lease. There is a discus-(for example, 101/2% = .105) .....
Step 3 sion about capitalizing (including in the cost of2) Rate in line 1 plus 1
Enter your deduction for property) certain rent expenses at the end of the(for example, .105 + 1 = 1.105) . . .
self-employment tax from line 27,3) Self-employed rate as a decimal chapter.
Form 1040 ................ 7,663rounded to at least 3 decimal places
Step 4(line 1 ÷ line 2) .............. TopicsSubtract step 3 from step 2 and This chapter discusses:Now that you have figured your self-em- enter the result ............. 192,337
ployed rate, you can figure your maximum de- Step 5 • The definition of rentduction for contributions for yourself by Multiply step 4 by step 1 and enter
completing the following steps. the result ................. 15,002 • Taxes on leased property
Step 6 • The cost of getting a leaseDeduction Worksheet for Self-Employed Multiply $170,000 by your plan
contribution rate. Enter the result • Improvements by the lessee
Step 1 but not more than $35,000 ..... 14,450
• Capitalizing rent expensesEnter the rate shown on line 3 above Step 7
Step 2 Enter the lesser of step 5 or step
Enter your net earnings (net profit) 6. This is your maximum See chapter 14 for information about gettingfrom line 31, Schedule C (Form deductible contribution. Enter publications and forms.1040); line 3, Schedule C– EZ (Form your deduction on line 29, Form
1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form 1040 .................... $  14,450
1040); or line 15a, Schedule K– 1
(Form 1065) ................
When to make contributions. To take a de- RentStep 3
duction for contributions for a particular year,Enter your deduction for
you must make the contributions not later than Rent is any amount you pay for the use ofself-employment tax from line 27,
Form 1040 ................. the due date (generally, April 15 for calendar property you do not own. In general, you can
Chapter 4 Rent Expense Page 13

Page 14 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is for • You pay much more than the current fair be either useful to or usable by a lessor at the
property you use in your trade or business. If you rental value of the property. end of the lease term except for continued leas-
have or will receive equity in or title to the prop- ing or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce-
• You have an option to buy the property aterty, the rent is not deductible. dure 2001 – 28 for examples of limited-usea nominal price compared to the value of property and property that is not limited-usethe property when you may exercise theUnreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental property.option. Determine this value when youdeduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, the make the agreement.issue of reasonableness arises only if you and Leases over $250,000. Special rules are pro-
the lessor are related. Rent paid to a related vided for certain leases of tangible property. The• You have an option to buy the property at
person is reasonable if it is the same amount rules apply if the lease calls for total payments ofa nominal price compared to the total
you would pay to a stranger for use of the same more than $250,000 and any of the followingamount you have to pay under the agree-
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because apply.ment.
it is figured as a percentage of gross sales. For • Rents increase during the lease.• The agreement designates part of the pay-examples of related persons, see Related Per- ments as interest, or that part is easy tosons in chapter 12. • Rents decrease during the lease.recognize as interest.
• Rents are deferred (rent is payable afterRent on your home. If you rent your home the end of the calendar year following theLeveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans-and use part of it as your place of business, you calendar year in which the use occurs andactions may not be considered leases. Lever-may be able to deduct the rent you pay for that the rent is allocated).aged leases generally involve three parties: apart. You must meet the requirements for busi-
lessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor.ness use of your home. For more information, • Rents are prepaid (rent is payable beforeUsually the lease term covers a large part of thesee Business use of your home in chapter 1. the end of the calendar year preceding theuseful life of the leased property, and the calendar year in which the use occurs andlessee’s payments to the lessor are enough toRent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid in the rent is allocated).cover the lessor’s payments to the lender.your trade or business is deductible in the year
These rules do not apply if your lease specifiespaid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, you If you plan to take part in what appears to be equal amounts of rent for each month in thecan deduct only the amount that applies to your a leveraged lease, you may want to get an lease term and all rent payments are due in theuse of the rented property during the tax year. advance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001 – 28 calendar year to which the rent relates (or in theYou can deduct the rest of your payment only in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001 – 19 contains preceding or following calendar year).over the period to which it applies. the guidelines the IRS will use to determine if a
leveraged lease is a lease for federal income tax Generally, if the special rules apply, you mustExample 1. You leased a building for 5 purposes. Revenue Procedure 2001 – 29 in the use an accrual method of accounting (and timeyears beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 per same Internal Revenue Bulletin provides the value of money principles) for your rental ex-year. You paid the first year’s rent ($12,000) on information required to be furnished in a request penses, regardless of your overall method ofJune 30. You can deduct only $6,000 ( 6/12 × for an advance ruling on a leveraged lease accounting. In addition, in certain cases in which$12,000) for the rent that applies to the first year. transaction. the IRS has determined that a lease was de-
signed to achieve tax avoidance, you must takeIn general, Revenue Procedure 2001 – 28Example 2. Last January you leased prop- rent and stated or imputed interest into accountprovides that, for advance ruling purposes only,erty for 3 years for $6,000 a year. You paid the under a constant rental accrual method in whichthe IRS will consider the lessor in a leveragedfull $18,000 (3 × $6,000) during the first year of the rent is treated as accruing ratably over thelease transaction to be the owner of the propertythe lease. Each year you can deduct only entire lease term. For details, see the regula-and the transaction to be a valid lease if all the$6,000, the part of the rent that applies to that tions under section 467 of the Internal Revenuefactors in the revenue procedure are met, in-year. Code.cluding the following.
Canceling a lease. You generally can deduct • The lessor must maintain a minimum un-as rent an amount you pay to cancel a business conditional “at risk” equity investment inlease. the property (at least 20% of the cost of Taxes onthe property) during the entire lease term.Lease or purchase. There may be instances
Leased Propertyin which you must determine whether your pay- • The lessee may not have a contractual
ments are for rent or for the purchase of the right to buy the property from the lessor at
If you lease business property, you can deductproperty. You must first determine whether your less than fair market value when the right
as additional rent any taxes you have to pay toagreement is a lease or a conditional sales con- is exercised.
or for the lessor. When you can deduct thesetract. Payments made under a conditional sales • The lessee may not invest in the property, taxes as additional rent depends on your ac-contract are not deductible as rent expense. except as provided by Revenue Procedure counting method.
Conditional sales contract. Whether an 2001– 28.
agreement is a conditional sales contract de- Cash method. If you use the cash method of• The lessee may not lend any money to thepends on the intent of the parties. Determine accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-lessor to buy the property or guarantee theintent based on the provisions of the agreement tional rent only for the tax year in which you payloan used by the lessor to buy the prop-and the facts and circumstances that exist when them.erty.you make the agreement. No single test, or
special combination of tests, always applies. Accrual method. If you use an accrual• The lessor must show that it expects to
However, in general, an agreement may be con- method of accounting, you can deduct taxes asreceive a profit apart from the tax deduc-
sidered a conditional sales contract rather than additional rent for the tax year in which you cantions, allowances, credits, and other tax
a lease if any of the following is true. determine all the following.attributes.
• The agreement applies part of each pay- • That you have a liability for taxes on theThe IRS may charge you a user fee for issuingment toward an equity interest you will re- leased property.a tax ruling. For more information, see Revenueceive. • How much the liability is.Procedure 2002– 1, in Internal Revenue Bulletin
• You get title to the property after you make No. 2002 – 1, or Publication 1375, which is a • That economic performance occurred.a stated amount of required payments. reprint of Revenue Procedure 2002– 1.
• The amount you must pay to use the prop- Leveraged leases of limited-use property. The liability and amount of taxes are deter-
erty for a short time is a large part of the The IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever- mined by state or local law and the  lease agree-
amount you would pay to get title to the aged leases of so-called limited-use property. ment. Economic performance occurs as you use
property. Limited-use property is property not expected to the property.
Page 14 Chapter 4 Rent Expense

Page 15 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendar years. That is the remaining life of your present investment. If the rental value of the leased lan d
year taxpayer that uses an accrual method of lease plus the periods for renewal. increased since the lease began, part of your
accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi- capital investment is for that increase in the
Example 2. The facts are the same as inness. Under state law, owners of real property rental value. The rest is for your investment in
Example 1, except that you paid $8,000 for thebecome liable (incur a lien on the property) for the permanent improvements.
original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op-real estate taxes for the year on January 1 of The part that is for the increased rental value
tions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 overthat year. However, they do not have to pay of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and you
the 20-year remaining life of the original lease.these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18 amortize it over the remaining term of the lease.
The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease wasmonths later) when tax bills are issued. Under You can depreciate the part that is for your
not less than 75% of the total cost of the leasethe terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable for investment in the improvements over the recov-
(or $7,500).the real estate taxes in the later year when the ery period of the property as discussed earlier,
tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the without regard to the lease term.Cost of a modification agreement. You maytax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable for have to pay an additional “rent” amount over partthe taxes for that year.
of the lease period to change certain provisionsOak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as in your lease. You must capitalize these pay-rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak’s ments and amortize them over the remaining Capitalizingliability under the lease becomes fixed. period of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay-
Rent Expensesments as additional rent, even if they are de-Example 2. The facts are the same as in scribed as rent in the agreement.Example 1 except that, according to the terms of Under the uniform capitalization rules, you havethe lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estate to capitalize the direct costs and part of theExample. You are a calendar year taxpayertaxes when the owner of the property becomes indirect costs for production or resale activities.and sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a buildingliable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct the starting on January 1. However, before you oc- Indirect costs include amounts incurred forreal estate taxes as rent on its tax return for the cupy it, you decide that you really need less renting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.earlier year. This is the year in which Oak ’s space. The lessor agrees to reduce your rent Generally, you are subject to the uniformliability under the lease becomes fixed. from $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release capitalization rules if you do any of the followingthe excess space from the original lease. In in the course of a trade or business or an activityexchange, you agree to pay an additional rent carried on for profit.amount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install-
Cost of ments of $50 each. • Produce real or tangible personal property
You must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize for use in the business or activity.Getting a Lease it over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor- • Produce real or tangible personal propertytization deduction each year will be $150 for sale to customers.You may either enter into a new lease with the ($3,000 ÷ 20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 ×lessor of the property or get an existing lease $50) that you will pay during each of the first 5 • Acquire property for resale. However, thisfrom another lessee. Very often when you get an years as rent. rule does not apply to personal propertyexisting lease from another lessee, you must acquired for resale if your average annualCommissions, bonuses, and fees. Commis-pay the previous lessee money to get the lease, gross receipts for the 3 previous tax yearssions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts youbesides having to pay the rent on the lease. were not more than $10 million.pay to get a lease on property you use in yourIf you get an existing lease on property or
business are capital costs. You must amortizeequipment for your business, you generally
Example 1. You rent construction equip-these costs over the term of the lease.must amortize any amount you pay to get that
ment to build a storage facility. You must capital-lease over the remaining term of the lease. For Loss on merchandise and fixtures. If you ize as part of the cost of the building the rent youexample, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that you paid for the equipment. You recover your cost bythere are 10 years remaining on the lease with bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of claiming a deduction for depreciation on theno option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 each getting the lease. You must capitalize the loss building.year. and amortize it over the remaining term of the
The cost of getting an existing lease of tangi- lease. Example 2. You rent space in a facility toble property is not subject to the amortization conduct your business of manufacturing tools.rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in You must include the rent you paid to occupy thechapter 9. facility in the cost of the tools you produce.
ImprovementsOption to renew. The term of the lease for More information. For more information, seeamortization includes all renewal options plus by Lessee the regulations under section 263A of the Inter-any other period for which you and the lessor nal Revenue Code.reasonably expect the lease to be renewed. If you add buildings or make other permanentHowever, this applies only if less than 75% of improvements to leased property, depreciatethe cost of getting the lease is for the term the cost of the improvements using the modifiedremaining on the purchase date (not including accelerated cost recovery system (MACRS).any period for which you may choose to renew, Depreciate the property over its appropriate re-extend, or continue the lease). Allocate the covery period. You cannot amortize the costlease cost to the original term and any option over the remaining term of the lease. 5.term based on the facts and circumstances. In If you do not keep the improvements whensome cases, it may be appropriate to make the you end the lease, figure your gain or loss basedallocation using a present value computation. on your adjusted basis in the improvements atFor more information, see section that time. Interest1.178– 1(b)(5) of the regulations. For more information, see the discussion of
MACRS in Publication 946, How To DepreciateExample 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease Property.with 20 years remaining on it and two options to Introductionrenew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paid Assignment of a lease. If a long-term lessee
$7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for the who makes permanent improvements to land This chapter discusses the tax treatmen t of busi-
renewal options. Because $7,000 is less than later assigns all lease rights to you for money ness interest expense. Business inte rest ex-
75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (or and you pay the rent required by the lease, the pense is an amount charged for the  use of
$7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30 amount you pay for the assignment is a capital money you borrowed for business act ivities.
Chapter 5 Interest Page 15

Page 16 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The easiest way to trace disburse- Order of funds spent. Generally, you treatTopics
ments to specific uses is to keep the loan proceeds deposited in an account as usedThis chapter discusses:
proceeds of a particular loan separate (spent) before either of the following amounts.
TIP
from any other funds.• Allocation of interest • Any unborrowed amounts held in the
same account.• Interest you can deduct
Secured loan. The allocation of loan pro- • Any amounts deposited after these loan• Interest you cannot deduct ceeds and the related interest is not generally proceeds.• Capitalization of interest affected by the use of property that secures the
loan.• When to deduct interest Example. On January 9, Edith opened a
checking account, depositing $500 of the pro-• Below-market loans Example. You secure a loan with property
ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowedused in your business. You use the loan pro-
funds. The following table shows the transac-ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use.Useful Items tions in her account during the tax year.You must allocate interest expense on the loanYou may want to see: to personal use (purchase of the automobile) Date Transactioneven though the loan is secured by businessPublication January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan A andproperty.
$1,000 unborrowed funds
❏ 537 Installment Sales depositedIf the property that secures the loan is
your home, you generally do not allo- January 13 $500 proceeds of Loan B❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods
cate the loan proceeds or the related deposited
TIP
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses interest. The interest is usually deductible as February 18 $800 used for personal
qualified home mortgage interest, regardless of purposes❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest
how the loan proceeds are used. For more infor-Deduction February 27 $700 used for passive activitymation, see Publication 936.
June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan CForm (and Instructions) deposited
Allocation period. The period for which a November 20 $800 used for an investment❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized loan is allocated to a particular use begins on theDeductions December 18 $600 used for personaldate the proceeds are used and ends on the purposes❏ Sch E (Form 1040) Supplemental earlier of the following dates.
Income and Loss Edith treats the $800 used for personal pur-
• The date the loan is repaid. poses as made from the $500 proceeds of Loan❏ Sch K–1 (Form 1065) Partner’s Share A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. She• The date the loan is reallocated to anotherof Income, Credits, Deductions, etc. treats the $700 used for a passive activity asuse.❏ Sch K–1 (Form 1120S) Shareholder’s made from the remaining $200 proceeds of
Share of Income, Credits, Loan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. She
Proceeds not disbursed to borrower. EvenDeductions, etc. treats the $800 used for an investment as made
if the lender disburses the loan proceeds to a entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treats❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement third party, the allocation of the loan is still based the $600 used for personal purposes as made
on your use of the funds. This applies whether❏ 3115 Application for Change in from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C
you pay for property, services, or anything elseAccounting Method and $400 of unborrowed funds.
by incurring a loan, or you take property subject For the periods during which loan proceeds❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense to a debt. are held in the account, Edith treats them asDeduction property held for investment.
Proceeds deposited in borrower ’s account.❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations Payments from checking accounts. Gen-Treat loan proceeds deposited in an account as
erally, you treat a payment from a checking orproperty held for investment. It does not matterSee chapter 14 for information about getting similar account as made at the time the check iswhether the account pays interest. Any interestpublications and forms. written if you mail or deliver it to the payee withinyou pay on the loan is investment interest ex- a reasonable period after you write it. You canpense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan, treat checks written on the same day as writtenyou must reallocate the loan based on the use of in any order.the funds.Allocation of Interest
Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re-
Example. Connie, a calendar-year tax- ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-The rules for deducting interest vary, depending
payer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im- ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treaton whether the loan proceeds are used for busi-
mediately uses the proceeds to open a checking any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)ness, personal, investment, or passive activi-
account. No other amounts are deposited in the made from any account you own, or from cash,ties. If you use the proceeds of a loan for more
account during the year and no part of the loan as made from those proceeds. This applies tothan one type of expense, you must make an
principal is repaid during the year. On April 1, any payment made within 30 days before orallocation to determine the interest for each use
Connie uses $20,000 from the checking account after the proceeds are received in cash or de-of the loan’s proceeds.
for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem- posited in your account.Allocate your interest expense to the follow-
ber 1, Connie uses an additional $40,000 from If the loan proceeds are deposited in aning categories.
the account for personal purposes. account, you can apply this rule even if the rules• Trade or business interest Under the interest allocation rules, the entire stated earlier under Order of funds spent would
$100,000 loan is treated as property held for otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as• Passive activity interest
investment for the period from January 4 used for other purposes. If you apply this rule to• Investment interest through March 31. From April 1 through August any payments, disregard those payments (and
the proceeds from which they are made) when31, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan as• Portfolio interest
applying the rules stated under Order of fundsused in the passive activity and $80,000 of the• Personal interest spent.loan as property held for investment. From Sep-
tember 1 through December 31, she must treatIn general, you allocate interest on a loan the If you received the loan proceeds in cash,
$40,000 of the loan as used for personal pur-same way you allocate the loan proceeds. You you can treat the payment as made on the date
poses, $20,000 as used in the passive activity,allocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse- you received the cash instead of the date you
and $40,000 as property held for investment.ments to specific uses. actually made the payment.
Page 16 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 17 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line of credit (continuous borrowings).Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 on How to report. Individuals should report
The following rules apply if you have a line of their share of deductible partnership or S corpo-August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash.
credit or similar arrangement. ration interest expense on either Schedule A orFrank deposits $1,500 in an account on August
Schedule E of Form 1040, depending on the18 and on August 28 writes a check on the 1) Treat all borrowed funds on which interest type of asset (or expenditure if the allocation isaccount for a passive activity expense. Also, accrues at the same fixed or variable rate based on the tracing of loan proceeds) to whichFrank deposits his paycheck, deposits other as a single loan. the interest expense is allocated.loan proceeds, and pays his bills during the
For interest allocated to trade or business2) Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowedsame period. Regardless of these other transac- assets (or expenditures), report the interest infunds on which interest accrues at differenttions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit he Part II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a separatefixed or variable rates as different loans.made on August 18 as being paid on August 4 line, put “business interest” and the name of theTreat these loans as repaid in the orderfrom the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank can partnership or S corporation in column (a) andshown on the loan agreement.treat the passive activity expense he paid on the amount in column (i).August 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro- For interest allocated to passive activity use,Loan refinancing. Allocate the replacementceeds treated as deposited in the account. enter the interest on Form 8582 as a deductionloan to the same uses to which the repaid loan from the passive activity of the partnership or SOptional method for determining date of was allocated. Make the allocation only to the corporation. Show any deductible amount inreallocation. You can use the following extent you use the proceeds of the new loan to Part II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a separatemethod to determine the date loan proceeds are repay any part of the original loan. line, put “passive interest” and the name of thereallocated to another use. You can treat all
entity in column (a) and the amount in columnpayments from loan proceeds in the account Partnerships (g).during any month as taking place on the later of and S Corporations For interest allocated to investment use,the following dates. enter the interest on Form 4952. Carry any
The following rules apply to the allocation of• The first day of that month. deductible amount allocated to royalties to Part
interest expense in connection with debt-fi- II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a separate line• The date the loan proceeds are deposited nanced acquisitions of interests in partnerships enter “investment interest” and the name of thein the account. and S corporations. These rules also apply to partnership or S corporation in column (a) and
the allocation of interest expense in connection the amount in column (i). Carry the balance ofHowever, you can use this optional method only
with debt-financed distributions from partner- the deductible amount to line 13, Schedule Aif you treat all payments from the account during ships and S corporations. (Form 1040).the same calendar month in the same way.
Any interest allocated to proceeds used forThese rules do not apply if the partner-Interest on a separate account. If you personal purposes is generally not deductible.ship or S corporation is formed or usedhave an account that contains only loan pro- for the principal purpose of avoidingCAUTION
!
ceeds and interest earned on the account, you Debt-financed distribution. A debt-financedthe interest allocation rules.can treat any payment from that account as distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor-
being made first from the interest. When the poration borrows funds and allocates thoseDebt-financed acquisition. A debt-financedinterest earned is used up, any remaining pay- funds to distributions made to partners or share-acquisition is the use of loan proceeds to buy an holders. The distributed loan proceeds and re-ments are from loan proceeds. interest in, or to make a contribution to the capi- lated interest expense must be reported to thetal of, a partnership or S corporation.Example. You borrowed $20,000 and used partners or shareholders separately. This is be-You must allocate the loan proceeds and the cause the loan proceeds and the interest ex-the proceeds of this loan to open a new savings related interest expense among all the assets of pense must be allocated depending on how theaccount. When the account had earned interest the entity. You can use any reasonable method. partner or shareholder uses the proceeds.of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur- If you buy an interest in a partnership or S This treatment of debt-financed distributionsposes. You can treat the withdrawal as coming corporation (other than by way of a contribution follows the general allocation rules discussedfirst from the interest earned on the account, to capital), reasonable methods include a pro earlier. For example, if a shareholder uses dis-$867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133 rata allocation based on the fair market value, tributed loan proceeds to invest in a passive($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on the book value, or adjusted basis of the assets, activity, that shareholder ’s portion of the Sloan from the time it was deposited in the ac- reduced by any debts allocated to the assets. corporation’s interest expense on the loan pro-count until the time of the withdrawal is invest- If you contribute to the capital of a partner- ceeds is allocated to a passive activity use.ment interest expense. The interest charged on ship or S corporation, reasonable methods ordi-
the part of the proceeds used for personal pur- Optional allocation method. The partner-narily include allocating the debt among all the
poses ($19,133) from the time you withdrew it ship or S corporation can choose to allocate theassets or tracing the loan proceeds to the
distributed loan proceeds to other expendituresuntil you either repay it or reallocate it to another entity’s expenditures.
it makes during the tax year of the distribution.Treat the purchase of an interest in a partner-use is personal interest expense. The interest
This allocation is limited to the difference be-ship or S corporation as a contribution to capitalcharged on the loan proceeds you left in the
tween the other expenditures and any loan pro-to the extent the entity receives any proceeds ofaccount ($867) continues to be investment inter-
ceeds already allocated to them. For anythe purchase.est expense until you either repay it or reallocate
distributed loan proceeds that are more than theit to another use.
amount allocated to the other expenditures, theExample. You buy an interest in a partner-
rules in the previous paragraph apply.ship for $20,000 using borrowed funds. TheLoan repayment. When you repay any part of partnership’s only assets include machinerya loan allocated to more than one use, treat it as How to report. If the entity does not use theused in its business valued at $60,000 andbeing repaid in the following order. optional allocation method, it reports the intereststocks valued at $15,000. You allocate the loan expense on the loan proceeds on the line onproceeds based on the value of the assets.1) Personal use. Schedule K – 1 (Form 1065 or Form 1120S) forTherefore, you allocate $16,000 of the loan pro- “Other deductions.” The expense is identified on2) Investments and passive activities (other ceeds ($60,000/$75,000 × $20,000) and the in- an attached schedule as “Interest expense allo-than those included in (3)). terest expense on that part to trade or business cated to debt-financed distributions. ” The part-use. You allocate the remaining $4,0003) Passive activities in connection with a ner or shareholder claims the interest expense($15,000/$75,000 × $20,000) and the interest onrental real estate activity in which you ac- depending on how the distribution was used.that part to investment use.tively participate. If the entity uses the optional allocation
Reallocation. If you allocate the loan pro- method, it reports the interest expense on the4) Former passive activities. ceeds among the assets, you must make a real- loan proceeds allocated to other expenditures
5) Trade or business use and expenses for location if the assets or the use of the assets on the appropriate line or lines of Schedule K – 1.
certain low-income housing projects. change. For example, if the entity chooses to allocate the
Chapter 5 Interest Page 17

Page 18 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loan proceeds and related interest to a rental Prepayment penalty. If you pay off your 2) Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to
activity expenditure, the entity takes the interest mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty for maturity.
into account in figuring the net rental income or doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter- 3) Subtract any qualified stated interest pay-loss reported on Schedule K– 1. est. ments from the result in (2). This is the
OID you can deduct in the first year.More information. For more information on Interest on employment tax deficiency. In-
allocating and reporting these interest ex- To figure your deduction in any subsequentterest charged on employment taxes assessed
penses, see Notice 88– 37 in Cumulative Bulle- year, follow the above steps, except determineon your business is deductible.
tin 1988 – 1. Also see Notice 89 – 35 in the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get the
Cumulative Bulletin 1989– 1. adjusted issue price, add to the issue price anyOriginal issue discount (OID). OID is a form
OID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2)of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-
and (3) above.
erally has OID when its proceeds are less than
The yield to maturity is generally shown inits principal amount. The OID is the difference
the literature you receive from your lender. If youInterest You between the stated redemption price at maturity
do not have this information, consult your lenderand the issue price of the loan.
or tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity isCan Deduct  A loan’s stated redemption price at matur- the discount rate that, when used in computingity is the sum of all amounts (principal and the present value of all principal and interestYou can generally deduct all interest you pay or interest) payable on it other than qualified stated payments, produces an amount equal to theaccrue during the tax year on debts related to interest. Qualified stated interest is stated in- principal amount of the loan.your trade or business. Interest relates to your terest that is unconditionally payable in cash or
trade or business if you use the proceeds of the property (other than another loan of the issuer) Example. The facts are the same as in theloan for a trade or business expense. It does not at least annually over the term of the loan at a previous example, except that you deduct thematter what type of property secures the loan. single fixed rate. OID on a constant yield basis over the term ofYou can deduct interest on a debt only if you You generally deduct OID over the term of the loan. The yield to maturity on your loan ismeet all the following requirements. the loan. Figure the amount to deduct each year 10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2001,using the constant-yield method , unless the• You are legally liable for that debt. you can deduct $93 [($98,500 × .102467) −OID on the loan is de minimis. $10,000]. For 2002, you can deduct $103• Both you and the lender intend that the
[($98,593 × .102467) − $10,000].De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if itdebt be repaid.
is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan or• You and the lender have a true stated redemption price of the loan at maturity mortgage ends, you may be able to deduct anydebtor-creditor relationship. multiplied by the number of full years from the remaining OID in the tax year in which the loandate of original issue to maturity (the term of the or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may endloan).Partial liability. If you are liable for part of a due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure,
business debt, you can deduct only your share If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one or similar event.
of the total interest paid or accrued. of the following ways to figure the amount you
If you refinance with the original lender,can deduct each year.
you generally cannot deduct the re-Example. You and your brother borrow
• On a constant-yield basis over the term of maining OID in the year in which themoney. You are liable for 50% of the note. You
CAUTION
!
the loan. refinancing occurs, but you may be able to de-use your half of the loan in your business, and
duct it over the term of the new mortgage oryou make one-half of the loan payments. You • On a straight-line basis over the term of loan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed fromcan deduct your half of the total interest pay- the loan. original lender under Interest You Cannot De-ments as a business deduction.
• In proportion to stated interest payments. duct, later.
Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paid • In its entirety at maturity of the loan.
Points. The term “points” is often used to de-or accrued on real estate you own legally or
You make this choice by deducting the OID in a scribe some of the charges paid by a borrowerequitably is deductible. However, rather than
manner consistent with the method chosen on when the borrower takes out a loan or a mort-deducting the interest currently, you may have
your timely filed tax return for the tax year in gage. These charges are also called loan origi-to add it to the cost basis of the property as
which the loan is issued. nation fees, maximum loan charges, or premiumexplained later under Capitalization of Interest.
charges. If any of these charges (points) areStatement. If you paid $600 or more of Example. On January 1, 2001, you took out solely for the use of money, they are interest.mortgage interest (including certain points) dur- a $100,000 discounted loan and received Because points are prepaid interest, youing the year on any one mortgage, you generally $98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature on cannot deduct the full amount in the year paid.will receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement. January 1, 2011 (a 10-year term), and the (For an exception for points paid on your homeYou will receive the statement if you pay interest $100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter- mortgage, see Publication 936.) Instead, theto a person (including a financial institution or a est of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of each points reduce the issue price of the loan andcooperative housing corporation) in the course year, beginning January 1, 2002. The $1,500 result in original issue discount, deductible asof that person ’s trade or business. A govern- OID on the loan is de minimis because it is less explained in the preceding discussion.mental unit is a person for purposes of furnishing than $2,500 ($100,000 × .0025 × 10). You
the statement. Partial payments on a nontax debt. If youchoose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basis
make partial payments on a debt (other than aIf you receive a refund of interest you over- over the term of the loan. Beginning in 2001, you
debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied,paid in an earlier year, this amount will be re- can deduct $150 each year for 10 years.
in general, first to interest and any remainder toported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannot Constant-yield method. If the OID is not de principal. You can deduct only the interest. Thisdeduct this amount. For information on how to minimis, you must use the constant-yield rule does not apply when it can be inferred thatreport this refund, see Refunds of interest later method to figure how much you can deduct each the borrower and lender understood that a differ-in this chapter. year. You figure your deduction for the first year ent allocation of the payments would be made.Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage. using the following steps.
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgage Installment purchase. If you make an install-
cannot be deducted as interest. These ex- 1) Determine the issue price of the loan. ment purchase of business property, the con-
penses, which include mortgage commissions, Generally, this equals the proceeds of the tract between you and the seller generally
abstract fees, and recording fees, are capital loan. If you paid points on the loan (as provides for the payment of interest. If no inter-
expenses. If the property mortgaged is business discussed later), the issue price generally est or a low rate of interest is char ged under the
or income-producing property, you can amortize is the difference between the proceeds contract, a portion of the stated principal  amount
the costs over the life of the mortgage. and the points. payable under the contract may be recharacter-
Page 18 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 19 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ized as interest (unstated interest). The amount debt for that person. However, the deduction for Capitalized interest. Treat capitalized inter-
recharacterized as interest reduces your basis est as a cost of the property produced. Youany month cannot be more than the interest
in the property and increases your interest ex- recover your interest when you sell or use thefigured using Moody ’s Corporate Bond Yield
pense. For more information on installment property. If the property is inventory, recoverAverage-Monthly Average Corporates (Moody’s
sales and unstated interest, see Publication capitalized interest through cost of goods sold. Ifrate) for that month.
537. the property is used in your trade or business,Who is a key person? A key person is an recover capitalized interest through an adjust-officer or 20% owner. However, the number of ment to basis, depreciation, amortization, or
individuals you can treat as key persons is lim- other method.
ited to the greater of the following.Interest You Partnerships and S corporations. The inter-
• Five individuals. est capitalization rules are applied first at theCannot Deduct partnership or S corporation level. The rules are• The lesser of 5% of the total officers and
then applied at the partners ’ or shareholders ’employees of the company or 20 individu-Certain interest payments cannot be deducted. level to the extent the partnership or S corpora-als.In addition, certain other expenses that may tion has insufficient debt to support the produc-seem to be interest are not, and you cannot tion or construction costs.Exceptions for pre-June 1997, contracts.deduct them as interest. If you are a partner or a shareholder, youYou can generally deduct the interest if the con-You cannot currently deduct interest that may have to capitalize interest you incur duringtract was issued before June 9, 1997, and themust be capitalized, and you generally cannot the tax year for the production costs of the part-covered individual is someone other than andeduct personal interest. nership or S corporation. You may also have toemployee, officer, or someone financially inter-Interest paid with funds borrowed from origi- capitalize interest incurred by the partnership orested in your business. If the contract was pur-nal lender. If you use the cash method of S corporation for your own production costs. Tochased before June 21, 1986, you can generallyaccounting, you cannot deduct interest you pay properly capitalize interest under these rules,deduct the interest no matter who is covered bywith funds borrowed from the original lender you must be given the required information in anthe contract.through a second loan, an advance, or any other attachment to the Schedule K-1 you receive
Interest allocated to unborrowed policyarrangement similar to a loan. You can deduct from the partnership or S corporation.
cash value. Corporations and partnershipsthe interest expense once you start making pay-
Additional information. The procedures forgenerally cannot deduct any interest expensements on the new loan.
applying the uniform capitalization rules are be-When you make a payment on the new loan, allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-
yond the scope of this publication. For moreyou first apply the payment to interest and then surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. This
information, see sections 1.263A – 8 throughto the principal. All amounts you apply to the rule applies to contracts issued after June 8,
1.263A– 15 of the regulations and Notice 88– 99interest on the first loan are deductible, along 1997, that cover someone other than an officer,
(as amended by Announcement 89– 72). Noticewith any interest you pay on the second loan, director, employee, or 20% owner. For more
88– 99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988 – 2. An-subject to any limits that apply. information, see section 264(f) of the Internal nouncement 89 – 72 is in Cumulative BulletinRevenue Code.Capitalized interest. You cannot deduct in- 1989– 1.
terest you are required to capitalize under the
uniform capitalization rules. See Capitalization
of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy property
Capitalizationand pay interest owed by the seller (for example, When Toby assuming the debt and any interest accrued
of Intereston the property), you cannot deduct the interest. Deduct Interest
Add this interest to the basis of the property.
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you gen- If the uniform capitalization rules, discussedCommitment fees or standby charges. erally must capitalize interest on debt equal to under Capitalization of Interest,  earlier, do notFees you incur to have business funds available your expenditures to produce real property or apply to you, deduct interest as follows.on a standby basis, but not for the actual use of certain tangible personal property. The propertythe funds, are not deductible as interest pay- must be produced by you for use in your trade or Cash method. Under the cash method, youments. You may be able to deduct them as can generally deduct only the interest you actu-business or for sale to customers. You cannotbusiness expenses. ally paid during the tax year. You cannot deductcapitalize interest related to property that youIf the funds are for inventory or certain prop- a promissory note you gave as payment be-acquire in any other manner.erty used in your business, the fees are indirect cause it is a promise to pay and not an actualInterest you paid or incurred during the pro-costs and you must capitalize them under the payment.duction period must be capitalized if the propertyuniform capitalization rules. See Capitalization
produced is designated property. Designated Prepaid interest. You generally cannot de-of Interest, later.
property is any of the following. duct any interest paid before the year it is due.Interest on income tax. Interest charged on Interest paid in advance can be deducted only in• Real property.income tax assessed on your individual income the tax year in which it is due.tax return is not a business deduction even • Tangible personal property with a class life Discounted loan. If interest or a discount isthough the tax due is related to income from of 20 years or more. subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not ayour trade or business. Treat this interest as a
• Tangible personal property with an esti- payment of interest and you cannot deduct itbusiness deduction only in figuring a net operat-
mated production period of more than 2 when you get the loan. For more information,ing loss deduction.
see Original issue discount (OID) under Interestyears.Penalties. Penalties on underpaid deficien- You Can Deduct, earlier.• Tangible personal property with an esti-cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-
Refunds of interest. If you pay interest andmated production period of more than 1est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, you
then receive a refund in the same tax year of anyyear if the estimated cost of production iscannot deduct any fines or penalties.
part of the interest, reduce your interest deduc-more than $1 million.Interest on loans with respect to life insur- tion by the refund. If you receive the refund in aance policies. You generally cannot deduct later tax year, include the refund in your incomeProperty you produce. You produce propertyinterest on a debt incurred with respect to any to the extent the deduction for the interest re-if you construct, build, install, manufacture, de-life insurance, annuity, or endowment contract duced your tax.velop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treatthat covers any individual unless that individual
property produced for you under a contract asis a key person. Accrual method. Under the accrual method,
produced by you up to the amount you pay orIf the policy or contract covers a key person, you can deduct only interest that has accrued
you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 of incur for the property. during the tax year.
Chapter 5 Interest Page 19

Page 20 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Prepaid interest. You generally cannot de- www.irs.gov.You can also contact an IRS office 2) Compensation-related loans or
duct any interest paid before it is due. Instead, to get these rates. corporation-shareholder loans if the avoid-
deduct it in the year in which it is due. ance of any federal tax is not a principal
purpose of the interest arrangement.Loans subject to the rules. The rules forDiscounted loan. If interest or a discount is below-market loans apply to the following.subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a This exception does not apply to a term loan
payment of interest and you cannot deduct it described in (2) above that was previously sub-1) Gift loans (below-market loans where the
when you get the loan. For more information, ject to the below-market loan rules. Those rulesforgone interest is in the nature of a gift).
see Original issue discount (OID) under Interest will continue to apply even if the outstanding
2) Compensation-related loans (below-mar-You Can Deduct, earlier. balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.
ket loans between an employer and an
Tax deficiency. If you contest a federal in- employee or between an independent con- Exceptions for loans without significant taxcome tax deficiency, interest does not accrue tractor and a person for whom the contrac- effect. The following loans are specifically ex-until the tax year the final determination of liabil- tor provides services). empted from the rules for below-market loansity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency, because their interest arrangements do not3) Corporation-shareholder loans.then the interest accrues in the year the tax was have a significant effect on the federal tax liabil-asserted and agreed to by you. 4) Tax avoidance loans (below-market loans ity of the borrower or the lender.
However, if you contest but pay the pro- where the avoidance of federal tax is one
posed tax deficiency and interest, and you do 1) Loans made available by lenders to theof the main purposes of the interest ar-
not designate the payment as a cash bond, then general public on the same terms and con-rangement).
the interest is deductible in the year paid. ditions that are consistent with the lender’s
5) Loans to qualified continuing care facilities customary business practices.Related person. If you use the accrual under a continuing care contract (made af-
method, you cannot deduct interest owed to a 2) Loans subsidized by a federal, state, orter October 11, 1985).
related person who uses the cash method until municipal government that are made avail-
Except as noted in (5) above, these rulespayment is made and the interest is includible in able under a program of general applica-
apply to demand loans (loans payable in full atthe gross income of that person. The relation- tion to the public.
any time upon the lender’s demand) outstandingship is determined as of the end of the tax year 3) Certain employee-relocation loans.after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans thatfor which the interest would otherwise be de-
are not demand loans) made after that date.ductible. If a deduction is denied under this rule, 4) Certain loans to or from a foreign person,
the rule will continue to apply even if your rela- unless the interest income would be effec-Treatment of gift and demand loans. If you
tionship with the person ceases to exist before tively connected with the conduct of a U.S.receive a below-market gift loan or demand
the interest is includible in the gross income of trade or business and not exempt fromloan, you are treated as receiving an additional
that person. See Related Persons in Publication U.S. tax under an income tax treaty.payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to the
538. forgone interest on the loan. You are then 5) Any other loan if the taxpayer can show
treated as transferring this amount back to the that the interest arrangement has no sig-
lender as interest. These transfers are consid- nificant effect on the federal tax liability of
ered to occur annually, generally on December the lender or the borrower. Whether an
Below-Market Loans 31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade or interest arrangement has a significant ef-
business, you can deduct the forgone interest fect on the federal tax liability of the lender
If you receive a below-market gift or demand each year as a business interest expense. The or the borrower will be determined by all
loan and use the proceeds in your trade or lender must report it as interest income. the facts and circumstances. Consider all
business, you may be able to deduct the forgone the following factors.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans ofinterest. See Treatment of gift and demand $100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi-loans later in this discussion. a) Whether items of income and deductionviduals, forgone interest treated as transferredA below-market loan is a loan on which no generated by the loan offset eachback to the lender is limited to the borrower’s netinterest is charged or on which interest is other.investment income for the year. This limit ap-charged at a rate below the applicable federal plies if the outstanding loans between the lender b) The amount of the items.rate. A gift or demand loan that is a below-mar- and borrower total $100,000 or less. If the c) The cost of complying with theket loan generally is considered an arm’s-length borrower’s net investment income is $1,000 or below-market loan provisions if theytransaction in which you, the borrower, are con- less, it is treated as zero. This limit does not were to apply.sidered as having received both the following. apply to a loan if the avoidance of any federal tax
is one of the main purposes of the interest ar- d) Any reasons, other than taxes, for• A loan in exchange for a note that requires
rangement. structuring the transaction as athe payment of interest at the applicable
below-market loan.federal rate. Treatment of term loans. If you receive a
below-market term loan other than a gift loan,• An additional payment.
you are treated as receiving an additional cash Exception for certain loans to a qualifiedThe additional payment is treated as a gift, divi- payment (as a dividend, etc.) on the date the continuing care facility. The below-marketdend, contribution to capital, payment of com- loan is made. This payment is equal to the loan interest rules do not apply to a loan made to apensation, or other payment, depending on the amount minus the present value, at the applica- qualified continuing care facility under a continu-substance of the transaction. ble federal rate, of all payments due under the ing care contract if the lender (or lender ’s
loan. The same amount is treated as originalFor any period, forgone interest  is: spouse) is age 65 or older by the end of the
issue discount on the loan. See Original issue calendar year. For 2001, this exception applies1) The interest that would be payable for that discount (OID) under Interest You Can Deduct, only to the part of the total outstanding loansperiod if interest accrued on the loan at the earlier. from the lender (or lender ’s spouse) that doesapplicable federal rate and was payable not exceed $144,100.Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less. Theannually on December 31, A qualified continuing care facility  is onerules for below-market loans do not apply tominus or more facilities that are designed to providecertain loans on days on which the total out-
services under continuing care contracts and2) Any interest actually payable on the loan standing loans between the borrower and lender
where substantially all the residents have en-for the period. is $10,000 or less. This exception applies only to
tered into continuing care contracts. In addition,the following.
Applicable federal rates are published substantially all the facilities used to provide
by the IRS each month in the Internal 1) Gift loans between individuals if the loan is services required under the continuing care con-
Revenue Bulletin. Internal Revenue not directly used to buy or carry tract must be owned or operated by the loan
TIP
Bulletins are available on the IRS web site at income-producing assets. borrower.
Page 20 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 21 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A continuing care contract is a written con- they are otherwise deductible. For more infor-Useful Items
tract between an individual and a qualified con- mation, see chapter 8.You may want to see:
tinuing care facility that meets all the following
Refunds of taxes. If you receive a refund forconditions. Publication any taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in-
clude the refund in income to the extent the1) The individual and/or the individual ’s ❏ 15 Circular E, Employer’s Tax Guide
deduction reduced your federal income tax inspouse must be entitled to use the facility ❏ 378 Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds the earlier year. For more information, see Re-for the rest of their life or lives.
covery of amount deducted in chapter 1.❏ 533 Self-Employment Tax2) The residential use must begin in a sepa-
You must include in income any inter-rate, independent living unit provided by ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods
est you receive on tax refunds.the continuing care facility and continue ❏ 551 Basis of Assetsuntil the individual (or individual’s spouse)
TIP
is incapable of living independently. The Form (and Instructions)facility must provide various “personal
care” services to the resident such as ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
maintenance of the residential unit, meals,
❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment Real Estate Taxesand daily aid and supervision relating to
Taxroutine medical needs.
Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,❏ 3115 Application for Change in3) The facility must be obligated to provide or foreign taxes on real estate levied for theAccounting Methodlong-term nursing care if the resident is no general public welfare. The taxing authoritylonger capable of living independently. must base the taxes on the assessed value ofSee chapter 14 for information about getting the real estate and charge them uniformly4) The contract must require the facility to publications and forms. against all property under its jurisdiction. De-provide the “personal services” and
ductible real estate taxes generally do not in-“long-term nursing care” without substan-
clude taxes charged for local benefits andtial additional cost to the individual.
improvements that increase the value of theWhen To property. See Taxes for local benefits, later.Sale or exchange of property. Different rules If you use an accrual method, you generallyDeduct Taxesgenerally apply to a loan connected with the sale cannot accrue real estate taxes until you payor exchange of property. If the loan does not them to the government authority. You can,Generally, you can only deduct taxes in the yearprovide adequate stated interest, part of the however, choose to ratably accrue the taxesyou pay them. This applies whether you use theprincipal payment may be considered interest. during the year. See Choosing to ratably accrue,cash method or an accrual method of account-However, there are exceptions that may require later.ing.you to apply the below-market interest rate rules
Under an accrual method, you can deduct ato these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi- Taxes for local benefits. Generally, you can-
tax before you pay it if you meet the exceptionnal Issue Discount in Publication 537. not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and
for recurring items discussed under Economic improvements that tend to increase the value of
More information. For more information on Performance in Publication 538. You can also your property. These include assessments for
below-market loans, see section 7872 of the choose to ratably accrue real estate taxes as streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines,
Internal Revenue Code and section 1.7872 – 5T discussed later under Real Estate Taxes. and public parking facilities. You should in-
of the regulations. crease the basis of your property by the amountLimit on accrual of taxes. A taxing jurisdic-
of the assessment.tion can require the use of a date for accruing
You can deduct taxes for these local benefitstaxes that is earlier than the date it originally
only if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, orrequired. However, if you use an accrual
interest charges related to those benefits. If partmethod, and can deduct the tax before you pay
of the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest,it, use the original accrual date for the year of
you must be able to show how much of the tax ischange and all future years to determine when6. for these expenses to claim a deduction for thatyou can deduct the tax.
part of the tax.
Example. Your state imposes a tax on per-
Example. City X, to improve downtownTaxes sonal property used in a trade or business con-
commercial business, converted a downtownducted in the state. This tax is assessed and
business area street into an enclosed pedes-becomes a lien as of July 1. The accrual date is
trian mall. The city assessed the full cost ofJuly 1 (accrual date). In 2001, the state changedIntroduction construction, financed with 10-year bonds,the assessment and lien dates from July 1,
against the affected properties. The city is pay-You can deduct various federal, state, local, and 2002, to December 31, 2001, for property tax
ing the principal and interest with the annualforeign taxes directly attributable to your trade or year 2002. Use the original accrual date to de-
payments made by the property owners.business as business expenses. termine when you can deduct the tax.
The assessments for construction costs are
You cannot deduct federal income Uniform capitalization rules. Uniform capi- not deductible as taxes or as business ex-
taxes, estate and gift taxes, or state talization rules apply to certain taxpayers who penses, but are depreciable capital expenses.
inheritance, legacy, and succession produce real property or tangible personal prop- The part of the payments used to pay the inter-
CAUTION
!
taxes. erty for use in a trade or business or for sale to est charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes.
customers. They also apply to taxpayers who
Charges for services. Water bills, sewerage,acquire property for resale. Under these rules,Topics and other service charges assessed againstyou may have to either include in inventory costsThis chapter discusses: your business property are not real estate taxes,or capitalize certain expenses related to the
but are deductible as business expenses.property, such as taxes. For more information,• When to deduct taxes see Publication 551. Purchase or sale of real estate. If real estate• Real estate taxes Carrying charges. Carrying charges include is sold, the real estate taxes must be divided
taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or between the buyer and the seller.• Income taxes
to carry, transport, or install personal property. The buyer and seller must divide the real• Employment taxes You can choose to capitalize carrying charges estate taxes according to the number of days in
• Other taxes not subject to the uniform capitalization rules if the real property tax year (the period to which
Chapter 6 Taxes Page 21

Page 22 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the tax imposed relates) that each owned the months after the due date of the return (exclud- ployers must withhold their employe es’ share of
property. Treat the seller as paying the taxes up ing extensions). Attach the statement to the social security and Medicare taxes  along with
to but not including the date of sale. Treat the amended return and write “Filed pursuant to state and federal income taxes. You may also
buyer as paying the taxes beginning with the section 301.9100 – 2” on the statement. File the need to pay certain employment taxes from your
date of sale. You can usually find this informa- amended return at the same address you filed own funds. These include your share  of social
tion on the settlement statement you received at the original return. security and Medicare taxes as an employer,
closing. along with unemployment taxes.If you choose to ratably accrue for a year
If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes until after the first year in which you incur real estate You should treat the taxes you withhold from
they are paid because you use the cash method taxes, file Form 3115. Generally, you must file your employees’ pay as wages on your tax re-
and the buyer of your property is personally this form during the tax year for which the choice turn. You can deduct the employment taxes you
liable for the tax, you are considered to have is to be effective. For more information, see the must pay from your own funds as taxes.
paid your part of the tax at the time of the sale. instructions for Form 3115.
This lets you deduct the part of the tax up to the Example. You pay your employee $18,000Changing. To change your choice to rata-date of sale even though you did not pay it. You a year. However, after you withhold variousbly accrue real estate taxes, file Form 3115must also include the amount of that tax in the taxes, your employee receives $14,500. Youduring the tax year for which the change isselling price of the property. also pay an additional $1,500 in employmentrequested.If you (the seller) use an accrual method and taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as
have not chosen to ratably accrue real estate wages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay from
taxes, you are considered to have accrued your your own funds as taxes.
part of the tax on the date you sell the property. For more information on employment taxes,Income Taxes see Publication 15.Example. Al Green, a calendar year accrual
This section discusses federal, state, local, andmethod taxpayer, owns real estate in X County. Unemployment fund taxes. As an employer,foreign income taxes.He has not chosen to ratably accrue property you may have to make payments to a state
taxes. November 30 of each year is the assess- unemployment compensation fund or to a stateFederal income taxes. You cannot deductment and lien date for the current real property disability benefit fund. Deduct these paymentsfederal income taxes.tax year, which is the calendar year. He sold the as taxes.
property on June 30, 2001. Under his account- State and local income taxes. A corporationing method he would not be able to claim a or partnership can deduct state income taxesdeduction for the taxes because the sale oc- imposed on the corporation or partnership ascurred before November 30. He is treated as business expenses. An individual can deduct Other Taxeshaving accrued his part of the tax, 180/365  (Janu- state income taxes only as an itemized deduc-ary 1– June 29), on June 30 and he can deduct it tion on Schedule A (Form 1040). The following are other taxes you can deduct iffor 2001. However, an individual can deduct a state you incur them in the ordinary course of your
tax on gross income (as distinguished from net trade or business.Choosing to ratably accrue. If you use an
income) directly attributable to a trade or busi-accrual method, you can choose to accrue real
Excise taxes. You can deduct as a businessness as a business expense.estate tax related to a definite period ratably
expense all excise taxes that are ordinary andover that period. Accrual of contested income taxes. If you necessary expenses of carrying on your trade oruse an accrual method, can deduct taxes before business. However, see Fuel taxes, later.Example. John Smith is a calendar year you pay them, and contest a state or local in-taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His real come tax liability, a special rule applies. Under Franchise taxes. You can deduct corporateestate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1, this special rule, you must accrue and deduct franchise taxes as a business expense.2001, to June 30, 2002, are $1,200. July 1 is the any contested amount in the tax year in whichassessment and lien date. the liability is finally determined. Fuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel,If John chooses to ratably accrue the taxes, Filing a tax return is not considered con- and other motor fuels that you use in your busi-$600 will accrue in 2001 ($1,200 × 6/12, July testing a liability. If you do not make an objective ness are usually included as part of the cost of1– December 31) and the balance will accrue in act of protest or show some affirmative evidence the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa-2002. of denial of the liability, you can deduct any rate item.
additional state or local income taxes found toSeparate choices. You can choose to rata- You may be entitled to a credit or refund forbe due for a prior year in the year for which theybly accrue the taxes for each separate trade or federal excise tax you paid on fuels used forwere originally imposed. You cannot deductbusiness and for nonbusiness activities if you certain purposes. For more information, seethem in the year in which the liability is finallyaccount for them separately. Once you choose Publication 378.determined.to ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must use
that method unless you get permission from the Occupational taxes. You can deduct as aForeign income taxes. Generally, you canIRS to change. See Changing, later. business expense an occupational tax chargedtake either a deduction or a credit for income at a flat rate by a locality for the privilege ofMaking the choice. If you choose to ratably taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or a working or conducting a business in the locality.accrue the taxes for the first year in which you U.S. possession. However, an individual cannot
incur real estate taxes, attach a statement to take a deduction or credit for foreign income Personal property tax. You can deduct anyyour income tax return for that year. The state- taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S. tax imposed by a state or local government onment should show all the following items. tax under the foreign earned income exclusion personal property used in your trade or busi-
or the foreign housing exclusion. For information• The trades or businesses to which the ness.
on these exclusions, see Publication 54, Taxchoice applies and the accounting method
Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on aor methods used.
Abroad. For information on the foreign tax credit, service or on the purchase or use of property as• The period to which the taxes relate. see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi- part of the cost of the service or property. If the
viduals. service or the cost or use of the property is a• The computation of the real estate tax de-
deductible business expense, you can deductduction for that first year.
the tax as part of that service or cost. If the
Generally, you must file your return by the due property is merchandise bought for resale, the
date (including extensions). However, if you sales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. IfEmployment Taxes
timely filed your return for the year without the property is depreciable, add the sales tax to
choosing to ratably accrue, you can still make If you have employees, you must withhold vari- the basis for depreciation. For mor e information
the choice by filing an amended return within 6 ous taxes from your employees ’ pay. Most em- on basis, see Publication 551.
Page 22 Chapter 6 Taxes

Page 23 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Do not deduct state and local sales Form (and Instructions) 10) Life insurance covering your officers and
taxes imposed on the buyer that you employees if you are not directly or indi-
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Returnmust collect and pay over to the state rectly a beneficiary under the contract.CAUTION
!
or local government. Do not include these taxes 11) Business interruption insurance that paysSee chapter 14 for information about gettingin gross receipts or sales. for lost profits if your business is shutpublications and forms.
down due to a fire or other cause.
Self-employment tax. You can deduct
one-half of your self-employment tax as a busi-
Self-Employed Healthness expense in figuring your adjusted gross Deductible Premiumsincome. This deduction only affects your income Insurance Deduction
tax. It does not affect your net earnings from You generally can deduct premiums you pay for You may be able to deduct 60% of the amountself-employment or your self-employment tax. the following kinds of insurance related to your paid in 2001 for medical insurance and qualifiedTo deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, line trade or business. long-term care insurance for you, your spouse,27, the amount shown on the “Deduction for
and your dependents if you are one of the follow-one-half of self-employment tax ” line of Sched- 1) Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
ing.ule SE (Form 1040). 2) Credit insurance that covers losses fromFor more information on self-employment • A self-employed individual with a net profitbusiness bad debts.tax, see Publication 533. reported on Schedule C, C– EZ, or F.
3) Group hospitalization and medical insur-
• A partner with net earnings from self-em-ance for employees, including long-term
ployment reported on line 15a of Schedulecare insurance.
K– 1 (Form 1065).
a) If a partnership pays accident and • A shareholder owning more than 2% ofhealth insurance premiums for its part- the outstanding stock of an S corporationners, it generally can deduct them as7. with wages from the corporation reportedguaranteed payments to partners. on Form W– 2.
b) If an S corporation pays accident and The insurance plan must be established underhealth insurance premiums for its 2% your business. You may be allowed this deduc-Insurance shareholder-employees, it generally tion whether you paid the premiums yourself orcan deduct them, but must also include your partnership or S corporation paid them andthem in the shareholder’s wages sub- you included the premium amounts in yourject to federal income tax withholding. gross income. Take the deduction on line 28 ofImportant Change See Publication 15– B. Form 1040.
for 2002 4) Liability insurance. Deductible percentage increases after 2001.
For tax years beginning after 2001, the deducti-5) Malpractice insurance that covers yourSelf-employed health insurance deduction.
ble percentage of health insurance premiumspersonal liability for professional negli-For 2002, the self-employed health insurance
gradually increases. The increases are shown ingence resulting in injury or damage to pa-deduction percentage increases to 70%. See
the following table.tients or clients.Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction.
6) Workers ’ compensation insurance set by For Tax Years Deductible
state law that covers any claims for bodily Beginning In: Percentage
injuries or job-related diseases suffered by 2002 .................. 7 0 %Introduction employees in your business, regardless of
fault. Years after 2002 .......... 100%You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec-
essary cost of insurance as a business expense a) If a partnership pays workers ’ compen- Qualified long-term care insurance. Youif it is for your trade, business, or profession. sation premiums for its partners, it gen- can include premiums paid on a qualifiedHowever, you may have to capitalize certain erally can deduct them as guaranteed long-term care insurance contract for you, yourinsurance costs under the uniform capitalization payments to partners. spouse, or your dependents when figuring yourrules. For more information, see Capitalized
b) If an S corporation pays workers ’ com- deduction. But, for each person covered, youPremiums, later.
pensation premiums for its 2% can include only the smaller of the following
shareholder-employees, it generally amounts.Topics can deduct them, but must also includeThis chapter discusses: 1) The amount paid for that person.them in the shareholder’s wages.
2) The amount shown below. (Use the• Deductible premiums 7) Contributions to a state unemployment in- person’s age at the end of the year.)surance fund are deductible as taxes if• Nondeductible premiums
they are considered taxes under state law. a) Age 40 or younger – $230• Capitalized premiums
8) Overhead insurance that pays for business b) Age 41 to 50 – $430• When to deduct premiums overhead expenses you have during long c) Age 51 to 60 – $860periods of disability caused by your injury
or sickness. d) Age 61 to 70 – $2,290Useful Items
You may want to see: 9) Car and other vehicle insurance that cov- e) Age 71 or older – $2,860
ers vehicles used in your business for lia-
Publication bility, damages, and other losses. If you Qualified long-term care insurance con-operate a vehicle partly for personal use,❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe tract. A qualified long-term care insurancededuct only the part of the insurance pre-Benefits contract is an insurance contract that only pro-mium that applies to the business use of vides coverage of qualified long-term care ser-❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income the vehicle. If you use the standard mile- vices. The contract must meet all the followingage rate to figure your car expenses, you❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods requirements.cannot deduct any car insurance premi-
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts ums. • It must be guaranteed renewable.
Chapter 7 Insurance Page 23

Page 24 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The services must be required by a chronically ill
individual and prescribed by a licensed health
care practitioner.
Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill
individual is a person who has been certified as
one of the following.
• An individual who has been unable, due to
loss of functional capacity for at least 90
days, to perform at least two activities of
daily living without substantial assistance
from another individual. Activities of daily
living are eating, toileting, transferring
(general mobility), bathing, dressing, and
continence.
• An individual who requires substantial su-
pervision to be protected from threats to
health and safety due to severe cognitive
impairment.
The certification must have been made by a
licensed health care practitioner within the previ-
ous 12 months.
Benefits received. For information on ex-
cluding from gross income benefits you receive
from a long-term care contract from gross in-
come, see Publication 525.
Other coverage. You cannot take the deduc-
tion for any month you were eligible to partici-
pate in any employer (including your spouse ’s)
subsidized health plan at any time during that
month. This rule is applied separately to plans
that provide long-term care insurance and plans
that do not provide long-term care insurance.
However, any medical insurance payments not
deductible on line 28 of Form 1040 can be in-
cluded as medical expenses on Schedule A
(Form 1040) if you itemize deductions.
Effect on itemized deductions. Subtract the
health insurance deduction from your medical
insurance when figuring medical expenses on
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-
tions.
Effect on self-employment tax. Do not sub-
tract the health insurance deduction when figur-
ing net earnings for your self-employment tax.
How to figure the deduction. Generally, you
can use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-
tions to figure your deduction. However, if any of
the following apply, you must use the worksheet
in this chapter.
• You had more than one source of income
subject to self-employment tax.
• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555– EZ (re-
lating to foreign earned income).
Table 7-1. Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction
Worksheet (Keep for your records.)
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
Enter total payments made during the year for health insurance
coverage established under your business for you, your spouse,
and your dependents. ( Do not include payments for any month
you were eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your
or your spouse’s employer. Also, do not include payments for
qualified long-term care insurance.)
Percentage used to figure deduction for 2001 .60
Multiply line 3 by the percentage on line 4
Enter your net profit and any other earned income* from the trade
or business under which the insurance plan is established. (If the
business is an S corporation, skip to line 13.)
Enter the total of all net profits from: line 31, Schedule C (Form
1040); line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F
(Form 1040); or line 15a, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065); plus any
other income allocable to the profitable businesses. See the
instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040). ( Do not include any
net losses shown on these schedules.)
Divide line 6 by line 7
Multiply Form 1040, line 27, by the percentage on line 8
Subtract line 9 from line 6
Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 29, attributable to
the same trade or business in which the insurance plan is
established
Subtract line 11 from line 10
Enter your wages from an S corporation in which you are a
more-than-2% shareholder and in which the insurance plan is
established
Enter the amount from Form 2555, line 43, attributable to the
amount entered on line 6 or 13 above, or the amount from Form
2555-EZ, line 18, attributable to the amount entered on line 13
above
Subtract line 14 from line 12 or 13, whichever applies
Compare the amounts on lines 5 and 15 above. Enter the smaller
of the two amounts here and on Form 1040, line 28. (Do not include
this amount when figuring a medical expense deduction on
Schedule A (Form 1040).)
*Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you
created. It does not include capital gain income.
For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract,
enter for each person covered the smaller of the following amounts.
a)
b)
Total payments made for that person during the year.
$230—if that person is age 40 or younger
$430—if age 41 to 50
$860—if age 51 to 60
$2,290—if age 61 to 70
$2,860—if age 71 or older
(Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to
participate in a long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your
or your spouse’s employer.) If more than one person is covered,
figure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then enter
the total of those amounts
Add the total of lines 1 and 2
15)
16)
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
15)
16)
The amount shown below. (Use the person’s age at the end of the
year.)
• You are using amounts paid for qualified
• It must provide that refunds, other than or the contract makes per diem or other long-term care insurance to figure the de-
refunds on the death of the insured or periodic payments without regard to ex- duction.
complete surrender or cancellation of the penses.
More than one health plan and business.contract, and dividends under the contract
Qualified long-term care services. Quali- If you have more than one health plan during themay be used only to reduce future premi-
fied long-term care services are: year and each plan is established under a differ-ums or increase future benefits.
ent business, you must use separate work-• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-• It must not provide for a cash surrender sheets ( Table 7 – 1) to figure each plan ’s netpeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-value or other money that can be paid, earnings limit. Include the premium you paidhabilitative services, andassigned, pledged, or borrowed. under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa-
• Maintenance or personal care services.• It generally must not pay or reimburse ex- rate worksheet and your net profit (or wages)
penses incurred for services or items that from that business on line 6 (or line 13). For a
would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex- plan that provides long-term care insurance, the
cept where Medicare is a secondary payer total of the amounts entered for each person on
Page 24 Chapter 7 Insurance

Page 25 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
line 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than the information about accrual methods of account-
ing, see chapter 1. For information about theappropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person. Capitalized Premiums
exception for recurring items, see Publication
538.Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must
capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirect Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses incosts for certain production or resale activities.Nondeductible advance, even if you pay them in advance. ThisYou include these costs in the basis of property rule applies to any expense paid far enough inyou produce or acquire for resale rather thanPremiums advance to, in effect, create an asset with aclaiming them as a current deduction. You re- useful life extending substantially beyond thecover the costs through depreciation, amortiza-You cannot deduct premiums on the following end of the current tax year.tion, or cost of goods sold when you use, sell, orkinds of insurance. otherwise dispose of the property. Example. In 2001, you signed a 3-year in-Indirect costs include premiums for insur-1) Self-insurance reserve funds.  You can- surance contract. Even though you paid the pre-ance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip-not deduct amounts credited to a reserve miums for 2001, 2002, and 2003 when youment, materials, property produced, or property signed the contract, you can only deduct theset up for self-insurance. This applies even acquired for resale. premium for 2001 on your 2001 tax return. Youif you cannot get business insurance cov-
Uniform capitalization rules. You may be can deduct in 2002 and 2003 the premium allo-erage for certain business risks. However,
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if, in cable to those years.your actual losses may be deductible. See your trade or business or an activity carried onPublication 547. Dividends received. If you receive dividendsfor profit, you do any of the following.
2) Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre- from business insurance and you deducted the
1) Produce real property or tangible personal premiums in prior years, at least part of themiums for a policy that pays for lost earn-
property for use in the business or activity. dividends generally are income. For more infor-ings due to sickness or disability. For this purpose, tangible personal prop- mation, see Recovery of amount deducted  inHowever, see the discussion on overhead erty includes a film, sound recording, video chapter 1.insurance, item (8), under Deductible Pre- tape, book, or similar property.miums, earlier.
2) Produce real property or tangible personal3) Certain life insurance and annuities. property for sale to customers.
a) For contracts issued before June 9, 3) Acquire property for resale.
1997, you cannot deduct the premiums However, these rules do not apply to the follow-on a life insurance policy covering you, 8.ing property.an employee, or any person with a fi-
nancial interest in your business if you 1) Personal property you acquire for resale if
are directly or indirectly a beneficiary of your average annual gross receipts are
Costs You$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.the policy. You are included among
possible beneficiaries of the policy if the 2) Property you produce if you meet either of
policy owner is obligated to repay a Can Deductthe following conditions.
loan from you using the proceeds of the
a) Your indirect costs of producing thepolicy. A person has a financial interest or Capitalizeproperty are $200,000 or less.in your business if the person is an
owner or part owner of the business or b) You treat inventoriable items as materi-
has lent money to the business. als and supplies that are not incidental.
IntroductionFor more information, see Revenueb) For contracts issued after June 8, Procedure 2001– 10 in Internal Reve- This chapter discusses two ways of treating cer-1997, you generally cannot deduct the nue Bulletin No. 2001– 2. tain costs— deduction or capitalization.premiums on any life insurance policy,
You generally deduct a cost as a currentendowment contract, or annuity con-
business expense by subtracting it from yourMore information. For more information ontract if you are directly or indirectly a
income in either the year you incur it or the yearthese rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules inbeneficiary. The disallowance applies
you pay it.Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-without regard to whom the policy cov-
If you capitalize a cost, you may be able tonal Revenue Code section 263A.ers. recover it over a period of years through periodic
c) Partners. If, as a partner in a partner- deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre-
ship, you take out an insurance policy ciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it to
on your own life and name your part- the basis of property to which it relates.When To Deduct
A partnership, corporation, estate, or trustners as beneficiaries to induce them to
makes the choice to deduct or capitalize thePremiumsretain their investments in the partner-
costs discussed in this chapter except for explo-ship, you are considered a beneficiary.
You can usually deduct insurance premiums in ration costs for mineral deposits. Each individualYou cannot deduct the insurance pre-
the tax year to which they apply. partner, shareholder, or beneficiary choosesmiums.
whether to deduct or capitalize explorationCash method. If you use the cash method of costs.4) Insurance to secure a loan. If you take accounting, you generally deduct insurance pre-
out a policy on your life or on the life of You may be subject to the alternativemiums in the tax year you actually paid them,
another person with a financial interest in minimum tax (AMT) if you deduct anyeven if you incurred them in an earlier year.
of the expenses discussed in this chap-your business to get or protect a business However, see Prepayment, later. CAUTION
!
ter, other than carrying charges and the costs ofloan, you cannot deduct the premiums as Accrual method. If you use an accrual removing architectural barriers.a business expense. Nor can you deduct method of accounting, you cannot deduct insur- For more information on alternative mini-the premiums as interest on business ance premiums before the tax year in which you mum tax, see the instructions for one of theloans or as an expense of financing loans. incur a liability for them. In addition, you cannot following forms.In the event of death, the proceeds of the deduct insurance premiums before the tax year
policy are not taxed as income even if they in which you actually pay them (unless the ex- • Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax— In-
are used to liquidate the debt. ception for recurring items applies). For more dividuals.
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 25

Page 26 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IF you . . . THEN . . . • Efficiency surveys.
Deduct research and experimental costs as a Deduct all research and experimental costs for the • Management studies.
current business expense, year of choice and all later years.
• Quality control testing.
Do not deduct research and experimental costs Amortize them over at least 60 months, starting with
• Research in connection with literary, his-as a current business expense, the month you first receive an economic benefit from
the research. torical, or similar projects.
• The acquisition of another’s patent, model,
production, or process.• Form 4626, Alternative Minimum Tax— the choice is to be effective. However, if you
Corporations. timely filed your return for the year without mak-
ing the choice, you can still make the choice by When and how to choose. Generally, you
filing an amended return within 6 months of the can make the choice to deduct these costs onlyTopics due date of the return (excluding extensions). in the first year you incur research and experi-This chapter discusses: Attach the statement to the amended return and mental costs.
write “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100– 2” on You choose to deduct research and experi-• Carrying charges the statement. File the amended return at the mental costs, rather than capitalize them, by
same address you filed the original return.• Research and experimental costs deducting them on your tax return for the year in
which you first incur research and experimental• Intangible drilling costs costs.
• Exploration costs
Research and• Development costs
Experimental Costs• Circulation costs Intangible
• Retired asset removal costs The costs of research and experimentation are Drilling Costs
generally capital expenses. However, you can• Barrier removal costs
choose to deduct these costs as a current busi- The costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermal
ness expense. wells are ordinarily capital expenses. You canUseful Items For information on amortizing these costs, usually recover them through depreciation orYou may want to see: see Research and Experimental Costs in chap- depletion. However, you can choose to deduct
ter 9. intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a current busi-Publication ness expense. These are certain drilling andResearch and experimental costs defined. development costs for wells in the United States❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Research and experimental costs are reasona- in which you hold an operating or working inter-Assets ble costs you incur in your trade or business for est. You can deduct only costs for drilling oractivities intended to provide information that preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, orForm (and Instructions) would eliminate uncertainty about the develop- geothermal steam or hot water.ment or improvement of a product. Uncertainty❏ 3468 Investment Credit You can choose to deduct only the costs ofexists if the information available to you does not items with no salvage value. These include❏ 8826 Disabled Access Credit establish how to develop or improve a product or wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re-the appropriate design of a product. Whether lated to drilling wells and preparing them forSee chapter 14 for information about getting costs qualify as research and experimental production. Your cost for any drilling or develop-publications and forms. costs depends on the nature of the activity to ment work done by contractors under any formwhich the costs relate rather than on the nature of contract is also an IDC. However, seeof the product or improvement being developed Amounts paid to contractor that must be capital-or the level of technological advancement. ized, next.The costs of obtaining a patent, includingCarrying Charges You can also choose to deduct the cost ofattorneys’ fees paid or incurred in making and drilling bore holes to determine the location andperfecting a patent application, are research andCarrying charges include the taxes and interest delineation of offshore hydrocarbon deposits ifexperimental costs. However, costs paid or in-you pay to carry or develop real property or to the shaft is capable of conducting hydrocarbonscurred to obtain another ’s patent are not re-carry, transport, or install personal property. to the surface on completion. It does not mattersearch and experimental costs.Certain carrying charges must be capitalized whether there is any intent to produce hydrocar-under the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor- Product. The term “product” includes any of bons.mation on capitalization of interest, see chapter the following items. If you do not choose to deduct your IDCs as5.) You can choose to capitalize carrying a current business expense, you can choose to• Formula.charges not subject to the uniform capitalization deduct them over the 60-month period begin-rules, but only if they are otherwise deductible. • Invention. ning with the month they were paid or incurred.You can choose to capitalize carrying
• Patent.charges separately for each project you have Amounts paid to contractor that must beand for each type of carrying charge. For unim- capitalized. Amounts paid to a contractor• Pilot model.proved and unproductive real property, your must be capitalized if they are either:• Process.choice is good for only 1 year. You must decide
• Amounts properly allocable to the cost ofwhether to capitalize carrying charges each year • Technique. depreciable property, orthe property remains unimproved and unpro-
• Property similar to the items listed above.ductive. For other real property, your choice to • Amounts paid only out of production orcapitalize carrying charges remains in effect un- It also includes products used by you in your proceeds from production if thesetil construction or development is completed. trade or business or held for sale, lease, or amounts are depletable income to the re-For personal property, your choice is effective license. cipient.until the date you install or first use it, whichever
Costs not included. Research and experi-is later.
How to make the choice. You choose to de-mental costs do not include expenses for any of
How to make the choice. To make the choice duct IDCs as a current business expense bythe following activities.
to capitalize a carrying charge, write a statement taking the deduction on your income tax return• Advertising or promotions.saying which charges you choose to capitalize. for the first tax year you have eligible costs. No
Attach it to your original tax return for the year • Consumer surveys. formal statement is required. If you file Schedule
Page 26 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 27 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
C (Form 1040), enter these costs under “Other These rules also apply to the deduction of be paid or incurred after the discovery of ores or
expenses.” development costs by corporations. See Devel- minerals in commercially marketable quantities.
opment Costs, later. Development costs include those incurred forEnergy credit for costs of geothermal wells. you by a contractor. Also, development costsIf you capitalize the drilling and development Recapture of exploration expenses. When include depreciation on improvements used incosts of geothermal wells that you place in ser- your mine reaches the producing stage, you the development of ores or minerals. They dovice during the tax year, you may be able to must recapture any exploration costs you chose not include costs for the acquisition or improve-claim a business energy credit. See Form 3468 to deduct. Use either of the following methods. ment of depreciable property.for more information.
Instead of deducting development costs inMethod 1— Include the deducted costs inNonproductive well. If you capitalize your the year paid or incurred, you can choose togross income for the tax year the mine reachesIDCs, you have another option if the well is treat them as deferred expenses and deductthe producing stage. Your choice must benonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of the them ratably as the units of produced ores orclearly indicated on the return. Increase yournonproductive well as an ordinary loss. You minerals benefited by the expenses are sold.adjusted basis in the mine by the amount in-must indicate and clearly state your choice on This choice applies each tax year to expensescluded in income. Generally, you must chooseyour tax return for the year the well is completed. paid or incurred in that year. Once made, thethis recapture method by the due date (includ-Once made, the choice for oil and gas wells is choice is binding for the year and cannot being extensions) of your return. However, if youbinding for all later years. You can revoke your revoked for any reason.timely filed your return for the year withoutchoice for a geothermal well by filing an making the choice, you can still make theamended return that does not claim the loss. How to make the choice. The choice to de-choice by filing an amended return within 6 duct development costs ratably as the ores orCosts incurred outside the United States. months of the due date of the return (excluding minerals are sold must be made for each mineYou cannot deduct as a current business ex- extensions). Make the choice on your or other natural deposit by a clear indication onpense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil, amended return and write “Filed pursuant to your return or by a statement filed with the IRSgas, or geothermal well located outside the section 301.9100– 2” on the form where you office where you file your return. Generally, youUnited States. However, you can choose to in- are including the income. File the amended must make the choice by the due date of theclude the costs in the adjusted basis of the well return at the same address you filed the origi- return (including extensions). However, if youto figure depletion or depreciation. If you do not nal return. timely filed your return for the year without mak-make this choice, you can deduct the costs over Method 2— Do not claim any depletion deduc- ing the choice, you can still make the choice bythe 10-year period beginning with the tax year in tion for the tax year the mine reaches the pro- filing an amended return within 6 months of thewhich you paid or incurred them. These rules do ducing stage and any later tax years until the due date of the return (excluding extensions).not apply to a nonproductive well. depletion you would have deducted equals the Clearly indicate the choice on your amended
exploration costs you deducted. return and write “Filed pursuant to section
301.9100– 2.” File the amended return at the
You also must recapture deducted explora- same address you filed the original return.Exploration Costs tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty from
mine property before it reaches the producing Foreign development costs. The rules dis-The costs of determining the existence, location, stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction for cussed earlier for foreign exploration costs applyextent, or quality of any mineral deposit are the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty and to foreign development costs.ordinarily capital expenses if the costs lead to any later tax years, until the depletion you wouldthe development of a mine. You recover these Reduced corporate deductions for develop-have deducted equals the exploration costs youcosts through depletion as the mineral is re- deducted. ment costs. The rules discussed earlier formoved from the ground. However, you can Generally, if you dispose of the mine before reduced corporate deductions for explorationchoose to deduct domestic exploration costs you have fully recaptured the exploration costs costs also apply to corporate deductions for de-paid or incurred before the development stage you deducted, recapture the balance by treating velopment costs.began (except those for oil, gas, and geothermal all or part of your gain as ordinary income.wells). Under these circumstances, you generally
treat as ordinary income all of your gain if it isHow to make the choice. You choose to de-
less than your adjusted exploration costs withduct exploration costs by taking the deduction Circulation Costs
respect to the mine. If your gain is more thanon your income tax return or on an amended
your adjusted exploration costs, treat as ordi-income tax return for the first tax year for which A publisher can deduct as a current business
nary income only a part of your gain, up to theyou wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred expense the costs of establishing, maintaining,
amount of your adjusted exploration costs.during the tax year. Your return must adequately or increasing the circulation of a newspaper,
describe and identify each property or mine, and magazine, or other periodical. For example, aForeign exploration costs. If you pay or incurclearly state how much is being deducted for publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extraexploration costs for a mine or other naturaleach one. The choice applies to the tax year you employees for a limited time to get new sub-deposit located outside the United States, youmake this choice and all later tax years. scriptions through telephone calls. Circulationcannot deduct all the costs in the current year. costs are deductible even if they normally wouldPartnerships. Each partner, not the part- You can choose to include the costs (other than be capitalized.nership, chooses whether to capitalize or to de- for an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the ad- This rule does not apply to the followingduct that partner’s share of exploration costs. justed basis of the mineral property to figure cost costs that must be capitalized.depletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chap-Reduced corporate deductions for explora-
ter 10.) If you do not make this choice, you musttion costs. A corporation (other than an S • The purchase of land or depreciable prop-
deduct the costs over the 10-year period begin-corporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes- erty.
ning with the tax year in which you pay or incurtic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re- • The acquisition of circulation through thethem. These rules also apply to foreign develop-maining 30% of costs and amortize them over purchase of any part of the business ofment costs.the 60-month period starting with the month the another publisher of a newspaper, maga-exploration costs are paid or incurred. The 30% zine, or other periodical, including thethe corporation capitalizes cannot be added to purchase of another publisher’s list of sub-its basis in the property to figure cost depletion. scribers.However, the amount amortized is treated as Development Costs
additional depreciation and is subject to recap-
Other treatment of circulation costs. If youture as ordinary income on a disposition of the You can deduct costs paid or incurred during the
do not want to deduct circulation costs as aproperty. See Section 1250 Property under De- tax year for developing a mine or any other
current business expense, you can choose onepreciation Recapture in chapter 3 of Publication natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well)
of the following ways to recover these costs.544. located in the United States. These costs must
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 27

Page 28 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nership cannot show this, it is presumed that the 4) A parking space must be located so that a• Capitalize all circulation costs that are partner was able to deduct the distributive share person in a wheelchair or on braces orproperly chargeable to a capital account. of the partnership’s costs in full. crutches does not have to wheel or walk
• Amortize circulation costs over the 3-year behind parked cars.
period beginning with the tax year they Example. John Duke’s distributive share of
were paid or incurred. ABC partnership’s deductible expenses for the Ramps.
removal of architectural barriers was $14,000.
1) A ramp must not rise more than 1 inch inJohn had $12,000 of similar expenses in his soleHow to make the choice. You choose to capi- each foot of length.proprietorship. He chose to deduct $7,000 oftalize circulation costs by attaching a statement them. John allocated the remaining $8,000 ofto your return for the first tax year the choice 2) A ramp must have at least one handrailthe $15,000 limit to his share of ABC ’s ex-applies. Your choice is binding for the year it is that is 32 inches high, measured from thepenses. John can add the excess $5,000 of hismade and for all later years, unless you get IRS surface of the ramp. The handrail must beown expenses to the basis of the property usedapproval to revoke it. smooth and must extend at least 1 footin his business. Also, if ABC can show that John past the top and bottom of the ramp. How-could not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 –  $8,000) of ever, this does mean that a handrail exten-his share of the partnership’s expenses because sion that is itself a hazard is required.of how John applied the limit, ABC can addRetired Asset Removal 3) A ramp must have a nonslip surface.$6,000 to the basis of its property.
Costs 4) A ramp must have a level platform at theQualification standards. You can deduct top and at the bottom. If a door swings outyour costs as a current expense only if the bar-If you retire and remove a depreciable asset in onto the platform or toward the ramp, therier removal meets one or more of the followingconnection with the installation or production of platform must be at least 5 feet deep and 5specific standards for improved access for thea replacement asset, you can deduct the costs feet wide. If a door does not swing ontoof removing the retired asset. However, if you disabled or the elderly. the platform or toward the ramp, the plat-replace a component (part) of a depreciable Grading. The ground must be graded to the form must be at least 3 feet deep and 5asset, capitalize the removal costs if the re- level of a normal entrance to make the facility feet wide. A platform must extend at leastplacement is an improvement and deduct the accessible to people with physical disabilities. 1 foot past the opening side of any door-costs if the replacement is a repair. way.Walks.
5) A ramp must have level platforms no far-
1) A public walk must be at least 48 inches ther than 30 feet apart and at any turn.
wide and cannot slope more than 5%. ABarrier Removal Costs 6) A curb ramp with a nonslip surface mustfairly long walk of maximum or near maxi-
be provided at an intersection. The curbmum steepness must have level areas atThe cost of an improvement to a business asset ramp must not be less than 4 feet wideregular intervals. A walk or driveway mustis normally a capital expense. However, you can and must not rise more than 1 inch in eachhave a nonslip surface.choose to deduct the costs of making a facility or foot of length. The two surfaces mustpublic transportation vehicle more accessible to 2) A walk must have a continuing common blend smoothly.and usable by those who are disabled or elderly. surface and must not have steps or sud-You must own or lease the facility or vehicle for den changes in level. Entrances. A building must have at leastuse in connection with your trade or business. one main entrance that a person in a wheelchair3) Where a walk crosses another walk, aA facility is all or any part of buildings, struc-
can use. The entrance must be on a level acces-driveway, or a parking lot, they must blendtures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, or
sible to an elevator.to a common level. However, this does notsimilar real or personal property. A public trans-
require the removal of curbs that are aportation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus or Doors and doorways.
safety feature for those with disabilities,railroad car, that provides transportation service
especially blindness.to the public (including service for your custom- 1) A door must have a clear opening of at
ers, even if you are not in the business of provid- least 32 inches and must be operable by a4) A sloping walk must have a level platforming transportation services). single effort.at the top and at the bottom. If a doorYou cannot deduct any costs that you paid or swings out onto the platform toward the 2) The floor on the inside and outside of aincurred to completely renovate or build a facility walk, the platform must be at least 5 feet doorway must be level for at least 5 feetor public transportation vehicle or to replace deep and 5 feet wide. If a door does not from the door in the direction the door sw-depreciable property in the normal course of swing onto the platform or toward the walk, ings and must extend at least 1 foot pastbusiness. the platform must be at least 3 feet deep the opening side of the doorway.
and 5 feet wide. A platform must extend atDeduction limit. The most you can deduct as 3) There must not be any sharp slopes orleast 1 foot past the opening side of anya cost of removing barriers to the disabled and sudden changes in level at a doorway. Thedoorway.the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However, threshold must be flush with the floor. Theyou can add any costs over this limit to the basis door closer must be selected, placed, andParking lots.of the property and depreciate these excess set so as not to impair the use of the doorcosts. 1) At least one accessible parking space by persons with disabilities.
close to a facility must be set aside andPartners and partnerships. The $15,000
Stairs.marked for use by persons with disabili-limit applies to a partnership and also to each
ties.partner in the partnership. A partner can allocate
1) Stairsteps must have round nosing of be-the $15,000 limit in any manner among the 2) A parking space must be open on one side tween 1 and 11/2 inch radius.partner’s individually incurred costs and the to allow room for a person in a wheelchairpartner’s distributive share of partnership costs. 2) Stairs must have a handrail 32 inchesor on braces or crutches to get in and outIf the partner cannot deduct the entire share of high, measured from the tread at the faceof a car onto a level surface suitable forpartnership costs, the partnership can add any of the riser.wheeling and walking.costs not deducted to the basis of the improved
3) Stairs must have at least one handrail that3) A parking space marked for use by per-property.
extends at least 18 inches past the topsons with disabilities, when placed be-A partnership must be able to show that any
step and the bottom step. But this does nottween two regular diagonal or head-onamount added to basis was not deducted by the
mean that a handrail extension that is itselfparking spaces, must be at least 12 feetpartner and that it was over a partner’s $15,000
wide. a hazard is required.limit (as determined by the partner). If the part-
Page 28 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 29 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4) Each step must not be more than 7 inches 2) A water fountain and a cooler must be Hazards. Hanging signs, ceiling lights, and
hand-operated or hand-and-foot-operated. similar objects and fixtures must be at least 7high.
feet above the floor.3) A water fountain mounted on the side of aFloors. floor-mounted cooler must not be more International accessibility symbol. The
than 30 inches above the floor. international accessibility symbol must be dis-1) Floors must have a nonslip surface. played on routes to a wheelchair-accessible en-4) A wall-mounted, hand-operated water2) Floors on each story of a building must be trance to a facility, at the entrance itself, and atcooler must be mounted with the basin 36on the same level or must be connected wheelchair-accessible entrances to public trans-inches from the floor.by a ramp of the type discussed previ- portation vehicles. This symbol is the outline
ously. 5) A water fountain must not be fully re- drawing of a person in a wheelchair and is
cessed and must not be set into an alcove shown in the following illustration.
Toilet rooms. unless the alcove is at least 36 inches
wide.
1) A toilet room must have enough space for
persons in wheelchairs to move around. Public telephones.
2) A toilet room must have at least one toilet 1) A public telephone must be placed so thatstall that: a person in a wheelchair can reach the dial
and the headset.a) Is at least 36 inches wide,
2) A public telephone must be equipped for ab) Is at least 56 inches deep,
person who is hearing impaired and itc) Has a door, if any, that is at least 32 must be identified as such with instructionsinches wide and swings out, for its use.
d) Has handrails on each side that are 33 3) Coin slots of public telephones must notinches high and parallel to the floor, 11/2 be more than 48 inches from the floor.
inches in outside diameter, 11/2 inches
away from the wall, and fastened se- Elevators.
curely at the ends and center, and
1) An elevator must be accessible to, ande) Has a toilet with a seat 19 to 20 inches
usable by, persons with disabilities and thefrom the finished floor. Rail facilities.elderly on the levels they use to enter the
building and all levels and areas normally3) A toilet room must have, in addition to or 1) A rail facility must have a fare control areaused.instead of the toilet stall described in (2), at with at least one entrance with a clear
opening at least 36 inches wide.least one toilet stall that: 2) Cab size must measure at least 54 by 68
inches to allow for turning a wheelchair. 2) A boarding platform edge bordering aa) Is at least 66 inches wide,
drop-off or other dangerous condition must3) Door clear opening width must be at leastb) Is at least 60 inches deep, be marked with a strip of floor material32 inches.
different in color and texture from the restc) Has a door, if any, that is at least 32 4) All controls needed must be within 48 to of the floor surface. The gap between theinches wide and swings out, 54 inches from the cab floor. These con- boarding platform and vehicle doorwaytrols must be usable by a person with ad) Has a handrail on one side, 33 inches must be as small as possible.visual impairment and must be identifiablehigh and parallel to the floor, 11/2 inches
by touch.in outside diameter, 11/2 inches away Buses.
from the wall, and fastened securely at
Controls. Switches and controls for light,the ends and center, and 1) A bus must have a mechanism such as a
heat, ventilation, windows, draperies, fire lift or ramp to enter the bus and enoughe) Has a toilet with a seat 19 to 20 inches alarms, and all similar controls needed or used clearance to let a wheelchair user reach afrom the finished floor with a centerline often must be placed within the reach of a per- secure location.18 inches from the side wall on which son in a wheelchair. These switches and con-
the handrail is located. 2) The bus must have a wheelchair-securingtrols must not be higher than 48 inches from the
device. However, this does not mean thatfloor.
4) A toilet room must have sinks with narrow a wheelchair-securing device that is itself aIdentification.aprons. Drain pipes and hot water pipes barrier or hazard is required.
under a sink must be covered or insulated. 3) The vertical distance from a curb or from1) Raised letters or numbers must be used to
5) A mirror and a shelf above a sink must not street level to the first front doorstep mustidentify rooms and offices. These identifi-
not be more than 8 inches. Each frontbe higher than 40 inches above the floor, cation marks must be placed on the wall to
doorstep after the first step up from themeasured from the top of the shelf and the the right or left of the door at a height of 54
curb or street level must also not be morebottom of the mirror. to 66 inches above the finished floor.
than 8 inches high. The steps at the front6) A toilet room for men must have 2) A door that might prove dangerous if a and rear doors must be at least 12 incheswall-mounted urinals with the opening of visually impaired person used it, such as a deep.the basin 15 to 19 inches from the finished door leading to a loading platform, boiler
4) The bus must have clearly legible signsfloor or floor-mounted urinals that are level room, stage, or fire escape, must be identi-
that indicate that seats in the front of thewith the main floor. fiable by touch.
bus are priority seats for persons who7) Towel racks, towel dispensers, and other have a disability or are elderly. The signsWarning signals.dispensers and disposal units must not be must encourage other passengers to makemounted higher than 40 inches from the 1) An audible warning signal must be accom- these seats available to those having prior-floor. panied by a simultaneous visual signal for ity who wish to use them.
the benefit of hearing impaired persons. 5) Handrails and stanchions must be pro-Water fountains.
2) A visual warning signal must be accompa- vided in the entrance to the bus so that
1) A water fountain and a cooler must have nied by a simultaneous audible signal for passengers who have a disability or are
up-front spouts and controls. the benefit of visually impaired persons. elderly can grasp them from outside the
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 29

Page 30 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bus and use them while boarding and pay- Other barrier removals. To be deductible, ever, this chapter does not discuss amortization
expenses of removing any barrier not covered of bond premium. For information, see chaptering the fare. This system must include a
by the above standards must meet all three of 3 of Publication 550.rail across the front of the bus interior that
the following tests. passengers can lean against while paying
Topicsfares. Overhead handrails must be contin- 1) The removed barrier must be a substantial This chapter discusses:uous except for a gap at the rear doorway. barrier to access or use of a facility or
public transportation vehicle by persons6) Floors and steps must have nonslip sur- • How to deduct amortizationwho have a disability or are elderly.faces. Step edges must have a band of
• Amortizing costs of going into businessbright contrasting color running the full 2) The removed barrier must have been a
width of the step. • Amortizing costs of getting a leasebarrier for at least one major group of per-
sons who have a disability or are elderly7) A stepwell next to the driver must have, • Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles(such as people who are blind, deaf, orwhen the door is open, at least 2 foot-can-
• Amortizing reforestation costswheelchair users).dles of light measured on the step tread.
Other stepwells must have, at all times, at • Amortizing costs of pollution control facili-3) The barrier must be removed without cre-
least 2 foot-candles of light measured on tiesating any new barrier that significantly im-
the step tread. pairs access to or use of the facility or • Amortizing costs of research and experi-vehicle by a major group of persons who8) The doorways of the bus must have mentationhave a disability or are elderly.outside lighting that provides at least 1
foot-candle of light on the street surface for Useful ItemsHow to make the choice. If you choose toa distance of 3 feet from the bottom step deduct your costs for removing barriers to the You may want to see:edge. This lighting must be below window disabled or the elderly, claim the deduction onlevel and must be shielded to protect the your income tax return (partnership return for Publicationeyes of entering and exiting passengers. partnerships) for the tax year the expenses were
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofpaid or incurred. Identify the deduction as a9) The fare box must be located as far for- Assetsseparate item. The choice applies to all the qual-ward as practical and must not block traffic
ifying costs you have during the year, up to thein the vestibule. ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
$15,000 limit. If you make this choice, you must
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertymaintain adequate records to support your de-Rapid and light rail vehicles.
duction.
Form (and Instructions)For your choice to be valid, you generally1) Passenger doorways on the vehicle sides
must file your return by its due date, includingmust have clear openings at least 32 in- ❏ 3468 Investment Creditextensions. However, if you timely filed yourches wide.
❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortizationreturn for the year without making the choice,2) Audible or visual warning signals must be you can still make the choice by filing an ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—provided to alert passengers who have a amended return within 6 months of the due date Individualsdisability or are elderly of closing doors. of the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi-
cate the choice on your amended return and3) Handrails and stanchions must permit safe See chapter 14 for information about gettingwrite “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100 – 2.”boarding, moving around, sitting and publications and forms.File the amended return at the same addressstanding assistance, and getting off by you filed the original return. Your choice is irrev-persons who have a disability or are eld- ocable after the due date, including extensions,erly. On a level-entry vehicle, handrails, of your return.stanchions, and seats must be located to How To Deduct
allow a wheelchair user to enter the vehi- Disabled access credit. If you make your
cle and position the wheelchair in a loca- Amortizationbusiness accessible to persons with disabilities
and your business is an eligible small business,tion that does not block the movement of
The purpose of this section is to explain how youyou may be able to take the disabled accessother passengers. On a vehicle with steps
deduct amortization.credit. If you choose to take the credit, you mustthat must be used in boarding, handrails
reduce the amount you deduct or capitalize byand stanchions must be provided in the Form 4562. You deduct amortization that be-the amount of the credit.entrance so that persons who have a disa- gins during the current year by completing PartFor more information about the disabled ac-bility or are elderly can grasp them from VI of Form 4562 and attaching it to your currentcess credit, see Form 8826.outside the vehicle and use them while year’s return.boarding. For later years, do not report your deduction
4) Floors must have nonslip surfaces. Step for amortization on Form 4562 unless you must
edges on a light rail vehicle must have a file the form for another reason. You must file
Form 4562 in any of the following situations.band of bright contrasting color running the
full width of the step. • You deduct amortization that begins this9.
5) A stepwell next to the driver must have, year.
when the door is open, at least 2 foot-can- • You claim depreciation for property placeddles of light measured on the step tread. in service this year.AmortizationOther stepwells must have, at all times, at
• You claim a section 179 expense deduc-least 2 foot-candles of light measured on
tion.the step tread.
Introduction • You claim a deduction for any vehicle re-6) Doorways on a light rail vehicle must have
ported on a form other than Schedule Coutside lighting that provides at least 1 Amortization is a method of recovering (deduct- (Form 1040) or Schedule C– EZ (Formfoot-candle of light on the street surface for ing) certain capital costs over a fixed period of 1040).a distance of 3 feet from the bottom step time. It is similar to the straight line method of
edge. This lighting must be below window depreciation. • You claim depreciation on any vehicle or
level and must be shielded to protect the The various amortizable costs covered in other listed property (regardless of when it
eyes of entering and exiting passengers. this chapter are included in the list below. How- was placed in service).
Page 30 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 31 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You claim depreciation on a return for a • Salaries and fees for executives and con- • The cost of accounting services for setting
sultants, or for similar professional ser- up the corporation.corporation (other than an S corporation).
vices. • The cost of legal services (such as draft-
Other forms to use. If you do not have to file ing the charter, bylaws, terms of the origi-
Nonqualifying costs. Start-up costs do not nal stock certificates, and minutes ofForm 4562 for years after the year amortization
include deductible interest, taxes, or research organizational meetings).begins, claim amortization directly on the “Other
and experimental costs. See Research and Ex-expenses” line of Schedule C or F (Form 1040)
perimental Costs, later.or the “Other deductions ” line of Form 1065, Nonqualifying costs. The following costs are
Form 1120, Form 1120-A, or Form 1120-S. not organizational costs. They are capital ex-Purchasing an active trade or business.
However, if you are amortizing reforestation penses that you cannot amortize.Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-
costs, see Where to report under Reforestation tive trade or business include only investigative • Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-Costs, later. costs incurred in the course of a general search curities, such as commissions, profes-for or preliminary investigation of the business. sional fees, and printing costs.These are the costs that help you decide
whether to purchase a new business and which • Costs associated with the transfer of as-
active business to purchase. Costs you incur in sets to the corporation.Going Into Business
an attempt to purchase a specific business are
capital expenses that you cannot amortize.When you go into business, treat all costs you
Costs of Organizingincur to get your business started as capital
Example. In June, you hired an accounting a Partnershipexpenses. Capital expenses are part of your
firm and a law firm to assist you in the potentialbasis in the business. Generally, you recover The costs of organizing a partnership are thepurchase of XYZ. They researched XYZ’s indus-costs for particular assets through depreciation direct costs of creating the partnership.try and analyzed the financial projections ofdeductions. However, you generally cannot re- XYZ. In September, the law firm prepared andcover other costs until you sell the business or Qualifying costs. You can amortize an orga-submitted a letter of intent to XYZ. The letterotherwise go out of business. See Capital Ex- nizational cost only if it meets all the followingstated that a binding commitment would resultpenses in chapter 1 for a discussion of how to tests.only after a purchase agreement was signed.treat these costs if you do not go into business. The law firm and accounting firm continued to
You can choose to amortize certain costs for 1) It is for the creation of the partnership andprovide services including a review of XYZ ’s
setting up your business over a period of 60 not for starting or operating the partnershipbooks and records and the preparation of a
trade or business.months or more. The cost must qualify as one of purchase agreement. In October, you signed a
the following. purchase agreement with XYZ. 2) It is chargeable to a capital account.
The costs to investigate the business before• A business start-up cost. 3) It could be amortized over the life of thesubmitting the letter of intent to XYZ are amortiz-
partnership if the partnership had a fixed• An organizational cost for a corporation. able investigative costs. The costs for services
life.after that time relate to the attempt to purchase• An organizational cost for a partnership. the business and must be capitalized. 4) It is incurred by the due date of the part-
nership return (excluding extensions) forDisposition of business. If you completely the first tax year in which the partnership isBusiness Start-Up Costs dispose of your business before the end of the in business. However, if the partnershipamortization period, you can deduct any remain-Start-up costs are costs for creating an active uses the cash method of accounting anding deferred start-up costs. However, you cantrade or business or investigating the creation or pays the cost after the end of its first taxdeduct these deferred start-up costs only to theacquisition of an active trade or business. year, see Cash method partnership underextent they qualify as a loss from a business.Start-up costs include any amounts paid or in- How To Amortize, later.
curred in connection with any activity engaged in 5) It is for a type of item normally expected toCosts of Organizingfor profit and for the production of income in benefit the partnership throughout its en-a Corporationanticipation of the activity becoming an active tire life.trade or business.
The costs of organizing a corporation are the Organizational costs include the following
direct costs of creating the corporation. fees.Qualifying costs. A start-up cost is amortiz-
able if it meets both the following tests. Qualifying costs. You can amortize an orga- • Legal fees for services incident to the or-
nizational cost only if it meets all the following ganization of the partnership, such as ne-1) It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or tests. gotiation and preparation of theincurred it to operate an existing active partnership agreement.trade or business (in the same field as the 1) It is for the creation of the corporation.
• Accounting fees for services incident toone you entered into). 2) It is chargeable to a capital account. the organization of the partnership.2) It is a cost you pay or incur before the day 3) It could be amortized over the life of the • Filing fees.your active trade or business begins. corporation if the corporation had a fixed
life.Start-up costs include costs for the following
Nonqualifying costs. The following costsitems. 4) It is incurred before the end of the first tax cannot be amortized.
year in which the corporation is in busi-• An analysis or survey of potential markets,
• The cost of acquiring assets for the part-ness. A corporation using the cash methodproducts, labor supply, transportation facil-
nership or transferring assets to the part-of accounting can amortize organizationalities, etc.
nership.costs incurred within the first tax year,
• Advertisements for the opening of the even if it does not pay them in that year. • The cost of admitting or removing part-business. ners, other than at the time the partnershipThe following are examples of organizational
• Salaries and wages for employees who is first organized.costs.
are being trained and their instructors. • The cost of making a contract concerning• The cost of temporary directors.
• Travel and other necessary costs for se- the operation of the partnership trade or• The cost of organizational meetings.curing prospective distributors, suppliers, business (including a contract between a
or customers. • State incorporation fees. partner and the partnership).
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 31

Page 32 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The costs for issuing and marketing inter- You, as an individual, can choose to
ests in the partnership (such as broker- amortize costs you incur to investigate
Getting a Leaseage, registration, and legal fees and an interest in an existing partnership.
TIP
printing costs). These “syndication These costs qualify as business start-up costs if If you get a lease for business property, youfees”are capital expenses that cannot be you acquire the partnership interest. recover the cost by amortizing it over the term ofdepreciated or amortized. the lease. The term of the lease for amortization
purposes generally includes all renewal optionsStart-up costs. If you choose to amortize yourLiquidation of partnership. If a partnership is (and any other period for which you and thestart-up costs, complete Part VI of Form 4562liquidated before the end of the amortization lessor reasonably expect the lease to be re-and prepare a separate statement that containsperiod, the unamortized amount of qualifying newed). However, renewal periods are not in-
the following information.organizational costs can be deducted in the cluded if 75% or more of the cost of getting the
partnership’s final tax year. However, these lease is for the term of the lease remaining on• A description of the business to which thecosts can be deducted only to the extent they the acquisition date (not including any period forstart-up costs relate.qualify as a loss from a business. which you may choose to renew, extend, or
continue the lease).• A description of each start-up cost in-
How To Amortize curred. Enter your deduction in Part VI of Form 4562
if you must file that form, or on the appropriate• The month your active business began (orYou deduct start-up and organizational costs in line of your tax return.was acquired).equal amounts over a period of 60 months or
more. You can choose a period for start-up costs • The number of months in your amortiza-that is different from the period you choose for tion period (not less than 60).organizational costs, as long as both are not less
than 60 months. Once you choose an amortiza- Section 197 IntangiblesFiling the statement early. You cantion period, you cannot change it. choose to amortize your start-up costs by filingTo figure your deduction, divide your total You must generally amortize over 15 years thethe statement with a return for any tax yearstart-up or organizational costs by the months in capitalized costs of “section 197 intangibles” youbefore the year your active business begins. Ifthe amortization period. The result is the amount acquired after August 10, 1993. You must amor-you file the statement early, the choice becomesyou can deduct for each month. tize these costs if you hold the section 197
effective in the month of the tax year your active intangibles in connection with your trade or busi-
business begins. ness or in an activity engaged in for the produc-Cash method partnership. A partnership us- tion of income.Revised statement. You can file a reviseding the cash method of accounting cannot de-
statement to include any start-up costs not in-duct an organizational cost it has not paid by the You may not be able to amortize sec-
end of the tax year. However, any cost the part- cluded in your original statement. However, you tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans-
nership could have deducted as an organiza- action that did not result in a significantcannot include on the revised statement any CAUTION
!
tional cost in an earlier tax year (if it had been change in ownership or use. See Anti-Churningcost you previously treated on your return as a
paid that year) can be deducted in the tax year of Rules, later.cost other than a start-up cost. You can file the
payment. revised statement with a return filed after the Your amortization deduction each year is the
return on which you chose to amortize your applicable part of the intangible’s adjusted basis
start-up costs.When to begin amortization. The amortiza- (for purposes of determining gain), figured by
tion period starts with the month you begin busi- amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months).
ness operations. The 15-year period begins with the later of:Organizational costs. If you choose to amor-
tize your corporation ’s or partnership ’s organi- • The month the intangible is acquired, or
zational costs, complete Part VI of Form 4562How To Make the Choice • The month the trade or business or activityand prepare a separate statement that contains
engaged in for the production of incomeTo choose to amortize start-up or organizational the following information. begins.costs, you must attach Form 4562 and an ac-
• A description of each cost.companying statement (explained later) to your You cannot deduct amortization for the month
return for the first tax year you are in business. If you dispose of the intangible.• The amount of each cost.you have both start-up and organizational costs,
If you pay or incur an amount that increases• The date each cost was incurred.attach a separate statement to your return for
the basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi-each type of cost. • The month your corporation or partnership ble after the 15-year period begins, amortize itGenerally, you must file the return by the due began active business (or acquired the over the remainder of the 15-year period begin-date (including any extensions). However, if you business). ning with the month the basis increase occurs.timely filed your return for the year without mak-
• The number of months in your amortiza-ing the choice, you can still make the choice by You are not allowed any other depreciation
filing an amended return within 6 months of the tion period (not less than 60). or amortization deduction for an amortizable
due date of the return (excluding extensions). section 197 intangible.
For more information, see the instructions for Partnerships. The statement prepared for
Part VI of Form 4562. a cash basis partnership must also indicate the Cost attributable to other property. TheOnce you make the choice to amortize amount paid before the end of the year for each rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply tostart-up or organizational costs, you cannot re- cost. any amount that is included in determining thevoke it. cost of property that is not a section 197 intangi-You do not need to separately list any
ble. For example, if the cost of computerpartnership organizational cost that is
Corporations and partnerships. If your busi- software is not separately stated from the cost ofless than $10. Instead, you can list the
TIP
ness is organized as a corporation or partner- hardware or other tangible property and youtotal amount of these costs with the dates the
ship, only your corporation or partnership can consistently treat it as part of the cost of thefirst and last costs were incurred.
choose to amortize its start-up or organizational hardware or other tangible property, these rules
After a partnership makes the choice tocosts. A shareholder or partner cannot make do not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac-
amortize organizational costs, it can file anthis choice. You, as shareholder or partner, can- quiring real property held for the production of
amended return to include additional organiza-not amortize any costs you incur in setting up rental income is considered the cost of goodwill,
tional costs not included in the partnership ’syour corporation or partnership. The corporation going concern value, or any other section 197
original return and statement.or partnership can amortize these costs. intangible.
Page 32 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 33 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Business books and records, etc. This in- erty or the use of property) is not similar to aSection 197
cludes the intangible value of technical manuals, covenant not to compete to the extent theIntangibles Defined training manuals or programs, data files, and amount paid under the arrangement represents
accounting or inventory control systems. It also reasonable compensation for those services orThe following assets are section 197 in- includes the cost of customer lists, subscription for that property or its use.tangibles. lists, insurance expirations, patient or client files,
Franchise, trademark, or trade name. Aand lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, and1) Goodwill. franchise, trademark, or trade name is a sectiontelevision advertisers.
2) Going concern value. 197 intangible. You must amortize its purchase
Patents, copyrights, etc. This includes pack- or renewal costs, other than certain contingent3) Workforce in place. age design, computer software, and any interest payments that you can deduct currently. For
in a film, sound recording, videotape, book, or4) Business books and records, operating information on currently deductible contingent
other similar property, except as discussed latersystems, or any other information base, payments, see Franchise, trademark, trade
under Assets That Are Not Section 197 In-including lists or other information con- name under Miscellaneous Expenses in chapter
tangibles.cerning current or prospective customers. 13.
5) A patent, copyright, formula, process, de- Customer-based intangible. This is the com- Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, asign, pattern, know-how, format, or similar position of market, market share, and any other section 197 intangible. Section 197 in-item. value resulting from the future provision of tangibles include any right under a license, con-
goods or services because of relationships with tract, or other arrangement providing for the use6) A customer-based intangible. customers in the ordinary course of business. of any section 197 intangible. It also includes7) A supplier-based intangible. For example, you must amortize the part of the any term interest in any section 197 intangible,
purchase price of a business that is for the whether the interest is outright or in trust.8) Any item similar to items (3) through (7). existence of the following intangibles.
9) A license, permit, or other right granted by Assets That Are Not• A customer base.a governmental unit or agency (including
Section 197 Intangiblesissuances and renewals). • A circulation base.
10) A covenant not to compete entered into in • An undeveloped market or market growth. The following assets are not section 197 in-
connection with the acquisition of an inter- tangibles.• Insurance in force.est in a trade or business.
1) Any interest in a corporation, partnership,• A mortgage servicing contract.11) A franchise, trademark, or trade name (in- trust, or estate.cluding renewals). • An investment management contract.
2) Any interest under an existing futures con-12) A contract for the use of, or a term interest • Any other relationship with customers in- tract, foreign currency contract, notionalin, any item in this list. volving the future provision of goods or principal contract, interest rate swap, or
services. similar financial contract.You cannot amortize any of the in-
3) Any interest in land.tangibles listed in items (1) through (8) Accounts receivable or other similar rights to
that you created (rather than acquired) income for goods or services provided to cus-
CAUTION
!
4) Most computer software. (See Computerunless you created them in connection with the tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi- software, later.)acquisition of assets constituting a trade or busi- ness are not section 197 intangibles.
5) Any of the following assets not acquired inness or a substantial part of a trade or business.
Supplier-based intangible. This is the value connection with the acquisition of a trade
resulting from the future acquisition of goods or or business or a substantial part of a tradeGoodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi- services used or sold by the business because or business.ness based on expected continued customer of business relationships with suppliers.patronage due to its name, reputation, or any a) An interest in a film, sound recording,For example, you must amortize the part ofother factor. video tape, book, or similar property.the purchase price of a business that is for the
existence of the following intangibles. b) A right to receive tangible property orGoing concern value. This is the additional
services under a contract or from avalue of a trade or business that attaches to • A favorable relationship with distributors
governmental agency.property because the property is an integral part (such as favorable shelf or display space
of an ongoing business activity. It includes value at a retail outlet). c) An interest in a patent or copyright.based on the ability of a business to continue to • A favorable credit rating. d) Certain rights that have a fixed durationfunction and generate income even though
or amount. (See Rights of fixed dura-there is a change in ownership (but does not • A favorable supply contract.
tion or amount, later.)include any other section 197 intangible). It also
includes value based on the immediate use or Government-granted license, permit, etc. 6) An interest under either of the following.availability of an acquired trade or business, This is any right granted by a governmental unitsuch as the use of earnings during any period in or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen- a) An existing lease or sublease of tangi-which the business would not otherwise be tal unit. For example, you must amortize the ble property.available or operational. capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuing
b) A debt that was in existence when theor renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal-Workforce in place, etc. This includes the interest was acquired.lion or license, or a television or radio broadcast-composition of a workforce (for example, its ex- ing license.perience, education, or training). It also includes 7) A professional sports franchise or any item
the terms and conditions of employment, Covenant not to compete. Section 197 in- acquired in connection with the franchise.
whether contractual or otherwise, and any other tangibles include a covenant not to compete (or 8) A right to service residential mortgages un-value placed on employees or any of their attrib- similar arrangement) entered into in connection less the right is acquired in connection withutes. with the acquisition of an interest in a trade or the acquisition of a trade or business or aFor example, you must amortize the part of business, or a substantial portion of a trade or substantial part of a trade or business.the purchase price of a business that is for the business. An interest in a trade or business
existence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, you includes an interest in a partnership or a corpo- 9) Certain transaction costs incurred by par-
must amortize the cost of acquiring an existing ration engaged in a trade or business. ties to a corporate organization or reorga n-
employment contract or relationship with em- An arrangement that requires the former ization in which any part of a gain or loss is
ployees or consultants. owner to perform services (or to provide prop- not recognized.
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 33

Page 34 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Intangible property that is not amortizable Under the anti-churning rules, you cannot ferent trusts, if the same person is the
under the rules for section 197 intangibles can use 15-year amortization for the intangible if any grantor of both trusts.
be depreciated if it has a determinable useful of the following conditions apply. • A tax-exempt educational or charitable or-life. You generally must use the straight line ganization and a person who directly or1) You or a related person (defined later)method over its useful life. For certain in- indirectly controls the organization (orheld or used the intangible at any timetangibles, the depreciation period is specified in whose family members control it).from July 25, 1991, through August 10,the law and regulations. For example, the depre-
1993.ciation period for computer software that is not a • A corporation and a partnership if the
section 197 intangible is 36 months. same persons own more than 20% of the2) You acquired the intangible from a person
For more information on depreciating intan- value of the outstanding stock of the cor-who held it at any time during the period in
gible property, see What Property Can Be De- poration and more than 20% of the capital(1) and, as part of the transaction, the user
preciated? in chapter 1 of Publication 946. or profits interest in the partnership.did not change.
• Two S corporations, and an S corporation3) You granted the right to use the intangibleComputer software. Section 197 intangibles
and a regular corporation, if the same per-to a person (or a person related to thatdo not include the following types of computer
sons own more than 20% of the value ofperson) who held or used it at any timesoftware.
the outstanding stock of each corporation.during the period in (1). This applies only if
1) Software that meets all the following re- the transaction in which you granted the • Two partnerships if the same personsquirements. right and the transaction in which you ac- own, directly or indirectly, more than 20%quired the intangible are part of a series of of the capital or profits interests in botha) It is (or has been) readily available for related transactions. See Related person, partnerships.purchase by the general public. later, for information about the kinds of
persons that are related. • A partnership and a person who owns,b) It is subject to a nonexclusive license.
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of thec) It has not been substantially modified. capital or profits interests in the partner-Exceptions. The anti-churning rules do notThis requirement is considered met if ship.apply in the following situations.the cost of all modifications is not more
• Two persons who are engaged in tradesthan the greater of 25% of the price of • You acquired the intangible from a dece-
or businesses under common control (asthe publicly available unmodified dent and its basis was stepped up to its
described in section 41(f)(1) of the Internalsoftware or $2,000. fair market value.
Revenue Code).
• The intangible was amortizable as a sec-2) Software that is not acquired in connection
tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans-with the acquisition of a trade or business When to determine relationship. Persons
feror you acquired it from. This exceptionor a substantial part of a trade or business. are treated as related if the relationship existed
does not apply if the transaction in which at the following time.
you acquired the intangible and the trans-Computer software defined. Computer
• In the case of a single transaction, imme-action in which the seller or transferor ac-software includes all programs designed to
diately before or immediately after thequired it are part of a series of relatedcause a computer to perform a desired function.
transaction in which the intangible was ac-transactions.It also includes any database or similar item that
quired.is in the public domain and is incidental to the • The gain-recognition exception, dis-
operation of qualifying software. cussed later, applies. • In the case of a series of related transac-
tions (or a series of transactions that com-Rights of fixed duration or amount. Section prise a qualified stock purchase underRelated person. For purposes of the197 intangibles do not include any right under a section 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenueanti-churning rules, the following are related per-contract or from a governmental agency if the Code), immediately before the earliestsons.right is acquired in the ordinary course of a trade transaction or immediately after the lastor business (or in an activity engaged in for the • An individual and his or her brothers, sis- transaction.production of income) and either: ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,
ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), Ownership of stock. In determining1) Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or and lineal descendants (children, grand- whether an individual directly or indirectly owns
2) Is of a fixed amount that, except for the children, etc.). any of the outstanding stock of a corporation, the
rules for section 197 intangibles, would be following rules apply.• A corporation and an individual who owns,recovered under a method similar to the directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned byunit-of-production method of cost recovery. value of the corporation’s outstanding or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust
However, this does not apply to the following stock. is considered owned proportionately by or for itsintangibles. shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.• Two corporations that are members of the
• Goodwill. same controlled group as defined in sec- Rule 2. An individual is considered to own
tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for his• Going concern value. Code, except that “more than 20%” is sub- or her family. Family includes only brothers and• A covenant not to compete. stituted for “at least 80%” in that definition sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse,and the determination is made without re- ancestors, and lineal descendants.• A franchise, trademark, or trade name. gard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of
Rule 3. An individual owning (other than by• A customer-related information base, section 1563. (For an exception, see sec-
applying rule 2) any stock in a corporation iscustomer-based intangible, or similar item. tion 1.197– 2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.)
considered to own the stock directly or indirectly• A trust fiduciary and a corporation if more owned by or for his or her partner.than 20% of the value of the corporation’sAnti-Churning Rules
Rule 4. For purposes of applying rule 1, 2, oroutstanding stock is owned, directly or in-
3, treat stock constructively owned by a personAnti-churning rules prevent you from amortizing directly, by or for the trust or grantor of the
under rule 1 as actually owned by that person.most section 197 intangibles if the transaction in trust.
Do not treat stock constructively owned by anwhich you acquired them did not result in a • The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci- individual under rule 2 or 3 as owned by thesignificant change in ownership or use. These ary and beneficiary, of any trust. individual for reapplying rule 2 or 3 to makerules apply to goodwill and going concern value,
another person the constructive owner of theand to any other section 197 intangible that is • The fiduciaries of two different trusts, and
stock.not otherwise depreciable or amortizable. the fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-
Page 34 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 35 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gain-recognition exception. This exception • Correction of the amortization deduction an issue under consideration by the fed-
to the anti-churning rules applies if the person for a section 197 intangible for which you eral court or appeals office.
you acquired the intangible from (the transferor) have not adopted a method of accounting.
• You changed the same method of ac-meets both the following requirements. counting (with or without obtaining IRS ap-If an amended return is allowed, you must file proval) during the last 5 years (including1) That person would not be related to you it by the later of the following dates. the year of change).(as described under Related person, ear- • 3 years from the date you filed your origi-lier) if the 20% test for ownership of stock • You filed a Form 3115 to change the samenal return for the year in which you did notand partnership interests were replaced by method of accounting during the last 5deduct the correct amount.a 50% test. years (including the year of change), but
did not make the change because the• 2 years from the time you paid your tax for2) That person chose to recognize gain on Form 3115 was withdrawn, not perfected,that year.the disposition of the intangible and pay denied, or not granted.income tax on the gain at the highest tax A return filed early is considered filed on the due
rate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for Also, see the exceptions listed in sectiondate.
information on making this choice. 2.01(2)(b) of the Appendix of Revenue Proce-If you did not deduct the correct amortization dure 99– 49.If this exception applies, the anti-churning for a section 197 intangible on two or more
rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted consecutively filed tax returns, you have
Disposition ofbasis in the intangible that is more than the gain adopted a method of accounting for the intangi-
recognized by the transferor. ble. You cannot file amended returns to correct Section 197 Intangibles
the amount of amortization.Notification. If the person you acquired the A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia-intangible from chooses to recognize gain under ble property used in your trade or business. Ifthe rules for this exception, that person must you held the intangible for more than 1 year, anyChanging Yournotify you in writing by the due date of the return gain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow-Accounting Methodon which the choice is made. able amortization, is ordinary income (section
If you cannot correct your amortization deduc- 1245 gain). Any remaining gain, or any loss, is aAnti-abuse rule. You cannot amortize any tions for a section 197 intangible by filing section 1231 gain or loss. If you held the intangi-section 197 intangible acquired in a transaction amended returns, you can claim the correct ble 1 year or less, any gain or loss on its disposi-for which the principal purpose was either of the amount only by changing your method of ac- tion is an ordinary gain or loss. For morefollowing. counting for the intangible. You will then be able information on ordinary or capital gain or loss on
to take into account any unclaimed or excess business property, see chapter 3 in Publication1) To avoid the requirement that the intangi- amortization from years before the year of 544.ble be acquired after August 10, 1993. change.
2) To avoid any of the anti-churning rules. Nondeductible loss. You cannot deduct any
Approval required. You must get IRS ap- loss on the disposition or worthlessness of a
proval to change your method of accounting. section 197 intangible that you acquired in theMore information. For more information File Form 3115, Application for Change in Ac- same transaction (or series of related transac-about the anti-churning rules, including addi- counting Method, to request a change to a per- tions) as other section 197 intangibles you stilltional rules for partnerships, see section missible method of accounting for amortization. have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis of1.197– 2(h) of the regulations. Revenue Procedure 97– 27, which is in Cumula- each remaining amortizable section 197 intangi-
tive Bulletin 1997 – 1, gives general instructions ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductibleIncorrect Amount of for getting approval. You do not need IRS ap- loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non-
Amortization Deducted proval to correct any mathematical or posting deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi-
error. See Amended Return, earlier. ble by the following fraction.If you did not deduct the correct amortization for
• The numerator is the adjusted basis of thea section 197 intangible in any year, you may be Automatic approval. You may be able to get remaining intangible on the date of the dis-able to make a correction for that year by filing automatic approval from the IRS to change your position.an amended return. See Amended Return, later. method of accounting for a section 197 intangi-
If you are not allowed to make the correction on ble if you meet both the following conditions. • The denominator is the total adjusted ba-an amended return, you can change your ac- sis of all remaining amortizable section• You did not deduct amortization or youcounting method to claim the correct amortiza- 197 intangibles on the date of the disposi-deducted the incorrect amount of amorti-tion. See Changing Your Accounting Method, tion.zation for the intangible in at least the 2later.
years immediately preceding the year of
change. Covenant not to compete. A covenant not toBasis adjustment. If you could have de-
compete, or similar arrangement, is not consid-ducted amortization but you did not take the • You owned the intangible at the beginning ered disposed of or worthless before you dis-deduction, you must reduce the basis of the of the year of change. pose of your entire interest in the trade orsection 197 intangible by the amortization you
business for which you entered into the cove-were entitled to deduct. If you deducted more File Form 3115 to request a change to a nant.amortization than you should have, you must permissible method of accounting for amortiza-
reduce your basis by the correct amortization tion. Revenue Procedure 99 – 49 and section Nonrecognition transfers. If you acquire aplus any of the excess for which you received a 2.01 of its Appendix, which is in Cumulative section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans-tax benefit. Bulletin No. 1999– 2, has instructions for getting fer, you are treated as the transferor with respectautomatic approval and lists exceptions to the to the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi-automatic approval procedures. ble that is not more than the transferor ’s ad-Amended Return
Exceptions. You generally cannot use the justed basis. You amortize this part of the
If you did not deduct the correct amortization, automatic approval procedure in any of the fol- adjusted basis over the intangible ’s remaining
you can file an amended return to make any of lowing situations. amortization period in the hands of the trans-
the following corrections. feror. Nonrecognition transfers include transfers• You (your federal income tax return) are to a corporation, partnership contributions and• Correction of a mathematical error made under examination. distributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun-in any year. • You are before a federal court or an ap- tary conversions.
• Correction of a posting error made in any peals office for any income tax issue and In a like-kind exchange or involuntary con-
year. the method of accounting to be changed is version of a section 197 intangible, you must
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 35

Page 36 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Maximum annual amortization deduction.continue to amortize the part of your adjusted 3) It consists of at least one acre planted with
The maximum annual amortization deductiontree seedlings in the manner normallybasis in the acquired intangible that is not more
for costs incurred in any tax year is $1,428.57used in forestation or reforestation.than your adjusted basis in the exchanged or
($10,000 ÷ 7), or $714.29 ($5,000 ÷ 7) if marriedconverted intangible over the remaining amorti- Qualified timber property does not include filing separately. The maximum deduction in thezation period of the exchanged or converted property on which you have planted shelter belts first and last tax year of the 84-month amortiza-intangible. or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees. tion period is one half of the maximum annual
deduction, or $714.29 ($357.15 if married filingExample. You own a section 197 intangible Amortization period. The 84-month amorti- separately).you have amortized for 4 full years. It has a zation period starts on the first day of the first
remaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You month of the second half of the tax year you Life tenant and remainderman. If one per-exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kind incur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax- son holds the property for life with the remainder
section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro- payer), regardless of the month you actually going to another person, the life tenant is entitled
incur the costs. You can claim amortization de-visions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor- to the full amortization (up to the annual limit) for
ductions for no more than 6 months of the firsttize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of the reforestation costs incurred by the life tenant.
and last (eighth) tax years of the period.acquired intangible over the 11 years remaining Any remainder interest in the property is ignored
in the original 15-year amortization period for the for amortization purposes.Example. Last year (a full 12-month taxtransferred asset. You amortize the other
year), John Jones incurred qualifying reforesta- Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timber$10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-year
tion costs of $8,400. His monthly amortization property within 10 years after the tax year youperiod.
deduction ($100) is figured by dividing $8,400 by incur qualifying reforestation expenses, report
84 months. Since it was the first year of the any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-
84-month period, he can deduct only $600 tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544
($100 × 6 months). for more information.
Reforestation Costs
Investment credit. Amortizable reforestationAnnual limit. Each year, you can choose to
You can choose to amortize a limited amount of costs qualify for the investment credit, whetheramortize up to $10,000 ($5,000 if you are mar-
reforestation costs for qualified timber property or not they are amortized. See the instructionsried filing separately) of qualifying costs you pay
over a period of 84 months. Reforestation costs for Form 3468 for information on the investmentor incur during the tax year. You cannot carry
are the direct costs of planting or seeding for credit.over or carry back qualifying costs over the an-
forestation or reforestation. nual limit. The annual limit applies to qualifying How to make the choice. To choose to amor-The choice to amortize reforestation costs costs for all your qualified timber property. tize qualifying reforestation costs, enter your de-If your qualifying costs are more thanincurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es- duction in Part VI of Form 4562 and attach a$10,000 for more than one piece of timber prop-tate must be made by the partnership, corpora- statement that contains the following informa-erty, you can divide the annual limit among anytion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, or tion.of the properties in any manner you wish.beneficiary cannot make that choice.
• A description of the costs and the datesA trust cannot choose to amortize re- Example. You incurred $10,000 of qualify- you incurred them.forestation costs and cannot deduct its ing costs on each of four qualified timber proper- • A description of the type of timber beingshare of any amortizable reforestationCAUTION
!
ties last year. You can allocate $2,500 to each grown and the purpose for which it iscosts of a partnership, S corporation, or estate. property, $5,000 to two properties, or the entire grown.$10,000 to any one property, or you can divide
the $10,000 among some or all of the properties Attach a separate statement for each propertyQualifying costs. Qualifying costs include
in any other manner. for which you amortize reforestation costs.only those costs you must capitalize and include
in the adjusted basis of the property. They in- Partnerships and S corporations. A part- Generally, you must make the choice on a
clude costs for the following items. nership or S corporation can choose to amortize timely filed return (including extensions) for the
up to $10,000 of qualifying reforestation costs tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-• Site preparation. each tax year. A partner ’s or shareholder ’s ever, if you timely filed your return for the year
share of these amortizable costs is figured without making the choice, you can still make• Seeds or seedlings.
under the general rules for allocating items of the choice by filing an amended return within 6• Labor. income, loss, deductions, etc., of a partnership months of the due date of the return (excluding
or S corporation.• Tools. extensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state-
The partner or shareholder is also subject to ment to the amended return and write “Filed• Depreciation on equipment used in plant- the annual limit of $10,000 ($5,000 if married pursuant to section 301.9100– 2” on Form 4562.ing and seeding. filing separately) on qualifying costs. This limit File the amended return at the same address
applies to all the partner’s or shareholder’s qual- you filed the original return.Costs you can deduct currently are not qualify-
ifying costs, regardless of their source.ing costs. Where to report. The following chart shows
If the government reimburses you for refores- where to report your amortization deduction forExample. You are single and a partner intation costs under a cost-sharing program, you reforestation costs after you enter it on Formtwo partnerships, both of which incurred qualify-
can amortize these costs only if you include the 4562.ing reforestation costs of more than $10,000 for
reimbursement in your income. the year. Each partnership chose to amortize If you file . . . The deduction goes on . . .
these costs up to the $10,000 annual limit. Your Schedule CQualified timber property. Qualified timber share of that $10,000 is $6,000 for one partner- (Form 1040) Line 27property is property that contains trees in signifi- ship and $8,000 for the other. Although your
Schedule Fcant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlot qualifying costs total $14,000, the amount you
(Form 1040) Line 34or other site that you own or lease. The property can amortize is limited to $10,000.
qualifies only if it meets all the following require- Form 1120 Line 26Estates. Estates can choose to amortize upments. to $10,000 of qualifying reforestation costs each Form 1120-A Line 22
tax year. These amortizable costs are divided1) It is located in the United States. Form 1120S Schedules K and K-1between the estate and the income beneficiary
2) It is held for the growing and cutting of based on the income of the estate allocable to Form 1065 Schedules K and K-1
timber you will either use in, or sell for use each. The amortizable cost allocated to the ben- None of the Line 32 of Form 1040in, the commercial production of timber eficiary is subject to the beneficiary ’s annual above (identify as “RFST”)
products. limit.
Page 36 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 37 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot report your amortization deduction structural components unless the building is ex-
on Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). clusively a treatment facility.
Partner or shareholder. If you are a part- 10.ner in a partnership or a shareholder in an S Basis reduction for corporations. A corpo-
corporation, see the instructions for Schedule ration must reduce the amortizable basis of a
K-1 (Form 1065 or Form 1120S) for information pollution control facility by 20% before figuring
on where to report any allocated amortization for the amortization deduction. Depletionreforestation costs. However, if you have other
reforestation costs you are amortizing, this de- More information. For more information onduction may be limited. See Annual limit, earlier. the amortization of pollution control facilities, Important RemindersEstate. If the estate does not file Schedule see section 169 of the Internal Revenue Code
C or F for the activity in which the reforestation and the related regulations.
Marginal production of oil and gas. Thecosts were incurred, include the amortization
suspension of the taxable income limit on per-deduction on line 15a of Form 1041.
centage depletion from the marginal production
of oil and natural gas has been extended to taxRevoking the choice. You must get IRS ap- Research and years beginning after 1999 and before 2002. Forproval to revoke your choice to amortize refores-
more information on marginal production, seetation costs. Your application to revoke the Experimental Costs section 613A(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.choice must include your name, address, the
years for which your choice was in effect, and You can amortize your research and experimen- Alternative minimum tax. Individuals, corpo-your reason for revoking it. You, or your duly tal costs, deduct them as current business ex- rations, estates, and trusts who claim depletionauthorized representative, must sign the appli- penses, or write them off over a 10-year period. deductions may be liable for alternative mini-cation and file it at least 90 days before the due If you choose to amortize these costs, deduct mum tax.date (without extensions) for filing your income them in equal amounts over 60 months or more. For more information on alternative mini-tax return for the first tax year for which your The amortization period begins the month you mum tax, see the following sources.choice is to end. first receive an economic benefit from the ex-
penditures. For a definition of “research and If you are: See:
experimental costs” and information on deduct- An individual The instructions for Form 6251,ing them as current business expenses, seeSend the application to: Alternative Minimum Tax —chapter 8. Individuals.
Commissioner of Internal Revenue A corporation Form 4626, AlternativeWashington, DC 20224 Optional write-off method. Rather than Minimum Tax — Corporations.
amortize these costs or deduct them as a cur- An estate or trust Form 1041, U.S. Income Taxrent expense, you have the option of deducting Return for Estates and Trusts,
(writing off) research and experimental costs and its instructions.
ratably over a 10-year period beginning with thePollution tax year in which you incurred the costs.
For more information on the optional write-offControl Facilities
method, see Internal Revenue Code section
59(e).You can choose to amortize over 60 months the Introduction
cost of a certified pollution control facility.
Depletion is the using up of natural resources byCosts you can amortize. You can amortize mining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The deple-Certified pollution control facility. A certi- costs chargeable to a capital account if you meet tion deduction allows an owner or operator tofied pollution control facility is a new identifiable both the following requirements. account for the reduction of a product ’streatment facility used, in connection with a plant
reserves.or other property in operation before 1976, to • You paid or incurred the costs in your
There are two ways of figuring depletion:reduce or control water or atmospheric pollution trade or business.
cost depletion and percentage depletion. Foror contamination. The facility must do so by • You are not deducting the costs currently. mineral property, you generally must use theremoving, changing, disposing, storing, or
method that gives you the larger deduction; forpreventing the creation or emission of pollu-
standing timber, you must use cost depletion.tants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facility How to make the choice. To choose to amor-
must be certified by state and federal certifying tize research and experimental costs, enter your
authorities. Topicsdeduction in Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it
to your income tax return. Generally, you mustThe facility must not significantly increase This chapter discusses:
file the return by the due date (including exten-the output or capacity, extend the useful life, or
sions). However, if you timely filed your returnreduce the total operating costs of the plant or • Who can claim depletion
for the year without making the choice, you canother property. Also, it must not significantly • Mineral propertystill make the choice by filing an amended returnchange the nature of the manufacturing or pro-
within 6 months of the due date of the returnduction process or facility. • Timber
(excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to theThe federal certifying authority will not certify
amended return and write “Filed pursuant toyour property to the extent it appears you will
section 301.9100 – 2” on Form 4562. File therecover (over the property’s useful life) all or part
amended return at the same address you filedof its cost from the profit based on its operation
the original return.(such as through sales of recovered wastes). Who CanYour choice is binding for the year it is madeThe federal certifying authority will describe the
and for all later years unless you get IRS ap-nature of the potential cost recovery. You must Claim Depletionproval to change to a different method.then reduce the amortizable basis of the facility
by this potential recovery. If you have an economic interest in mineral prop-
New identifiable treatment facility. A new More information. For more information on erty or standing timber, you can take a deduction
identifiable treatment facility is tangible depre- amortizing research and development costs, for depletion. More than one person  can have an
ciable property that is identifiable as a treatment see section 174 of the Internal Revenue Code economic interest in the same mi neral deposit or
facility. It does not include a building and its and the related regulations. timber.
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 37

Page 38 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You have an economic interest if both the Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of your sold (or that otherwise gives rise to gross
following apply. property is your original cost or other basis, plus income) for the tax year.
certain additions and improvements, and minus A bonus payment includes a bonus for either a• You have acquired by investment any in- certain deductions such as depletion allowed or mineral lease or an oil and gas lease.terest in mineral deposits or standing tim- allowable and casualty losses. Your adjustedber. Use the following fraction to figure the part ofbasis can never be less than zero. See Publica-
the bonus you must subtract.tion 551, Basis of Assets,  for more information• You have a legal right to income from the
on adjusted basis.extraction of the mineral or cutting of the Number of units sold in the tax year Bonus×timber to which you must look for a return Recoverable units from the property PaymentsTotal recoverable units. The total recover-of your capital investment.
able units is the sum of the following. For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos-A contractual relationship that allows you an its, gross income from the property is defined1) The number of units of mineral remainingeconomic or monetary advantage from products later under Oil and Gas Wells. For property otherat the end of the year (including units re-of the mineral deposit or standing timber is not, than a geothermal deposit or an oil and gas well,covered but not sold).in itself, an economic interest. A production pay- gross income from the property is defined laterment carved out of, or retained on the sale of, under Mines and Geothermal Deposits.2) The number of units of mineral sold duringmineral property is not an economic interest. the tax year (determined under your Taxable income limit. The percentage deple-method of accounting, as explained next). tion deduction cannot be more than 50% (100%
for oil and gas property) of your taxable incomeYou must estimate or determine recoverable
from the property figured without the depletionunits (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousandsMineral Property deduction.of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod-
Taxable income from the property meansucts using the current industry method and theThe term “mineral property” means each sepa- gross income from the property minus all allowa-most accurate and reliable information you canrate interest you own in each mineral deposit in ble deductions (excluding any deduction for de-obtain.each separate tract or parcel of land. You can pletion) attributable to mining processes,treat two or more separate interests as one Number of units sold. You determine the including mining transportation. These deducti-property or as separate properties. See section number of units sold during the tax year based ble items include the following.614 of the Internal Revenue Code and the re- on your method of accounting. Use the followinglated regulations for rules on how to treat sepa- • Operating expenses.table to make this determination.rate mineral interests. • Certain selling expenses.Mineral property includes oil and gas wells, THEN the units sold during
IF you use ... the year are ... • Administrative and financial overhead.mines, and other natural deposits (including ge-
othermal deposits). The cash The units sold for which you • Depreciation.There are two ways of figuring depletion on method of receive payment during the
• Intangible drilling and development costs.accounting, tax year (regardless of themineral property.
year of sale). • Exploration and development expendi-• Cost depletion.
An accrual The units sold based on your tures.
• Percentage depletion. method of inventories.
accounting, The following rules apply when figuring yourGenerally, you must use the method that gives taxable income from the property for purposesyou the larger deduction. However, unless you The number of units sold during the tax year of the taxable income limit.are an independent producer or royalty owner, does not include any for which depletion deduc-you generally cannot use percentage depletion • Do not deduct any net operating loss de-tions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells, duction from the gross income from the
later. property.Figuring the cost depletion deduction.
Once you have figured your property’s basis for • Corporations do not deduct charitable con-depletion, the total recoverable units, and theCost Depletion tributions from the gross income from thenumber of units sold during the tax year, you can property.To figure cost depletion you must first determine figure your cost depletion deduction by taking
the following. • If, during the year, you dispose of an itemthe following steps.
of section 1245 property that was used in• The property’s basis for depletion. Step Action Result connection with mineral property, reduce
any allowable deduction for mining ex-• The total recoverable units of mineral in  1 Divide your property ’s Rate per unit.
penses by the part of any gain you mustthe property’s natural deposit. basis for depletion by
total recoverable units. report as ordinary income that is allocable• The number of units of mineral sold during to the mineral property. See section 2 Multiply the rate per Cost depletionthe tax year. 1.613– 5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor-unit by units sold deduction.
mation on how to figure the ordinary gainduring the tax year.
Basis for depletion. To figure the property ’s allocable to the property.
basis for depletion, subtract all the following
from the property’s adjusted basis. Percentage Depletion For tax years beginning after 1997 and
before 2002, percentage depletion on1) Amounts recoverable through: To figure percentage depletion, you multiply a the marginal production of oil or naturalCAUTION
!
certain percentage, specified for each mineral, gas is not limited to taxable income from thea) Depreciation deductions, by your gross income from the property during property figured without the depletion deduction.b) Deferred expenses (including deferred the tax year.
exploration and development costs),
Gross income. When figuring your percent-and Oil and Gas Wells
age depletion, subtract from your gross incomec) Deductions other than depletion. Generally, only independent producers and roy-from the property the following amounts.
alty owners can claim percentage depletion for2) The residual value of land and improve- • Any rents or royalties you paid or incurred any oil or gas well. However, if you are not anments at the end of operations. for the property. independent producer or royalty owner, you may
3) The cost or value of land acquired for pur- • The part of any bonus you paid for a lease be able to claim percentage depletion for the
poses other than mineral production. on the property allocable to the product following items.
Page 38 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 39 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to occupy any retail outlet owned, In addition, there is a limit on the percentage• Natural gas sold under a fixed contract. depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit,leased, or controlled by you or a related
• Natural gas from geopressured brine. later.person.
For information on the depletion deduction for Average daily production. Figure your aver-2) The combined gross receipts from salesthese items, see Natural Gas Wells, later. age daily production by dividing your total do-(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, or
mestic production for the tax year by the numbertheir by-products by all retail outlets takenIndependent Producers and of days in your tax year.into account in (1) are more than $5 millionRoyalty Owners for the tax year. Partial interest. If you have a partial inter-
If you are an independent producer or royalty est in the production from a property, figure yourFor the purpose of determining if this rule
owner, you figure percentage depletion using a share of the production by multiplying total pro-applies, do not count the following.
rate of 15% of the gross income from the prop- duction from the property by your percentage of
• Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities)erty based on your average daily production of interest in the revenues from the property.
of oil or natural gas to commercial or in-domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up to You have a partial interest in the production
dustrial users.your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How- from a property if you have a net profits interest
ever, certain refiners and retailers, as explained in the property. To figure the share of production• Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart-next, and certain transferees of proven oil and for your net profits interest, you must determinement of Defense.gas properties, as explained later, cannot claim your percentage participation (as measured by
• Sales of oil or natural gas or their by-prod-percentage depletion. For information on figur- the net profits) in the gross revenue from the
ucts outside the United States if none ofing the deduction, see Figuring percentage de- property. To figure this percentage, you divide
your domestic production or that of a re-pletion, later. the income you receive for your net profits inter-
lated person is exported during the tax est by the gross revenue from the property.Refiners who cannot claim percentage de- year or the prior tax year.pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple- Example. John Oak owns oil property intion if you or a related person refine crude oil and Sales through a related person. You are which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest.you and the related person refined more than considered to be selling through a related per- During the year, the property produced 10,00050,000 barrels on any day during the tax year. son if any sale by the related person produces barrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000.
gross income from which you may benefit be- John had expenses of $90,000 attributable toRelated person. You and another person
cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter- the property. The property generated a net profitare related persons if either of you holds a signif-
est in the person. of $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re-icant ownership interest in the other person or if
ceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 × .20) fora third person holds a significant ownership in- You are not considered to be selling through
his net profits interest.terest in both of you. a related person who is a retailer if all the follow-
For example, a corporation, partnership, es- Paul determined his percentage participationing apply.
tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significant to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income he
• You do not have a significant ownershipownership interest in it are related persons. A received) by $200,000 (the gross revenue from
interest in the retailer.partnership and a trust are related persons if one the property). Paul determined his share of the
person holds a significant ownership interest in oil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar-• You sell your production to persons who
each of them. rels × 11%).are not related to either you or the retailer.
For purposes of the related person rules,
• The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas Depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Gen-significant ownership interest means direct or
from your customers or persons related to erally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar-indirect ownership of 5% or more in any one of
your customers. rels. Your depletable natural gas quantity isthe following.
6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number of• There are no arrangements for the retailer• The value of the outstanding stock of a barrels of your depletable oil quantity that youto acquire oil or natural gas you producedcorporation. choose to apply. If you claim depletion on bothfor resale or made available for purchase oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de-• The interest in the profits or capital of a by the retailer. pletable oil quantity by the number of barrels youpartnership.
• Neither you nor the retailer knows of or use to figure your depletable natural gas quan-• The beneficial interests in an estate or controls the final disposition of the oil or tity. If you are involved in marginal production,trust. natural gas you sold or the original source see section 613A(c) of the Internal Revenue
of the petroleum products the retailer ac- Code to figure your depletable oil or natural gasAny interest owned by or for a corporation, quired for resale. quantity.partnership, trust, or estate is considered to be
owned directly both by itself and proportionately Example. You have both oil and natural gasTransfers. You cannot claim percentage de-by its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. production. To figure your depletable naturalpletion if you received your interest in a proven gas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels ofRetailers who cannot claim percentage de- oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 and your depletable oil quantity. Your depletable nat-pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple- before October 12, 1990. For a definition of the ural gas quantity is 2.16 million cubic feet of gastion if both the following apply. term “transfer,” see section 1.613A – 7(n) of the (360 × 6000). You must reduce your depletableregulations.1) You sell oil or natural gas or their by-prod- oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000 − 360).
ucts directly or through a related person in You must allocate the depletable oil or gasFiguring percentage depletion. Generally,any of the following situations. quantity among the following related persons inas an independent producer or royalty owner, proportion to each entity ’s or family member ’syou figure your percentage depletion by comput-a) Through a retail outlet operated by you production of domestic oil or gas for the year.ing your average daily production of domestic oilor a related person.
or gas and comparing it to your depletable oil or • Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% orb) To any person who is required under gas quantity. If your average daily production more of the beneficial interest is owned byan agreement with you or a related per- does not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan- the same or related persons (consideringson to use a trademark, trade name, or tity, you figure your percentage depletion by only persons that own at least 5% of theservice mark or name owned by you or multiplying the gross income from the oil or gas beneficial interest).a related person in marketing or distrib- property by 15%. If your average daily produc-uting oil, natural gas, or their by-prod- • You and your spouse and minor children.tion of domestic oil or gas exceeds your deplet-ucts. able oil or gas quantity, you must make an For purposes of this allocation, a related person
allocation as explained later under Averagec) To any person given authority under an is anyone mentioned under Related persons in
daily production exceeds depletable quantities.agreement with you or a related person chapter 12 except that item (1) in that discussion
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 39

Page 40 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Temporary suspension of taxable income Electing large partnerships must figure de-includes only an individual, his or her spouse,
limit for marginal production. For tax yearsand minor children. pletion allowance. For partnership tax years
beginning after 1997 and before 2002, percent- beginning after 1997, an electing large partner-Members of the same controlled group of age depletion on the marginal production of oil ship, rather than each partner, generally mustcorporations are treated as one taxpayer when or natural gas is not limited to taxable income figure the depletion allowance. The partnershipfiguring the depletable oil or natural gas quan- from the property figured without the depletion figures the depletion allowance without takingtity. They share the depletable quantity. Under deduction. For information on marginal produc- into account the limits on the amount of produc-this rule, a controlled group of corporations is tion, see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Rev-defined in section 1563(a) of the Internal Reve- tion and taxable income. Also, the adjusted ba-enue Code.nue Code, except that the stock ownership re- sis of a partner’s interest in the partnership is not
quirement in that definition is “more than 50% ” affected by the depletion allowance.
rather than “at least 80%.” An electing large partnership is one thatPartnerships and S Corporations
meets both the following requirements.Gross income from the property. For pur- Generally, each partner or shareholder, and notposes of percentage depletion, gross income the partnership or S corporation, figures the de- • The partnership had 100 or more partnersfrom the property (in the case of oil and gas pletion allowance separately. (However, see in the preceding year.wells) is the amount you receive from the sale of Electing large partnerships must figure deple-the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well. • The partnership chooses to be an electingtion allowance,  later.) Each partner or share-If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property, large partnership.holder must decide whether to use cost orbut manufacture or convert it into a refined prod- percentage depletion. If a partner or shareholderuct before sale or transport it before sale, the Disqualified partners. An electing largeuses percentage depletion, he or she must ap-gross income from the property is the represen- partnership does not figure the depletion allow-ply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit using his ortative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil or ance of its disqualified partners. The disqualifiedher taxable income from all sources.gas, before conversion or transportation. partners must figure it themselves, as explainedIf you sold gas after you removed it from the earlier.Partner’s or shareholder ’s adjusted basis.premises for a price that is lower than the RMFP,
The partnership or S corporation must allocate All the following are disqualified partners.determine gross income from the property for
to each partner or shareholder his or her sharepercentage depletion purposes without regard
• Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas propertyto the RMFP.
held by the partnership or S corporation. The pletion (discussed under Independent Pro-Gross income from the property does not
partnership or S corporation makes the alloca- ducers and Royalty Owners, earlier).include lease bonuses, advance royalties, or
tion as of the date it acquires the oil or gasother amounts payable without regard to pro- • Retailers who cannot claim percentageproperty.duction from the property. depletion (discussed under IndependentEach partner’s share of the adjusted basis of Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier).Average daily production exceeds deplet- the oil or gas property generally is figured ac-
able quantities. If your average daily produc- cording to that partner ’s interest in partnership • Any partner whose average daily produc-
tion for the year is more than your depletable oil capital. However, in some cases, it is figured tion of domestic crude oil and natural gasor natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for according to the partner’s interest in partnership is more than 500 barrels during the taxdepletion for each domestic oil or natural gas income. year in which the partnership tax yearproperty as follows. The partnership or S corporation adjusts the ends. Average daily production is dis-
partner’s or shareholder’s share of the adjusted cussed earlier.1) Figure your average daily production of oil
basis of the oil and gas property for any capitalor natural gas for the year.
expenditures made for the property and for any
2) Figure your depletable oil or natural gas Natural Gas Wellschange in partnership or S corporation interests.
quantity for the year.
Each partner or shareholder must sep- You can use percentage depletion for natural
3) Figure depletion for all oil or natural gas arately keep records of his or her share gas sold under a fixed contract or produced fromproduced from the property using a per- of the adjusted basis in each oil and geopressured brine.
RECORDS
centage depletion rate of 15%. gas property of the partnership or S corporation.
The partner or shareholder must reduce his or4) Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac- Natural gas sold under a fixed contract.her adjusted basis by the depletion he or shetion, the numerator of which is the result Natural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifiestakes on the property each year. The partner orfigured in (2) and the denominator of which for a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This isshareholder must use that reduced adjusted ba-is the result figured in (1). This is your
domestic natural gas sold by the producer undersis to figure cost depletion or his or her gain ordepletion allowance for that property for
a contract that does not provide for a price in-loss if the partnership or S corporation disposesthe year.
of the property. crease to reflect any increase in the seller ’s tax
liability because of the repeal of percentage de-Taxable income limit. If you are an indepen-
pletion for gas. The contract must have been indent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas, Reporting the deduction. Information that
effect from February 1, 1975, until the date ofyour deduction for percentage depletion is lim- you, as a partner or shareholder, use to figure
sale of the gas. Price increases after February 1,ited to the smaller of the following. your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper-
1975, are presumed to take the increase in taxties is reported by the partnership or S corpora-• Your taxable income from the property fig- liability into account unless demonstrated other-tion on line 25 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) orured without the deduction for depletion. wise by clear and convincing evidence.on line 23 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). De-For a definition of taxable income from the
duct oil and gas depletion for your partnership orproperty, see Taxable income limit, earlier,
S corporation interest on Schedule E (Formunder Mineral Property. Natural gas from geopressured brine. Qual-1040). The depletion deducted on Schedule E is ified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli-• 65% of your taxable income from all included in figuring income or loss from rental gible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%.sources, figured without the depletion al- real estate or royalty properties. The line instruc- This is natural gas that is both the following.lowance, any net operating loss carryback, tions for Schedule E explain where to report this
and any capital loss carryback. income or loss and whether you need to file • Produced from a well you began to drilleither of the following forms.You can carry over to the following year any after September 1978 and before 1984.
amount you cannot deduct because of the • Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. • Determined in accordance with section65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de-
503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-pletion allowance (before applying any limits) for
to be produced from geopressured brine.tions.the following year.
Page 40 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 41 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Extraction. Extracting ores or mineralsMines and Lessor ’s Gross Income
from the ground includes extraction by mineGeothermal Deposits A lessor’s gross income from the property thatowners or operators of ores or minerals from the
qualifies for percentage depletion usually is thewaste or residue of prior mining. This does notCertain mines, wells, and other natural deposits,
total of the royalties received from the lease.apply to extraction from waste or residue of priorincluding geothermal deposits, qualify for per- However, for oil, gas, or geothermal property,mining by the purchaser of the waste or residuecentage depletion. gross income does not include lease bonuses,or the purchaser of the rights to extract ores or
advanced royalties, or other amounts payableminerals from the waste or residue.Mines and other natural deposits. For a nat- without regard to production from the property.ural deposit, the percentage of your gross in- Treatment processes. The processes in-
come from the property that you can deduct as Bonuses and advanced royalties. Bonusescluded as mining depend on the ore or mineral
depletion depends on the type of deposit. and advanced royalties are payments a lesseemined. To qualify as mining, the treatment
makes before production to a lessor for the grantThe following is a list of the depletion per- processes must be applied by the mine owner or
of rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil tocentages for the more common minerals. operator. For a listing of treatment processes
be extracted from leased property. If you are theconsidered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) ofDEPOSITS PERCENT lessor, your income from bonuses and ad-the Internal Revenue Code and the related regu- vanced royalties received is subject to an allow-lations.Sulphur, uranium, and, if from deposits ance for depletion.in the United States, asbestos, lead Transportation of more than 50 miles. Ifore, zinc ore, nickel ore, and mica . . . 22 Figuring cost or percentage depletion.the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must be To figure cost depletion on a bonus, multiplyGold, silver, copper, iron ore, and transported more than 50 miles to plants or millscertain oil shale, if from deposits in the your adjusted basis in the property by a fraction,to be treated because of physical and otherUnited States ................ 1 5 the numerator of which is the bonus and therequirements, the additional authorized trans-Borax, granite, limestone, marble, denominator of which is the total bonus andportation is considered mining and included inmollusk shells, potash, slate, royalties expected to be received. To figure cost
soapstone, and carbon dioxide the computation of gross income from mining. depletion on advanced royalties, use the com-produced from a well ........... 1 4 putation explained earlier under Cost Depletion,If you wish to include transportation of
Coal, lignite, and sodium chloride .... 1 0 treating the number of units for which the ad-more than 50 miles in the computation
vanced royalty is received as the number ofClay and shale used or sold for use in of gross income from mining, file an
making sewer pipe or bricks or used or units sold.application in duplicate with the IRS. Include onsold for use as sintered or burned To figure percentage depletion (for otherthe application the facts concerning the physicallightweight aggregates .......... 7 1/2
than gas, oil, or geothermal property), any bo-and other requirements which prevented the
Clay used or sold for use in making nus or advanced royalty payments are part ofconstruction and operation of the plant within 50drainage and roofing tile, flower pots, your gross income from the property.miles of the point of extraction. Send this appli-and kindred products, and gravel, sand,
and stone (other than stone used or cation to: Terminating the lease. If you receive a bo-
sold for use by a mine owner or nus on a lease that expires, terminates, or isoperator as dimension or ornamental abandoned before you derive any income fromInternal Revenue Servicestone) ..................... 5 the extraction of mineral, include in income forWashington, DC 20224
the year of expiration, termination, or abandon-You can find a complete list of minerals and Attention: Assistant Chief Counsel, Pass-
ment, the depletion deduction you took. Alsotheir percentage depletion rates in section throughs and Special Industries
increase your adjusted basis in the property to613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
restore the depletion deduction you previouslyCorporate deduction for iron ore and coal. Disposal of coal or iron ore. You cannot take subtracted.The percentage depletion deduction of a corpo- a depletion deduction for coal (including lignite) For advanced royalties, include in income forration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) is or iron ore mined in the United States if both the the year of lease termination, the depletionreduced by 20% of: following apply. claimed on minerals for which the advanced
royalties were paid if the minerals were not pro-• The percentage depletion deduction for • You disposed of it after holding it for more duced before termination. Increase your ad-the tax year (figured without regard to this than 1 year. justed basis in the property by the amount youreduction), minus include in income.• You disposed of it under a contract under
• The adjusted basis of the property at the which you retain an economic interest in Delay rentals. These are payments for defer-close of the tax year (figured without the the coal or iron ore. ring development of the property. Since delaydepletion deduction for the tax year).
rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in-Treat any gain on the disposition as a capital
come that is not subject to depletion. Thesegain.Gross income from the property. For prop- rentals can be avoided by either abandoning theDisposal to related person. This rule doeserty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil or lease, beginning development operations, ornot apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore togas well, gross income from the property means obtaining production.one of the following persons.the gross income from mining. Mining includes
all the following. • A related person (as listed in chapter 12).
• Extracting ores or minerals from the • A person owned or controlled by the same Timberground. interests that own or control you.
• Applying certain treatment processes. You can figure timber depletion only by the cost
method. Percentage depletion does not apply toGeothermal deposits. Geothermal deposits• Transporting ores or minerals (generally, timber. Base your depletion on your cost or otherlocated in the United States or its possessionsnot more than 50 miles) from the point of basis in the timber. Your cost does not includequalify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. Aextraction to the plants or mills in which the cost of land.geothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir ofthe treatment processes are applied. Depletion takes place when you cut standingnatural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquid
timber. You can figure your depletion deductionor vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, aExcise tax. Gross income from mining in- when the quantity of cut timber is first accuratelygeothermal deposit is not considered a gas well.cludes the separately stated excise tax received measured in the process of exploitation.Figure gross income from the property for aby a mine operator from the sale of coal to
geothermal steam well in the same way as for oilcompensate the operator for the excise tax the Figuring cost depletion. To figure your cost
and gas wells. See Gross income from the prop-mine operator must pay to finance black lung depletion allowance, you multiply the number of
erty, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells.benefits. timber units cut by your depletion unit.
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 41

Page 42 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Timber units. When you acquire timber of the products cut from the timber. For more
property, you must make an estimate of the information, see Timber in chapter 2 of Publica- Business Bad Debt
quantity of marketable timber that exists on the tion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of As-
property. You measure the timber using board Definedsets.
feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you later
determine that you have more or less units of A business bad debt is a loss from the worth-Form T. Attach Form T, Forest Activitiestimber, you must adjust the original estimate. lessness of a debt that was either:Schedules, to your income tax return if you areThe term timber property means your eco- • Created or acquired in your trade or busi-claiming a deduction for timber depletion ornomic interest in standing timber in each tract or ness, orchoosing to treat the cutting of timber as a saleblock representing a separate timber account.
or exchange. • Closely related to your trade or businessDepletion unit. You figure your depletion when it became partly or totally worthless.unit each year by taking the following steps.
A debt is closely related to your trade or busi-1) Determine your cost or adjusted basis of
ness if your primary motive for incurring the debtthe timber on hand at the beginning of the
is business related.year.
The bad debts of a corporation are always2) Add to the amount determined in (1) the business bad debts.11.cost of any units acquired during the year
Credit sales. Business bad debts are mainlyand any additions to capital.
the result of credit sales to customers. Goods3) Figure the number of units to take into and services customers have not paid for areaccount by adding the number of units ac- Business recorded in your books as either accounts re-quired during the year to the number of ceivable or notes receivable. If you are unable tounits on hand in the account at the begin- collect any part of these receivables, the uncol-Bad Debtsning of the year and then adding (or sub- lectible part is a business bad debt.tracting) any correction to the estimate of  Accounts or notes receivable valued at fairthe number of units remaining in the ac- market value when received are deductible onlycount. at that value, even though the fair market valueIntroduction may be less than face value. If you bought an4) Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3).
If someone owes you money you cannot collect, account receivable for less than its face value,This is your depletion unit.
you have a bad debt. There are two kinds of bad the amount you can deduct if it becomes worth-
less is the amount you paid for it.debts— business and nonbusiness. This chap-Example. You bought a timber tract for ter covers business bad debts. You can take a bad debt deduction$160,000 and the land was worth as much as
Generally, a business bad debt is one that only if the amount owed you was previ-the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000.
comes from operating your trade or business. ously included in gross income. ThisBased on an estimated one million board feet CAUTION
!
applies to amounts owed you from all sources ofYou can deduct business bad debts on your(1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure your
taxable income, including sales, services, rents,depletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷ business tax return.
and interest.1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple- All other bad debts are nonbusiness badtion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF × debts and are deductible only as short-term cap- Accrual method. If you use an accrual$80). ital losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more method of accounting, you generally report in-When to claim depletion. Claim your deple- information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub- come as you earn it. You can only take a badtion allowance as a deduction in the year of sale lication 550. debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable ifor other disposition of the products cut from the you have previously included the uncollectibletimber, unless you choose to treat the cutting of Topics amount in income.timber as a sale or exchange. Include allowable If you qualify, you can use theThis chapter discusses:depletion for timber products not sold during the nonaccrual-experience method of accountingtax year the timber is cut as a cost item in the discussed later. Under this method, you do not• Definition of business bad debtclosing inventory of timber products for the year. have to accrue income that, based on your ex-The inventory is your basis for determining gain • When a debt becomes worthless perience, you do not expect to collect.or loss in the tax year you sell the timber prod- • How to treat business bad debts Cash method. If you use the cash methoducts.
of accounting, you generally report income• Recovery of a business bad debt
when you receive payment. You cannot take aExample. Assume the same facts as in the • Where to deduct business bad debts bad debt deduction for amounts owed to youprevious example except that you sold only half
because you never included those amounts inof the timber products in the cutting year. You
income. For example, a cash basis architectwould deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletion Useful Items
cannot take a bad debt deduction if a client doesthat year. You would add the remaining $20,000 You may want to see: not pay the bill because the architect ’s fee wasdepletion to your closing inventory of timber
not previously included in income.products. Publication
Choosing to treat the cutting of timber as a Debts from a former business. If you sell
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomesale or exchange. You can choose, under your business but keep its receivables, these
certain circumstances, to treat the cutting of debts are business debts since they arose out of❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
timber held for more than 1 year as a sale or your trade or business. If one of these debtsIndividuals, Estates, and Trusts
exchange. You must make the choice on your later becomes worthless, the loss is still a busi-
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofincome tax return for the tax year to which it ness bad debt. These debts would also be busi-
Assetsapplies. If you make this choice, subtract the ness debts if sold to the new owner of the
adjusted basis for depletion from the fair market business.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesvalue of the timber on the first day of the tax year If you sell your business to one person and
❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appealin which you cut it to figure the gain or loss on the sell your receivables to someone else, the activi-
Rights, and Claims for Refundcutting. You generally report the gain as ties of the new holder of the debts determine
long-term capital gain. The fair market value whether they are business or nonbusiness debts
See chapter 14 for information about gettingthen becomes your basis for figuring your ordi- for that person. A loss from the debts is a busi-
publications and forms.nary gain or loss on the sale or other disposition ness bad debt to the new holder if that person
Page 42 Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts

Page 43 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
acquired the debts in his or her trade or business stances, the loan is actually a contribution to
or if the debts were closely related to the new capital. When Debt Isholder’s trade or business when they became Debts of an insolvent partner. If your busi-worthless. Otherwise, a loss from these debts is Worthlessness partnership breaks up and one of youra nonbusiness bad debt. former partners is insolvent and cannot pay any
You do not have to wait until a debt is due toDebt acquired from a decedent. The char- of the partnership’s debts, you may have to pay
determine whether it is worthless. A debt be-acter of a loss from debts of a business acquired more than your share. If you pay any part of the
comes worthless when there is no longer anyfrom a decedent is determined in the same way insolvent partner’s share of the debts, you can
chance the amount owed will be paid.as debts sold by a business. If you are in a trade take a bad debt deduction for the amount you
or business, a loss from the debts is a business It is not necessary to go to court if you canpay.
bad debt if the debts were closely related to your show that a judgment from the court would be
Business loan guarantee. If you guarantee atrade or business when they became worthless. uncollectible. You must only show that you have
debt that becomes worthless, the debt can qual-Otherwise, a loss from these debts is a nonbusi- taken reasonable steps to collect the debt.
ify as a business bad debt if all the followingness bad debt. Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-
requirements are met. dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of
Example 1.  In 2000 Arnie died, leaving his an unsecured and unpreferred debt.• You made the guarantee in the course of
business, including the accounts receivable, to your trade or business. Property received for debt. If you receivehis son Carl. Certain receivables become worth-
• You have a legal duty to pay the debt. property in partial settlement of a debt, reduceless in 2001. Carl can deduct the loss as a
the debt by the fair market value of the propertybusiness bad debt because the debt was closely • You made the guarantee before the debt
received. You can deduct the remaining debt asrelated to his business when it became worth- became worthless. You meet this require-
a bad debt if and when it becomes worthless.less. ment if you reasonably expected you
If you later sell the property, any gain on thewould not have to pay the debt without fullExample 2.  In 2000 Charlie died, leaving sale is due to the appreciation of the property. Itreimbursement from the issuer.his business to his son George, but leaving the is not a recovery of a bad debt. For information• You receive reasonable consideration forreceivables to his daughter Diane. The receiv- on the sale of an asset, see Publication 544.making the guarantee. You meet this re-ables become worthless in 2001. Diane is not
quirement if you made the guarantee inengaged in any trade or business during 2000 or Example. Patti owed Margaret $5,000. Inaccord with normal business practice or2001. Therefore, Diane’s loss is a nonbusiness partial satisfaction of the debt, Patti gave Mar-for a good faith business purpose.bad debt even though the original debt was garet property worth $2,000. Margaret deducted
incurred in a business. the remaining $3,000 as a bad debt but did not
get a tax benefit from the deduction as she hadExample. Jane Zayne owns the ZayneLiquidation. If you liquidate your business
no taxable income. Margaret later sold the prop-Dress Company. She guaranteed payment of aand some of your accounts receivable become
erty for a $1,000 gain. Even though Margaret did$20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out-worthless, they are business bad debts.
not get a tax benefit from the earlier bad debtlet. Elegant Fashions is one of Zayne ’s largest
deduction, she must include the $1,000 gain inclients. Elegant Fashions later filed for bank-Types of Business Bad her income. It is not a recovery of her bad debt.ruptcy and defaulted on the loan. Ms. Zayne
Debts made full payment to the bank. She can take a
business bad debt deduction, since her guaran-The following are situations that may result in a tee was made in the course of her trade orbusiness bad debt. business for a good faith business purpose. She How To Treat
was motivated by the desire to retain one of herLoans to clients and suppliers. If you make
better clients and keep a sales outlet.a loan to a client, supplier, employee, or distribu- There are two ways to treat business bad debts.
tor for a business reason and it becomes worth- Employee. Any guarantee you make to pro- • The specific charge-off method.less, you have a business bad debt. tect or improve your job is closely related to your
• The nonaccrual-experience method.trade or business as an employee.Example. John Smith, an advertising agent,
Generally, you must use the specific charge-offDeductible in the year paid. If you make amade loans to certain clients to keep their busi-
method. However, you can use thepayment on a loan you guaranteed, you canness. One of these clients went bankrupt and
nonaccrual-experience method if you meet thededuct it in the year paid, unless you have rightscould not repay him. Since the main reason for
requirements discussed later underagainst the borrower.making the loan was business related, the debt
Nonaccrual-Experience Method.was a business debt and John can take a busi- Rights against a borrower. When youness bad debt deduction. make payment on a loan you guaranteed, you
Specific Charge-Off Methodmay have the right to take the place of theDebts of political parties. If a political party
lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you have(or other organization that accepts contributions If you use the specific charge-off method, youthis right, or some other right to demand pay-or spends money to influence elections) owes can deduct specific business bad debts thatment from the borrower, you cannot take a badyou money and the debt becomes worthless, become either partly or totally worthless duringdebt deduction until these rights become partlyyou can take a bad debt deduction only if you the tax year.or totally worthless.use an accrual method of accounting and meet
all the following tests. Partly worthless debts. You can deduct spe-Joint debtor.  If two or more debtors jointly
cific bad debts that become partly uncollectible.owe you money, your inability to collect from one1) The debt arose from the sale of goods or Your tax deduction is limited to the amount youdoes not enable you to deduct a proportionateservices in the ordinary course of your charge off on your books during the year. You doamount as a bad debt.trade or business. not have to charge off and deduct your partly
Bankruptcy claim. If a person who owes you2) More than 30% of your receivables ac- worthless debts annually. You can delay the
money becomes bankrupt, the amount you cancrued in the year of the sale were from charge off until a later year. You cannot, how-
deduct as a bad debt is the amount owed to yousales to political parties. ever, deduct any part of a debt after the year it
minus the amount you receive from distribution becomes totally worthless.3) You made substantial continuing efforts to of the bankrupt person’s assets.collect on the debt. Significantly modified debt.  An exception
Sale of mortgaged property. If mortgaged or to the charge off rule exists for debt which has
Loan or capital contribution. You cannot pledged property is sold for less than the debt, been significantly modified and on which the
take a bad debt deduction for a loan you made to the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is a holder recognized gain. For m ore information,
a corporation if, based on the facts and circum- bad debt. see section 1.166-(3)(a)(3) of the regulations.
Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts Page 43

Page 44 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduction disallowed. You can generally If you determine, based on your experience, operating loss helps lower taxes in the year to
take a partial bad debt deduction only in the year that certain amounts (accounts receivable) are which you carry the net operati ng loss.
you make the charge-off on your books. If, under uncollectible, do not include them in your gross More information. See Publication 536 foraudit, the IRS does not allow your deduction and income for the tax year. more information about net operating losses.the debt becomes partly worthless in a later tax Amounts must be for performing services.year, you can deduct the amount you charge off You can use the nonaccrual-experience methodin that year plus the disallowed amount charged only for amounts earned by performing services.off in the earlier year. The charge-off in the You cannot use this method for amounts owed Where To Deductearlier year, unless reversed on your books, to you from activities such as lending money,fulfills the charge-off requirement for the later selling goods, or acquiring receivables or other Use the following table to find where to deductyear. rights to receive payment. your business bad debts.
Totally worthless debts. If a debt becomes Interest or penalty charged. Generally, you
totally worthless, you can deduct the entire Table 11–2. Where To Deduct acannot use the nonaccrual-experience method
amount, except any amount deducted in an ear- Bad Debtfor amounts due on which you charge interest or
lier tax year when the debt was only partly worth- a late payment penalty. However, do not treat a
less. THEN deduct your baddiscount offered for early payment as the charg- IF you are a... debt on...You do not have to make an actual ing of interest or a penalty if both the following
charge-off on your books to claim a bad debt apply. Sole Proprietor  Line 9 of Schedule Cdeduction for a totally worthless debt. However, (Form 1040)• You otherwise accrue the full amount dueyou may want to do so. If you do not and the IRS
as gross income at the time you providelater rules the debt is only partly worthless, you Farmer  Line 34 of Schedule F
the services.will not be allowed a deduction for the debt in (Form 1040)
that tax year. A deduction of a partly worthless • You treat the discount allowed for early  Line 15 of Form 1120Corporationbad debt is limited to the amount actually payment as an adjustment to gross in-
charged off.  Line 15 of Form 1120– Acome in the year of payment.
Filing a claim for refund. If you did not deduct  Line 10 of Form 1120S
How to apply this method. You can apply thea bad debt on your original return for the year it Partnership  Line 12 of Form 1065nonaccrual-experience method under either ofbecame worthless, you can file a claim for a
the following systems.credit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth-
less, you must file the claim by the later of the • Separate receivable system.following dates.
• Periodic system.• 7 years from the date your original return
Under the separate receivable system, apply thewas due (not including extensions).
nonaccrual-experience method separately to• 2 years from the date you paid the tax. each account receivable. Under the periodic 12.system, apply the nonaccrual-experienceIf the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt, method to total qualified accounts receivable atyou must file the claim by the later of the follow- the end of your tax year.ing dates.
Electric andTreat each of these systems as a separate• 3 years from the date you filed your origi- method of accounting. You generally cannotnal return. change from one system to the other without Clean-FuelIRS approval.• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.
Generally, you also need IRS approval fromYou may have longer to file the claim if you were a different accounting method to either system Vehiclesphysically or mentally unable to handle your under the nonaccrual-experience method.financial affairs for a time. For details and more For more information on the separate receiv-information about filing a claim, see Publication able system, see section 1.448– 2T of the regu-556. Important Changeslations. For more information on the periodic
system, see Notice 88 – 51 in Cumulative Bulle-Use one of the following forms to file a claim.
for 2002tin 1988– 1.
Table 11–1. Forms Used To File a
Maximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction.Claim
The maximum deduction you can claim for quali-
IF you are an... THEN file... fied clean-fuel vehicle property placed in serviceRecovery
in calendar year 2002 is one of the following.Individual  Form 1040X If you deduct a bad debt on your tax return and
1) $37,500 for a truck or van with a grossCorporation  Form 1120X later recover (collect) all or part of it, you may
vehicle weight rating over 26,000 pounds.have to include all or part of the recovery inS Corporation  Form 1120S gross income. The amount you include is limited 2)  $37,500 for a bus with a seating capacity(check box F(5)) to the amount you actually deducted. However, of at least 20 adults (excluding the driver).
you can exclude the amount deducted that didPartnership  Form 1065 3) $3,750 for a truck or van with a gross vehi-not reduce your tax. Report the recovery as(check box G(5))
cle weight rating over 10,000 pounds but“Other income ” on the appropriate business
not more than 26,000 pounds.form or schedule.
See  Recoveries in Publication 525 for more 4) $1,500 for a vehicle not included in (1), (2),Nonaccrual-Experience information. or (3).Method
Net operating loss (NOL) carryover. If a The deduction will be phased out completely by
If you use an accrual method of accounting and bad debt deduction increases an NOL carryover 2005.
qualify under the rules explained in this section, that has not expired before the beginning of the
you can use the nonaccrual-experience method tax year in which the recovery takes place, you Qualified electric vehicle credit. The credit
for bad debts. Under this method, you do not treat the deduction as having reduced your tax. for a qualified electric vehicle pla ced in service in
accrue income you expect to be uncollectible. A bad debt deduction that contributes to a net calendar year 2002 will be reduced b y 25% after
Page 44 Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles

Page 45 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you apply the $4,000 limit. The credit will be Motor vehicle. A motor vehicle is any vehicle duction is generally the additional cost of permit-
phased out completely by 2005. that has four or more wheels and is manufac- ting the use of the clean-burning fuel.
tured primarily for use on public streets, roads, Clean-fuel vehicle property does notand highways. It does not include a vehicle oper- include an electric vehicle that qualifiesated exclusively on a rail or rails. for the electric vehicle credit, dis-CAUTION
!
Introduction cussed later.Nonqualifying property.  This is property
used in the following ways.You are allowed a limited deduction for the cost Qualified property. Your property must meetof clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-fuel ve- the following requirements to qualify for the de-1) Predominantly outside the United States.hicle refueling property you place in service dur- duction.ing the tax year. Also, you are allowed a tax 2) Predominantly to furnish lodging or in con-credit of 10% of the cost of any qualified electric nection with the furnishing of lodging. 1) It must be acquired for your own use andvehicle you place in service during the tax year. not for resale.3) By certain tax-exempt organizations.You can take the electric vehicle credit 2) Its original use must begin with you.4) By governmental units or foreign personsor the deduction for clean-fuel vehicle
or entities. 3) Either —property regardless of whether you use
TIP
the vehicle in a trade or business. However, you a) The motor vehicle of which it is a partcan take a deduction for clean-fuel vehicle re- must satisfy any federal or state emis-fueling property only if you use the property in sions standards that apply to each fuelyour trade or business. by which the vehicle is designed to beDeductions for
propelled, or
Clean-Fuel VehicleTopics b) It must satisfy any federal and state
This chapter discusses: emissions certification, testing, andand Refueling Property warranty requirements that apply.
• The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle prop- You are allowed a limited deduction for the costerty 4) It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-of clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-fuel ve- fined earlier.• The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle refuel- hicle refueling property. These deductions are
ing property allowed only in the tax year you place the prop-
Deduction limit. The maximum deductionerty in service.• Recapture of the deductions you can claim for qualified clean-fuel vehicleYou cannot claim these deductions for the property with respect to any motor vehicle is one• The electric vehicle credit part of the property’s cost you claim as a section of the following.179 deduction. For information on the section• Recapture of the credit
179 deduction, see Publication 946. 1) $50,000 for a truck or van with a gross
vehicle weight rating over 26,000 poundsUseful Items Deduction for Clean-Fuel or for a bus with a seating capacity of at
You may want to see: least 20 adults (excluding the driver).Vehicle Property
2) $5,000 for a truck or van with a gross vehi-Publication The deduction for this property may be claimed cle weight rating over 10,000 pounds butregardless of whether the property is used in a not more than 26,000 pounds.❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car trade or business.Expenses 3) $2,000 for a vehicle not included in (1) or
Clean-fuel vehicle property. Clean-fuel vehi- (2).❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
cle property is either of the following kinds ofAssets
property.❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property Deduction for Clean-Fuel
1) A motor vehicle (defined earlier) produced Vehicle Refueling PropertyForm (and Instructions) by an original equipment manufacturer and
designed to be propelled by a clean-burn- Your property must meet the following require-❏ 8834 Qualified Electric Vehicle Credit ing fuel. The only part of a vehicle’s basis ments to qualify for this deduction.
that qualifies for the deduction is the partSee chapter 14 for information about getting 1) It must be depreciable property.attributable to:publications and forms.
2) Its original use must begin with you.a) A clean-fuel engine that can use a
3) It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-clean-burning fuel,
fined earlier.b) The property used to store or deliver
Definitions the fuel to the engine, or Clean-fuel vehicle refueling property.
c) The property used to exhaust gases Clean-fuel vehicle refueling property is anyThe following definitions apply throughout this
from the combustion of the fuel. property (other than a building or its structuralchapter.
components) used to do either of the following.
2) Any property installed on a motor vehicle
Clean-burning fuels. The following are 1) Store or dispense a clean-burning fuel (de-(including installation costs) to enable it to
clean-burning fuels. fined earlier) into the fuel tank of a motorbe propelled by a clean-burning fuel if:
vehicle propelled by the fuel, but only if the
a) The property is an engine (or modifica- storage or dispensing is at the point where1) Natural gas.
tion of an engine) that can use a the fuel is delivered into the tank.2) Liquefied natural gas. clean-burning fuel, or 2) Recharge motor vehicles propelled by3) Liquefied petroleum gas. b) The property is used to store or deliver electricity, but only if the property is lo-
that fuel to the engine or to exhaust4) Hydrogen. cated at the point where the vehicles are
gases from the combustion of that fuel. recharged.5) Electricity.
For vehicles that may be propelled by both a6) Any other fuel that is at least 85% alcohol Recharging property. This property in-
clean-burning fuel and any other fuel, your de-(any kind) or ether. cludes any equipment used to provide electricity
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles Page 45

Page 46 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to the battery of a motor vehicle propelled by of the capital or profits interest in both part- service. The property will cease to qualify if it is
nerships. changed in any of the following ways.electricity. It includes low-voltage recharging
equipment, high-voltage (quick) charging equip- 14) An executor of an estate and a beneficiary 1) It is modified so that it can no longer bement, and ancillary connection equipment such of the estate. propelled by a clean-burning fuel.as inductive charging equipment. It does not
To determine whether an individual directlyinclude property used to generate electricity, 2) It ceases to be a qualified clean-fuel vehi-
or indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock ofsuch as solar panels or windmills, and does not cle property (for example, by failing to
a corporation, see Ownership of stock underinclude the battery used in the vehicle. meet emissions standards).
Related Persons in Publication 538.
3) It becomes nonqualifying property, definedDeduction limit. The maximum deduction earlier.How To Claimyou can claim for clean-fuel vehicle refueling
property placed in service at one location is the Deductions Sales or other dispositions. If you sell or$100,000. To figure your maximum deduction otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3 yearsHow you claim the deductions for clean-fuelfor any tax year, subtract from $100,000 the total after the date you placed it in service and knowvehicle property and clean-fuel vehicle refuelingyou (or any related person or predecessor) or have reason to know that it will be changed inproperty depends on the use of the property andclaimed for clean-fuel vehicle refueling property any of the ways described above, you are sub-the kind of income tax return you file.placed in service at that location for all earlier ject to the recapture rules. In other dispositionsyears. (including a disposition by reason of an accidentDeduction for nonbusiness clean-fuel vehi-
or other casualty), the recapture rules do notIf the deduction limit applies, you must cle property by individuals. Individuals can
apply.specify on your tax return the property claim the deduction for clean-fuel vehicle prop-
If the vehicle was subject to depreciation, the(and the portion of the property’s cost) erty used for nonbusiness purposes by includingCAUTION
!
deduction (minus any recapture) is consideredyou are using as a basis for the deduction. the deduction in the total on line 32 of Form
depreciation when figuring the part of any gain1040. Also, enter the amount of your deduction
from the disposition that is ordinary income. SeeRelated persons. For this purpose, the fol- and “Clean-Fuel” on the dotted line next to line
Publication 544 for more information on disposi-lowing are considered related persons. 32. If you use the vehicle partly for business, see
tions of depreciable property.the next two discussions.
1) An individual and his or her brothers and Recapture amount. Figure your recaptureDeduction for business clean-fuel vehiclesisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, amount by multiplying the deduction by the fol-property by employees. Employees who useancestors, and lineal descendants. lowing percentage.clean-fuel vehicle property for business, or
2) An individual and a corporation if the indi- partly for business and partly for nonbusiness • 100% if the recapture date is within thevidual owns, directly or indirectly, more purposes, should include the entire deduction in first full year after the date the vehicle wasthan 50% in value of the outstanding stock the total on line 32 of Form 1040. Also, enter the placed in service.of the corporation. amount of your deduction and “Clean-Fuel” on
• 662/3% if the recapture date is within thethe dotted line next to line 32.3) Two corporations that are members of the second full year after the date the vehiclesame controlled group as defined in sec- Sole proprietors. Sole proprietors must claim was placed in service.tion 267(f) of the Internal Revenue Code. deductions for clean-fuel vehicle property and
• 331/3% if the recapture date is within theclean-fuel vehicle refueling property used for4) A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust. third full year after the date the vehiclebusiness on the Other expenses line of either
5) Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if the was placed in service.Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form
same person is a grantor of both trusts. 1040). If clean-fuel vehicle property is used
Recapture date. The recapture date is gen-partly for nonbusiness purposes, claim the non-6) A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the same erally the date of the event that causes thebusiness part of the deduction as explained ear-trust. recapture. However, the recapture date for anlier under Deduction for nonbusiness clean-fuel
7) A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two sepa- event described in item (3), earlier, is the firstvehicle property by individuals.
rate trusts if the same person is a grantor day of the recapture year in which the event
Partnerships. Partnerships claim the deduc-of both trusts. occurs.
tions for clean-fuel vehicle property and8) A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation if How to report. How you report the recaptureclean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 20 ofthe trust or a grantor of the trust owns, amount for clean-fuel vehicle property as in-Form 1065.directly or indirectly, more than 50% in come depends on how you claimed the deduc-
S corporations. S corporations claim the de-value of the outstanding stock of the cor- tion for that property.
ductions for clean-fuel vehicle property andporation. Deducted by individuals asclean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 19 of9) A person and a tax-exempt educational or nonbusiness-use property. Include theForm 1120S.charitable organization that is controlled di- amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
rectly or indirectly by that person or by C corporations. C corporations claim the de- Deducted by employees as business-usemembers of the family of that person. ductions for clean-fuel vehicle property and property. Include the amount on line 21 ofclean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 26 of Form 1040.10) A corporation and a partnership if the Form 1120 (line 22 of Form 1120– A).same persons own more than 50% in Deducted by sole proprietors asvalue of the outstanding stock of the cor- business-use property. Include the amountRecapture ofporation and more than 50% of the capital on the Other income line of either Schedule Cor profits interest in the partnership. the Deductions (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).
11) Two S corporations or an S corporation Partnerships and corporations (includingIf the property ceases to qualify, you may haveand a regular corporation if the same per- S corporations). Include the amount on theto recapture the deduction. You recapture thesons own more than 50% in value of the Other income line of the form you file.deduction by including it, or part of it, in youroutstanding stock of each corporation. income.
12) A partnership and a person owning, di-
Clean-Fuel Vehiclerectly or indirectly, more than 50% of the
Clean-Fuel Vehicle Property Refueling Propertycapital or profits interests in the partner-
ship. You must recapture the deduction for clean-fuel You must recapture the deduction for clean-fuel
13) Two partnerships if the same persons vehicle property if the property ceases to qualify vehicle refueling property if the property ceases
own, directly or indirectly, more than 50% within 3 years after the date you placed it in to qualify at any time before the end of its depre-
Page 46 Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles

Page 47 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ciation recovery period. The property will cease whether the property is used in a trade or busi- Recapture of the Credit
to qualify if it is changed in any of the following ness.
ways. The electric vehicle credit is subject to recapture
if, within 3 years after the date you place theQualified Electric Vehicle1) It ceases to be a clean-fuel vehicle refuel- vehicle in service, it ceases to qualify for theing property (for example, by being con- A vehicle is a qualified electric vehicle if it meets electric vehicle credit. You recapture the creditverted to store and dispense gasoline). all the following requirements. by adding it, or part of it, to your income tax for
the year in which the recapture event occurs.2) It is no longer used 50% or more in your 1) It is a motor vehicle (defined earlier) pow-trade or business. The vehicle will cease to qualify if it isered primarily by an electric motor drawing changed in either of the following ways.3) It becomes nonqualifying property, defined current from rechargeable batteries, fuel
earlier. cells, or other portable sources of electrical 1) It is modified so that it is no longer prima-current. rily powered by electricity.
Sales or other dispositions. If you sell or 2) You were the first person to use it. 2) It becomes nonqualifying property, definedotherwise dispose of the property before the end
earlier.3) You acquired it for your own use and notof its recovery period and know or have reason
for resale.to know that it will be changed in any of the ways
described above, you are subject to the recap- 4) It has never been used as a nonelectric Sales or other dispositions. If you sell or
ture rules. In other dispositions (including a dis- vehicle. otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3 yearsposition by reason of an accident or other after the date you placed it in service and know5) It is not nonqualifying property, definedcasualty), the recapture rules do not apply. or have reason to know that it will be changed inearlier.The deduction (minus any recapture either of the ways described above, you areamount) is considered depreciation when figur- subject to the recapture rules. In other disposi-ing the part of any gain from the disposition that tions (including a disposition by reason of anAmount of the Creditis ordinary income. See Publication 544 for accident or other casualty), the recapture rulesmore information on dispositions of depreciable The credit is generally 10% of the cost of each do not apply.property. qualified electric vehicle you place in service If the vehicle was subject to depreciation, theduring the year. If your vehicle is a depreciable credit (minus any recapture amount) is consid-Recapture amount. Figure your recapture business asset, you must reduce the cost of the ered depreciation when figuring the part of anyamount by multiplying the deduction you vehicle by any section 179 deduction before gain from the disposition that is ordinary income.claimed by the following fraction. figuring the 10% credit. If you need information See Publication 544 for more information onon the section 179 deduction, see Publication dispositions of depreciable property.Total recovery Recovery years 946.period for the _ before the
property recapture year Recapture amount. Figure your recaptureCredit limits. The credit is limited to $4,000 amount by multiplying the credit by the followingfor each vehicle. The total credit is limited to theTotal recovery period for the property percentage.excess of your regular tax liability, reduced by
certain credits, over your tentative minimum tax. • 100% if the recapture date is within theHow to report. How you report the recapture To figure the credit limit, complete Form 8834 first full year after the date the vehicle wasamount for clean-fuel vehicle refueling property and attach it to your tax return. placed in service.depends on how you claimed the deduction for
that property. • 662/3% if the recapture date is within theHow To second full year after the date the vehicleSole proprietors. Include the amount on Claim the Credit was placed in service.the Other income line of either Schedule C
(Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040). • 331/3% if the recapture date is within theYou must complete and attach Form 8834 to
third full year after the date the vehicleyour tax return to claim the electric vehiclePartnerships and corporations (including
was placed in service.credit. Enter your credit on your tax return asS corporations). Include the amount on the
discussed next.Other income line of the form you file.
Recapture date. The recapture date is gen-
erally the date of the event that causes theIndividuals. Individuals claim the credit by en-Basis Adjustments recapture. However, the recapture date for antering the amount from line 20 of Form 8834 on
event described in item (2), earlier, is the firstline 50 of Form 1040. Check box “d” and specifyYou must reduce the basis of your clean-fuel
day of the recapture year in which the eventForm 8834.vehicle property or clean-fuel vehicle refueling
occurs.property by the deduction claimed. If, in a later
Partnerships. Partnerships enter the amountyear, you must recapture part or all of the deduc-
How to report. Report the recapture amountfrom line 20 of Form 8834 on line 13 of Scheduletion, increase the basis of the property by the
as follows.K (Form 1065). The partnership then allocatesamount recaptured. If the property is deprecia-
the credit to the partners on line 13 of Scheduleble property, you can recover this additional Individuals. Include the amount on line 58K– 1 (Form 1065). See the instructions for Formbasis over the property ’s remaining recovery of Form 1040. Write “QEVCR” on the dotted line1065.period beginning with the tax year of recapture. next to line 58.
If you were using the percentage tables Partnerships. Include on line 25 of Sched-S corporations. S corporations enter theto figure your depreciation on the prop- ule K – 1 (Form 1065) the information a partneramount from line 20 of Form 8834 on line 13 oferty, you will not be able to continue toCAUTION
!
needs to figure the recapture of the credit.Schedule K (Form 1120S). The S corporationdo so. See Publication 946 for information on then allocates the credit to the shareholders on S corporations. Include on line 23 offiguring your depreciation without the tables. line 13 of Schedule K– 1 (Form 1120S). See the Schedule K – 1 (Form 1120S) the information ainstructions for Form 1120S. shareholder needs to figure the recapture of the
credit.C corporations. C corporations claim the
C corporations. Include the amount on linecredit by entering the amount from line 20 ofElectric Vehicle Credit
10 of Schedule J (Form 1120), or line 7 of Part IForm 8834 in the total for line 6c of Schedule J
(Form 1120 – A). Check the box for “Other” andYou can choose to claim a tax credit for a quali- (Form 1120), checking the “Other” box and en-
attach the required schedule. See the instruc-fied electric vehicle you place in service during tering “8834” in the space provided. See the
tions for Form 1120.the year. You can make this choice regardless of instructions for Form 1120.
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles Page 47

Page 48 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Bribes and kickbacks vance, reimbursement, or charge. If you make aBasis Adjustments
single payment to your employees and it in-• Charitable contributions cludes both wages and an expense reimburse-If you claim a tax credit for a qualified electric
• Education expenses ment, you must specify the amount of thevehicle you place in service during the year, you
reimbursement.must reduce your basis in that vehicle by the • Franchises, trademarks, and trade names If you reimburse these expenses under anlesser of:
• Lobbying expenses accountable plan, deduct them as travel, meal,
1) $4,000, or and entertainment expenses. If you reimburse• Penalties and fines these expenses under a nonaccountable plan,2) 10% of the cost of the vehicle. • Repayments (claim of right) you must report the reimbursements as wages
This basis reduction rule applies even if the on Form W – 2, Wage and Tax Statement,  and
credit allowed is less than that amount. deduct them as wages. See Table 13– 1.Useful ItemsIf you must recapture part or all of the credit,
You may want to see:increase the basis of your vehicle by the amount
recaptured. If the qualified electric vehicle is Accountable Plans
Publicationdepreciable property, you can recover the addi-
To be an accountable plan, your reimbursementtional basis over the vehicle ’s remaining recov- ❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe or allowance arrangement must require yourery period beginning with the tax year of Benefits employees to meet all the following rules.recapture.
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and CarIf you were using the percentage tables 1) They must have paid or incurred deducti-Expensesto figure your depreciation on the vehi- ble expenses while performing services as
cle, you will not be able to continue to your employees.❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
CAUTION
!
do so. See Publication 946 for information on 2) They must adequately account to you for❏ 542 Corporationsfiguring your depreciation without the tables. these expenses within a reasonable period❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property of time.
❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates 3) They must return any excess reimburse-
ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-Form (and Instructions) riod of time.
❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions An arrangement under which you advance
13. money to employees is treated as meeting (3)❏ 1099–MISC Miscellaneous Income
above only if the following requirements are also
❏ 6069 Return of Excise Tax on Excess met.
Contributions to Black Lung Benefit
Other Expenses • The advance is reasonably calculated notTrust Under Section 4953 and
to exceed the amount of anticipated ex-Computation of Section 192
penses.Deduction
Important Change • You make the advance within a reasona-
See chapter 14 for information about getting ble period of time.
forms and publications.for 2001
If any expenses reimbursed under this ar-
rangement are not substantiated, or are an ex-Standard mileage rate. The standard mile-
cess reimbursement that is not returned within aage rate for the cost of operating your car, van,
reasonable period of time by an employee, youTravel, Meals,pickup, or panel truck in 2001 is 34 1/2 cents a
cannot treat these expenses as reimbursedmile for all business miles. See Car allowance,
and Entertainment under an accountable plan. Instead, treat thelater.
reimbursed expenses as paid under a nonac-
To be deductible, expenses incurred for travel, countable plan, discussed later.
meals, and entertainment must be ordinary and
Adequate accounting. Your employees mustnecessary expenses of carrying on your trade orImportant Change adequately account to you for their expenses.business. Generally, you also must show that
They must give you documentary evidence ofentertainment expenses (including meals) arefor 2002 their travel, mileage, and other employee busi-directly related to, or associated with, the con-
ness expenses. This evidence should includeduct of your trade or business.Meal expense deduction subject to “hours of items such as receipts, along with either a state-The following discussion explains how youservice” limits. In 2002, this deduction in- ment of expenses, an account book, a diary, or adeduct any reimbursements or allowances youcreases to 65% of the reimbursed meals your similar record in which the employee enteredmake for these expenses incurred by your em-employees consume while they are subject to each expense at or near the time the expenseployees. If you are self-employed and incurthe Department of Transportation ’s “hours of was incurred.these expenses yourself, see Publication 463service” limits. For more information, see Meal
for information on how you can deduct them.expenses when subject to “hours of service ” Excess reimbursement or allowance. An
limits, later. excess reimbursement or allowance is any
Reimbursements amount you pay to an employee that is more
than the business-related expenses for which
How you deduct a reimbursement or allowance the employee adequately accounted. The em-
arrangement (including per diem allowances, ployee must return any excess reimbursementIntroduction discussed later) for travel, meals, and entertain- or other expense allowance to you within a rea-This chapter covers expenses you as a busi- ment expenses incurred by your employees de- sonable period of time.ness owner may have that are not explained in pends on whether you have an accountable plan
earlier chapters of this publication. or a nonaccountable plan. A reimbursement or Reasonable period of time. A reasonable
allowance arrangement is a system by which period of time depends on the facts and circum-
Topics you pay advances, reimbursements, and stances. Generally, actions that take place
charges for your employees’ business expenses within the times specified in the following list willThis chapter discusses:
and they substantiate their expenses to you so be treated as taking place within a reasonable
• Travel, meals, and entertainment you can substantiate your deduction of the ad- period of time.
Page 48 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 49 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover
your employees’ fixed costs (such as deprecia-
tion, insurance, etc.). For information on using a
FAVR allowance, see Revenue Procedure
2000– 48 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2000– 49.
You can read Revenue Procedure 2000 – 48 at
many public libraries.
Per diem allowance. If your employee actu-
ally substantiates to you the other elements (dis-
cussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursed
using the per diem allowance, how you report
and deduct the allowance depends on whether
the allowance is for lodging and meal expenses
or for meal expenses only and whether the al-
lowance is more than the federal rate.
Regular federal per diem rate. The regular
federal per diem rate is the highest amount the
federal government will pay to its employees for
lodging, meal, and incidental expenses (or meal
and incidental expenses only) while they are
traveling away from home in a particular area.
The rates are different for different locations.
Publication 1542 lists the rates in the continental
United States.
New rates went into effect on October
1, 2001. You must have chosen to use
either the old rates or the new rates for
CAUTION
!
the period October 1, 2001, through December
31, 2001.
Internet access.  Per diem rates are avail-
able on the Internet. If you have a computer and
a modem, you can access per diem rates at
www.policyworks.gov/perdiem.
Table 13-1. Reporting Reimbursements
If the type of reimbursement (or other
expense allowance) arrangement is
under: Then the employer reports on Form W-2:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting made and excess
returned
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of excess
both required but excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the
federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and excess
returned
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the
federal rate:
Adequate accounting made up to the
federal rate only and excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1. The
amount up to the federal rate is reported
only in box 12 — it is not reported in box 1.
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of
excess, or both, not required by plan
The entire amount as wages in box 1.
No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the
federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of excess
both required but excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1. The
amount up to the federal rate is reported
only in box 12 — it is not reported in box 1.
Standard meal allowance. The federalPer Diem and Car Allowances rate for meal and incidental expense (M & IE) is1) You give an advance within 30 days of the
the standard meal allowance. You may pay antime the employee has the expense. You may reimburse your employees under an
allowance for meal and incidental expenses onlyaccountable plan based on travel days, miles, or2) Your employees adequately account for if, for example, you reimburse actual lodgingsome other fixed allowance. In these cases,their expenses within 60 days after the ex- expenses or do not reimburse lodging expensesyour employee is considered to have accountedpenses were paid or incurred. because there are none.to you for the amount of the expense that does
3) Your employees return any excess reim- not exceed the rates established by the federal High-low method. This is a simplifiedbursement within 120 days after the ex- government. Your employee must actually sub- method of computing the federal per diem ratepense was paid or incurred. stantiate to you the other elements of the ex- for lodging and meal expenses for traveling
pense, such as time, place, and business within the continental United States. It elimi-4) You give a periodic statement (at least purpose. nates the need to keep a current list of the perquarterly) to your employees that asks
diem rate in effect for each city in the continentalthem to either return or adequately ac- Federal rate. The federal rate can be figured
United States.count for outstanding advances and they using any one of the following methods.
Under the high-low method, the per diemcomply within 120 days of the statement.
1) For per diem amounts: amount for travel during 2001 is $201 ($42 for M
& IE) for certain high-cost locations. All otherHow to deduct. You can take a deduction for
a) The regular federal per diem rate. areas have a per diem amount of $124 ($34 fortravel, meals, and entertainment expenses if
M & IE). The high-cost locations eligible for theyou reimburse your employees for these ex- b) The standard meal allowance.
$201 per diem amount under the high-lowpenses under an accountable plan. The amount c) The high-low rate. method are listed in Publication 1542 (Revisedyou deduct for meals and entertainment, how-
March 2001).ever, may be subject to a 50% limit, discussed 2) For car expenses:later. If you are a sole proprietor, deduct the The per diem amounts given abovereimbursement on line 24 of Schedule C (Form a) The standard mileage rate. and the high-cost locations listed in1040). If you file a corporation income tax return, Publication 1542 (Revised MarchCAUTION
!
b) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).include the reimbursement in the amount 2001) were changed for the period October 1,claimed on the “Other deductions” line of Form 2001, through December 31, 2001. You could1120, U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return,  or use the amounts given above and the high-costCar allowance. Your employee is consideredForm 1120– A, U.S. Corporation Short-Form In- locations given in Publication 1542 for this pe-to have accounted to you for car expenses thatcome Tax Return.  If you file any other income riod only if you used them consistently for alldo not exceed the standard mileage rate. Fortax return, such as a partnership or S corpora- employees who were reimbursed under the2001, the standard mileage rate is 34 1/2 centstion return, deduct the reimbursement on the high-low method. Otherwise, see Revenue Pro-per mile for each business mile.appropriate line of the return as provided in the cedure 2001– 47 for the new per diem amountsYou can choose to reimburse your employ-instructions for that return. and list of high-cost locations.ees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al-
lowance. This is an allowance that includes a
combination of payments covering fixed and va- Reporting per diem and car allowances.
riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to The following paragraphs explain how to report
cover your employees’ variable operating costs per diem and car allowances. The manner in
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 49

Page 50 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
which you report them depends on how the • The federal rate for M & IE. For this purpose, a highly compensated em-
allowance compares to the federal rate. ployee is an employee who meets either of the
If you provide your employee with a per diem following requirements.Allowance LESS than or EQUAL to the fed- allowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci-eral rate. If your allowance for the employee is 1) Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi-dental expenses, you must treat an amountless than or equal to the appropriate federal rate, ness during the year or the precedingequal to the federal M & IE rate for the area ofthat allowance is not included as part of the year. An employee is treated as owningtravel as an expense for food and beverages. Ifemployee’s pay in box 1 of the employee’s Form any interest owned by his or her brother,the per diem allowance you provide is less thanW– 2. Deduct the allowance as travel expenses sister, spouse, ancestors, and lineal de-the federal per diem rate for the area of travel,(including meals that may be subject to the 50% scendants.you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance aslimit, discussed later). See How to deduct under the amount for food and beverages. 2) Received more than $85,000 in pay for theAccountable Plans, earlier.
preceding year. You may choose to in-Drilling rigs. The 50% limit does not apply toAllowance MORE than the federal rate. If clude only employees who were also in thethe food or beverages an employer provides onyour employee ’s allowance is more than the top 20% of employees when ranked byan oil or gas platform or drilling rig located off-appropriate federal rate, you must report the pay for the preceding year.shore or in Alaska. This exception also appliesallowance as two separate items.
to food and beverages provided by an employer These expenses are not subject to the 50%You include the allowance amount up to the
at a support camp that is near and integral to an limit. For example, the expenses for food, bever-federal rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee’s
oil or gas platform or drilling rig located in ages, and entertainment for a company-wideForm W – 2. Deduct it as travel expenses (as
Alaska. picnic are not subject to the 50% limit.explained above). This part of the allowance is
treated as reimbursed under an accountable Meal expenses when subject to “hours ofplan. service” limits. You can deduct 60% of the Nonaccountable PlansYou include the amount that is more than the reimbursed meals your employees consumefederal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if they while away from their tax home on business A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement thatapply) of the employee ’s Form W – 2. Deduct it during or incident to any period subject to the does not meet the requirements for an account-as wages subject to income tax withholding, Department of Transportation’s hours of service able plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid,social security, Medicare, and federal unem- limits. under a nonaccountable plan are reported asployment taxes. This part of the allowance is Individuals subject to the Department of wages on Form W– 2. The payments are subjecttreated as reimbursed under a nonaccountable Transportation’s hours of service limits include to income tax withholding, social security, Medi-plan as explained later under Nonaccountable the following. care, and federal unemployment taxes. You canPlans. deduct the reimbursement as compensation or• Certain air transportation workers (such as wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil-pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and ity tests for employees’ pay in chapter 2. Deductcontrol tower operators) who are underMeals and Entertainment the allowable amount as compensation orFederal Aviation Administration regula- wages on the appropriate line of your income taxUnder an accountable plan, you can generally tions. return, as provided in its instructions.deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible • Interstate truck operators and bus driversbusiness-related meal and entertainment ex- who are under Department of Transporta-penses you reimburse your employees. The de- tion regulations. Other Reimbursed Expensesduction limit applies even if you reimburse them
for 100% of the expenses. • Certain railroad employees (such as engi- You may provide meals and entertainment toneers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- individuals who are not your employees. TheseApplication of the 50% limit. The 50% de- ers, and control operations personnel) expenses may or may not be subject to the 50%duction limit applies to reimbursements you who are under Federal Railroad Adminis- limit, depending on the circumstances.make to your employees for expenses they incur tration regulations.for meals while traveling away from home on Nonemployee. If you provide a person who is• Certain merchant mariners who are underbusiness and for entertaining business custom- not your employee with meals, goods, services,Coast Guard regulations.ers at your place of business, a restaurant, or or the use of a facility and the item you provide isanother location. It applies to expenses incurred considered entertainment, you can deduct theat a business convention or reception, business De minimis (minimal) fringe benefit. The expense only to the extent it is included in themeeting, or business luncheon at a club. The 50% limit does not apply to an expense for food gross income of the recipient as compensationdeduction limit may also apply to meals you or beverage that is excluded from the gross for services or as a prize or award. If you arefurnish on your premises to your employees income of an employee because it is a de required to include these expenses on an infor-(discussed in chapter 2). minimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15– B for mation return (Form 1099 – MISC), you cannot
additional information on de minimis fringe ben- claim a deduction for them unless you file theRelated expenses. Taxes and tips relating
efits. necessary information return. For more informa-to a meal or entertainment activity you reim-
tion about when to file Form 1099 – MISC, seeburse to your employee under an accountable Company cafeteria or executive dining the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,plan are included in the amount subject to the room. You can deduct the cost of food and 5498, and W– 2G. These expenses are not sub-50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex- beverages you provide primarily to your employ- ject to the 50% limit.penses, such as cover charges for admission to ees on your business premises. This includesa nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinner the cost of maintaining the facilities for providing Director, stockholder, or employee meet-or cocktail party, or the amount you pay for the food and beverages. These expenses are ings. You can deduct entertainment expensesparking at a sports arena, are all subject to the subject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as de directly related to business meetings of your50% limit. However, the cost of transportation to minimis fringe benefits, discussed in Publication employees, partners, stockholders, agents, orand from an otherwise allowable business meal 15– B, or unless they are compensation to your directors. You can provide some minor socialor a business-related entertainment activity is employees and you treat them as provided activities, but the main purpose of the meetingnot subject to the 50% limit. under a nonaccountable plan, as discussed must be your company ’s business. These ex-
later. penses are subject to the 50% limit.Amount subject to 50% limit. If you provide
your employees with a per diem allowance (dis- Employee activities. You can deduct the ex- Trade association meetings. You can de-cussed earlier) only for meal and incidental ex- pense of providing recreational, social, or similar duct expenses directly related to and necessarypenses, the amount treated as an expense for activities (including the use of a facility) for your for attending business meetings or conventionsfood and beverages is the lesser of the follow- employees. The benefit must be primarily for of certain exempt organizations. These organi-ing. your employees who are not highly compen- zations include business leagues, chambers of
• The per diem allowance. sated employees. commerce, real estate boards, and trade and
Page 50 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 51 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
professional associations. Meal and entertain- Black lung benefit trust contributions. If The kickbacks paid by the Yard Corporation are
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit. you, as a coal mine operator, make a contribu- not deductible.
tion to a qualified black lung benefit trust, you Medicare or Medicaid. Kickbacks, bribes,Sale of meals or entertainment. You can de- may be able to deduct your contribution. To and rebates paid in Medicare or Medicaid pro-duct the cost of providing meals, entertainment, deduct it, you must make your contribution dur- grams are not deductible.goods and services, or use of facilities you sell to ing the tax year or pay it to the trust by the due
the public. For example, if you run a nightclub, date for filing your federal income tax return Form 1099 –MISC. If you pay kickbacks
your expense for the entertainment you furnish (including extensions). You must make the con- during your tax year, whether or not they are
to your customers, such as a floor show, is a tribution in cash or in property the trust is permit- deductible on your income tax return, you maybusiness expense. These expenses are not ted to hold. have to report them on an information return,subject to the 50% limit. Form 1099 – MISC. For more information aboutFigure your allowable deduction for contribu-
when to file Form 1099– MISC, see the Generaltions to a black lung benefit trust on Schedule AAdvertising to promote goodwill. You can Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, andof Form 6069.deduct the cost of providing meals, entertain- W– 2G.ment, or recreational facilities to the general Bribes and kickbacks. You cannot deductpublic as a means of advertising or promoting Car and truck expenses. You can deduct thebribes, kickbacks, or similar payments if they aregoodwill in the community. For example, the costs of operating a car, truck, or other vehicle ineither of the following.expense of sponsoring a television or radio your business. These costs include gas, oil, re-show is deductible. You can also deduct the 1) Payments directly or indirectly to an official pairs, license tags, insurance, and depreciation.expense of distributing free food and beverages or employee of any government or an Only the expenses for business use are deducti-to the general public. These expenses are not agency or instrumentality of any govern- ble. Traveling between your home and yoursubject to the 50% limit. ment in violation of the law. If the govern- place of business is usually not business use.
ment is a foreign government, theCharitable sports event. The 50% limit does Under certain conditions, you can use the
payments are not deductible if they arenot apply to the expenses covered by a package standard mileage rate instead of deducting the
unlawful under the Foreign Corrupt Prac-deal that includes a ticket to a charitable sports actual expenses for your vehicle. The standard
tices Act of 1977.event if the event meets certain conditions. See mileage rate for the cost of operating your car,
Entertainment tickets in chapter 2 of Publication van, pickup, or panel truck in 2001 is 341/2 cents2) Payments directly or indirectly to a person463 for a list of the conditions a charitable sports a mile for all business miles. For more informa-in violation of any federal or state law (butevent must meet. tion on how to figure your deduction, see Publi-only if that state law is generally enforced)
cation 463.that provides for a criminal penalty or for
the loss of a license or privilege to engage Charitable contributions. Cash payments toin a trade or business. charitable, religious, educational, scientific, orMiscellaneous
similar organizations may be deductible as busi-Meaning of “generally enforced.” A state ness expenses if the payments are not charita-Expenses law is considered generally enforced unless it is
ble contributions or gifts. If the payments arenever enforced or enforced only for infamousIn addition to travel, meal, and entertainment charitable contributions or gifts, you cannot de-persons or persons whose violations are ex-expenses, there are other expenses you can duct them as business expenses. However, cor-traordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law isdeduct. This section briefly covers some of porations (other than S corporations) can deductgenerally enforced unless proper reporting of athese expenses (listed in alphabetical order). charitable contributions on their income tax re-violation of the law results in enforcement only
turns. See Charitable Contributions in Publica-under unusual circumstances.Advertising expenses. You generally can tion 542 for more information. Sole proprietors,deduct reasonable advertising expenses if they Kickbacks. A kickback includes a payment partners in a partnership, or shareholders in anrelate to your business activities. Generally, you for referring a client, patient, or customer. The S corporation may be able to deduct charitablecannot deduct the cost of advertising to influ- common kickback situation occurs when money contributions made by their business on Sched-ence legislation. See Lobbying expenses, later. or property is given to someone as payment for ule A (Form 1040).You can usually deduct as a business ex- influencing a third party to purchase from, use
pense the cost of institutional or “good will” ad- the services of, or otherwise deal with the per- Example. You paid $15 to a local church forvertising to keep your name before the public if it son who pays the kickback. In many cases, the a half-page ad in a program for a concert it isrelates to business you reasonably expect to person whose business is being sought or en- sponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en-gain in the future. For example, the cost of ad- joyed by the person who pays the kickback does courage readers to buy your products. Sincevertising that encourages people to contribute to not know of the payment. your payment is not a contribution, you cannotthe Red Cross, to buy U.S. Saving Bonds, or to deduct it as such. However, you can deduct it asparticipate in similar causes is usually deducti- Example 1. Mr. Green, an insurance bro- an advertising expense.ble. ker, pays part of the insurance commissions he
Inventory. If you contribute inventory (prop-earns to car dealers who refer insurance cus-Foreign expenses. You cannot deduct the erty you sell in the course of your business), thetomers to him. The car dealers are not licensedcosts of advertising on foreign radio and televi- amount you can claim as a contribution deduc-to sell insurance. Mr. Green cannot deductsion (including cable) where the advertising is tion is the smaller of its fair market value on thethese payments if they are in violation of anyprimarily for a market in the United States. How- day you contributed it or its basis. The basis offederal or state law as explained previously inever, this rule only applies to advertising ex- donated inventory is any cost incurred for the(2) under Bribes and kickbacks.penses in countries that deny a deduction for inventory in an earlier year that you would other-advertising on a United States broadcast prima- wise include in your opening inventory for theExample 2. The Yard Corporation is in therily for that country’s market. year of the contribution. You must remove thebusiness of repairing ships. It returns 10% of the
repair bills as kickbacks to the captains and chief amount of your contribution deduction from yourAnticipated liabilities. Anticipated liabilities
officers of vessels it repairs. It considers kick- opening inventory. It is not part of the cost ofor reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de-
backs necessary to get business. The owners of goods sold.ductible. For example, assume you sold 1-year
the ships do not know of these payments. If the cost of donated property is not includedTV service contracts this year totaling $50,000.
in your opening inventory, the property’s basis isFrom experience, you know you will have ex- In the state where the corporation operates,
zero and you cannot claim a charitable contribu-penses of about $15,000 in the coming year for it is unlawful to attempt to influence the actions
tion deduction. Treat the property’s cost as youthese contracts. You cannot deduct any of the of any employee, private agent, or fiduciary in
would ordinarily treat it under your method of$15,000 this year by charging expenses to a relation to the principal ’s or employer’s affairs by
accounting. For example, include the purchasereserve or liability account. You can deduct your giving or offering anything of value without the
price of inventory bought and donated in theexpenses only when you actually pay or accrue knowledge and consent of the principal or em-
same year in the cost of goods sold for that year.them, depending on your accounting method. ployer. The state generally enforces the law.
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 51

Page 52 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A corporation (other than an S corporation) Demolition expenses or losses. You cannot special course to learn how to repair disc play-
deduct any amount paid or incurred to demolish ers. Since the course maintains and improvescan deduct its basis in the property plus one-half
a structure or any loss for the undepreciated skills required in his trade, he can deduct itsof the gain that would have been realized if the
basis of a demolished structure. Add these cost.property had been sold at its fair market value on
amounts to the basis of the land where thethe date of contribution. But the deduction can-
Environmental cleanup costs. You can de-demolished structure was located.not be more than twice the property’s basis. For
duct certain costs to clean up land and to treatmore information on the charitable contribution Depreciation. If property you buy to use in groundwater you contaminated with hazardousof property by a corporation, see section your business has a useful life substantially be- waste from your business operations. You can170(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. yond the year it is placed in service, you gener- deduct the costs you incur to restore your landally cannot deduct the entire cost as a business and groundwater to the same physical conditionExample 1. You own an auto repair shop expense in the year you buy it. You must spread that existed prior to contamination. You cannotand in 2001 you donated auto parts to your local the cost over more than one tax year and deduct deduct costs for the construction of groundwaterschool for its auto repair class. The fair market part of it each year. This method of deducting treatment facilities. You must capitalize thosevalue of the parts at the time of the contribution the cost of business property is called deprecia- costs and you can recover them through depre-was $600 and you had included $400 for the tion. ciation.parts in your opening inventory for 2001. Your However, you may be able to elect to deductcharitable contribution is $400. You reduce your a limited amount of the cost of certain deprecia- Franchise, trademark, trade name. If youopening inventory by the $400 for the donated ble property in the year you place it in service in buy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, youproperty. your business. This deduction is known as the can deduct the amount you pay or incur as a
“section 179 deduction.” business expense only if your payments are partExample 2. Assume the same facts as Ex- For information on depreciation and the sec- of a series of payments that are:ample 1, except you purchased the auto parts in tion 179 deduction, see Publication 946.2001 for $400 (not part of the opening inven- 1) Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi-tory). The $400 is included as part of the cost of Donations to business organizations. You tion of the item,goods sold for 2001 but not in figuring the basis can deduct donations to business organizations
of the property. Your charitable contribution is as business expenses if all the following condi- 2) Payable at least annually for the entire
$0. tions are met. term of the transfer agreement, and
• The donation relates directly to your trade 3) Substantially equal in amount (or payableClub dues and membership fees. Generally, or business. under a fixed formula).you cannot deduct amounts you pay or incur for
• You reasonably expect a financial return in When determining the term of the transfermembership in any club organized for business,
line with your donation. agreement, include all renewal options and anypleasure, recreation, or any other social pur-
other period for which you and the transferorpose. This includes country clubs, golf and ath- • The donation is not a nondeductible lobby- reasonably expect the agreement to be re-letic clubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline ing expense as discussed later under Lob- newed.clubs, and clubs operated to provide meals bying expenses.
A franchise includes an agreement that givesunder circumstances generally considered to be
one of the parties to the agreement the right toconducive to business discussions. For example, a donation you make to a com-
distribute, sell, or provide goods, services, ormittee organized by the Chamber of CommerceException. None of the following organiza- facilities within a specified area.to bring a national convention to your city maytions will be treated as a club organized for
be deductible. Property acquired after August 10, 1993business, pleasure, recreation, or other social
(or after July 25, 1991, if elected). Anypurpose unless one of the main purposes is to Education expenses. You can deduct the or- amounts you pay or incur that are not describedconduct entertainment activities for members or dinary and necessary expenses you pay for the in (1) through (3) must be charged to a capitaltheir guests or to provide members or their education and training of your employees. For account. These are “section 197 intangibles ”guests with access to entertainment facilities. more information, see Education Expenses in and are amortized over 15 years. See chapter 9chapter 2.• Boards of trade. for more information on amortization.You can also deduct your own education
You can elect to apply this treatment to any• Business leagues. expenses (including certain related travel) re-
franchise, trademark, or trade name acquiredlated to your trade or business. You must be• Chambers of commerce. after July 25, 1991. This election is binding andable to show the education maintains or im-
cannot be revoked without approval of the IRS.• Civic or public service organizations. proves skills required in your trade or business,
or it is required by law or regulations for keeping Property acquired before August 11, 1993.• Professional organizations such as bar as-
your pay, status, or job. For a transfer not treated as a sale or exchangesociations and medical associations.
You cannot deduct education expenses you of a capital asset, you can deduct a lump-sum• Real estate boards. incur to meet the minimum requirements of your payment of an agreed upon principal amount
present trade or business, or those that qualify ratably over the shorter of the following.• Trade associations.
you for a new trade or business. This is true
• 10 years.even if the education maintains or improves
Damages recovered. Special rules apply to skills presently required in your business. For • The period of the transfer agreement.compensation you receive for damages sus- more information on education expenses, see
tained as a result of patent infringement, breach Publication 508. For a transfer not treated as a sale or ex-of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola- change of a capital asset, you can deduct, in thetions. You must include this compensation in Example 1. Dr. Carter, who is a psychiatrist, year made, a payment that is one of a series ofyour income. However, you may be able to take begins a program of study at an accredited psy- approximately equal payments payable over ei-a special deduction. The deduction applies choanalytic institute to qualify as a psychoana- ther of the following.only to amounts recovered for actual injury, not lyst. She can deduct the cost of the program
any additional amount. The deduction is the • The period of the transfer agreement.because the study maintains or improves skills
smaller of the following. required in her profession and does not qualify • A period of more than 10 years, regard-her for a new one.• The amount you received or accrued for less of the period of the agreement.
damages in the tax year reduced by the Example 2. Herb Jones owns a repair shopamount you paid or incurred in the year to for electronic equipment. The bulk of the busi- The above business deductions do notrecover that amount. ness is television repairs, but occasionally he apply to transfers after October 2,
• Your losses from the injury you have not fixes tape decks and disc players. To keep up 1989, and before August 11, 1993, ifCAUTION
!
deducted. with the latest technical changes, he takes a the principal sum is over $100,000.
Page 52 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 53 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Charge any payment not deductible because discussed earlier under Meals and Entertain- prohibit a business deduction for lobbying
of these rules to a capital account. However, you ment. expenses.
can deduct the payments charged to a capital
Legal and professional fees. Legal and pro- If a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec-account over the life of the asset if you can
fessional fees, such as fees charged by ac- tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with adetermine the useful life of the asset. Otherwise,
countants, that are ordinary and necessary notice on the part of dues that is allocable toyou can choose to amortize the payment over a
expenses directly related to operating your busi- nondeductible lobbying and political expenses,25-year period beginning with the tax year the
ness are deductible as business expenses. you cannot deduct that part of the dues.transfer occurs.
However, you usually cannot deduct legal feesContracts entered into before October 3, Covered executive branch official. Foryou pay to acquire business assets. Add them to1989. For contracts to buy a franchise, trade- purposes of this discussion, a covered executivethe basis of the property.mark, or trade name entered into before October branch official is any of the following. If the fees include payments for work of a3, 1989, you can deduct payments contingent personal nature (such as making a will), you 1) The President.on productivity, use, or disposition. The rules take a business deduction only for the part of thediscussed earlier for annual and substantially 2) The Vice President.fee related to your business. The personal por-equal payments do not apply. tion of legal fees for producing or collecting taxa- 3) Any officer or employee of the WhiteDisposition of franchise, trademark, or ble income, doing or keeping your job, or for tax House Office of the Executive Office of thetrade name. If you transfer, sell, or otherwise advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form President and the two most senior leveldispose of a franchise, trademark, or trade 1040) if you itemize deductions. See Publication officers of each of the other agencies inname, you must recapture as ordinary income 529. the Executive Office.(up to any gain realized) the payments you de- Tax preparation fees. You can deduct as a 4) Any individual who:ducted as any of the following. trade or business expense the cost of preparing
• A lump-sum or serial payment of a princi- that part of your tax return relating to your busi- a) Is serving in a position in Level I of the
pal amount not treated as a sale or ex- ness as a sole proprietor. The remaining cost Executive Schedule under section 5312
change of a capital asset. may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if of title 5, United States Code,
you itemize deductions.• An amortized payment deducted over 25 b) Has been designated by the PresidentYou can also take a business deduction foryears. as having Cabinet-level status, orthe amount you pay or incur in resolving as-
• The amortization claimed on section 197 c) Is an immediate deputy of an individualserted tax deficiencies for your business as a
intangibles. listed in item (a) or (b).sole proprietor.
For more information about dispositions of Licenses and regulatory fees. Licenses and Exceptions to denial of deduction. Thefranchises, trademarks, and trade names, see regulatory fees for your trade or business paid general denial of the deduction does not apply tochapter 2 in Publication 544. each year to state or local governments gener- the following.ally are deductible. Some licenses and fees may
Impairment-related expenses. If you are dis- have to be amortized. See chapter 9 for more • Expenses of appearing before, or commu-abled, you can deduct expenses necessary for information. nicating with, any local council or similaryou to be able to work (impairment-related ex- governing body concerning its legislationpenses) as a business expense, rather than as a Lobbying expenses. Generally, you cannot (local legislation) if the legislation is of di-medical expense. deduct lobbying expenses. Lobbying expenses rect interest to you or to you and an organ-You are disabled if you have either of the include amounts paid or incurred for any of the ization of which you are a member. Anfollowing. following activities. Indian tribal government is treated as a
local council or similar governing body.• A physical or mental disability (for exam- • Influencing legislation.
ple, blindness or deafness) that function- • Any in-house expenses for influencing leg-• Participating in or intervening in any politi-ally limits your being employed. islation and communicating directly with acal campaign for, or against, any candi-
covered executive branch official if those• A physical or mental impairment that sub- date for public office.
expenses for the tax year do not exceedstantially limits one or more of your major • Attempting to influence the general public, $2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).life activities. or segments of the public, about elections,
• Expenses incurred by taxpayers engagedlegislative matters, or referendums.You can deduct the expense as a business in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-expense if all the following apply. • Communicating directly with covered ex- fessional lobbyists) on behalf of another
ecutive branch officials (defined later) in person (but does apply to payments by the• Your work clearly requires the expense for
any attempt to influence the official actions other person to the lobbyist for lobbyingyou to satisfactorily perform the work.
or positions of those officials. activities).• The goods or services purchased are
• Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-clearly not needed or used, other than in-
dinating any of the preceding activities. Moving machinery. Generally, the cost ofcidentally, in your personal activities.
moving your machinery from one city to another• Their treatment is not specifically provided Your expenses for influencing legislation and is a deductible expense. So is the cost of movingfor under other tax law provisions. communicating directly with a covered execu- machinery from one plant to another, or from
tive branch official include a portion of your labor one part of your plant to another. You can de-
costs and general and administrative costs of duct the cost of installing the machinery in theExample. You are blind. You must use a
your business. For information on making this new location. However, you must capitalize thereader to do your work, both at and away from
allocation, see section 1.162 – 28 of the regula- costs of installing or moving newly purchasedyour place of work. The reader ’s services are
tions. machinery.only for your work. You can deduct your ex-
You cannot take a charitable deduction orpenses for the reader as a business expense.
Outplacement services. You can deduct thebusiness expense for amounts paid to an organ-
costs of outplacement services you provide toization if both the following apply.Interview expense allowances. Reimburse-
your employees to help them find new employ-ments you make to job candidates for transpor- • The organization conducts lobbying activi- ment, such as career counseling, resum´e assis-tation or other expenses related to interviews for ties on matters of direct financial interest tance, skills assessment, etc.possible employment are not wages. You can to your business.deduct the reimbursements as a business ex- The costs of outplacement services may
pense. However, expenses for food, beverages, • A principal purpose of your contribution is cover more than one deduction category. For
and entertainment are subject to the 50% limit to avoid the rules discussed earlier that example, deduct as a utilities expense t he cost
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 53

Page 54 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of telephone calls made under this service and ness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex- ordinary income, enter it on line 22 of Schedule
deduct as rental expense the cost of renting penses include the following. A (Form 1040). However, if the repayment is
machinery and equipment for this service. over $3,000 and Method 1 (discussed later) ap-• Advertising in a convention program of aFor information on whether the value of out- plies, deduct it on line 27 of Schedule A (Formpolitical party, or in any other publication ifplacement services is includable in your employ- 1040).any of the proceeds from the publicationees’ income, see Publication 15– B. are for, or intended for, the use of a politi- Repayment — $3,000 or less. If the
cal party or candidate. amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct itPenalties and fines. Penalties you pay for
from your income in the year you repaid it.• Admission to a dinner or program (includ-late performance or nonperformance of a con-
ing, but not limited to, galas, dances, filmtract are generally deductible. For instance, if Repayment— over $3,000. If the amountpresentations, parties, and sportingyou contracted to construct a building by a cer- you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de-events) if any of the proceeds from thetain date and had to pay an amount for each day duct the repayment, as described earlier. How-function are for, or intended for, the use ofthe building was not finished after that date, you ever, you can instead choose to take a tax credita political party or candidate.can deduct the amounts paid or incurred. for the year of repayment if you included theOn the other hand, you cannot deduct penal- • Admission to an inaugural ball, gala, income under a claim of right. This means thatties or fines you pay to any government agency parade, concert, or similar event if identi- at the time you included the income, it appearedor instrumentality because of a violation of any fied with a political party or candidate. that you had an unrestricted right to it. If youlaw. These fines or penalties include the follow- qualify for this choice, figure your tax under bothing amounts. methods and use the method that results in lessRemoval costs. You can deduct the cost of
• Paid because of a conviction for a crime or retiring and removing a depreciable asset in tax.
after a plea of guilty or no contest in a connection with the installation or production of Method 1. Figure your tax for 2001 claimingcriminal proceeding. a replacement asset. However, you must capi- a deduction for the repaid amount.talize the cost of removing a component of a• Paid as a penalty imposed by federal, depreciable asset if the replacement adds to the Method 2. Figure your tax for 2001 claimingstate, or local law in a civil action, includ- value or usefulness of the asset or significantly a credit for the prepaid amount. Follow theseing certain additions to tax and additional increases its useful life. steps.amounts and assessable penalties im-
posed by the Internal Revenue Code. Repairs. The cost of repairing or improving 1) Figure your tax for 2001 without deduct-property used in your trade or business is either• Paid in settlement of actual or possible ing the repaid amount.a deductible or capital expense. You can deductliability for a fine or penalty, whether civil
2) Refigure your tax from the earlier yearrepairs that keep your property in a normal effi-or criminal.
cient operating condition, but that do not add to without including in income the amount• Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro- its value or usefulness or appreciably lengthen you repaid in 2001.ceeding that could result in a fine or pen- its life. If the repairs add to the value or useful- 3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownalty. ness of your property or significantly increase its on your return for the earlier year. This islife, you must capitalize them. Although you can-Examples of nondeductible penalties and the credit.not deduct capital expenses as current ex-fines include the following. penses, you can usually deduct them over a 4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for
period of time as depreciation. 2001 figured without the deduction (step• Fines for violating city housing codes.
The cost of repairs includes the costs of 1).• Fines paid by truckers for violating state labor, supplies, and certain other items. You
If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct themaximum highway weight laws and air cannot deduct the value of your own labor.
quality laws. amount repaid as discussed earlier under TypeExamples of repairs include the following.
of deduction.• Civil penalties for violating federal laws re- • Patching and repairing floors.
If Method 2 results in less tax, claim thegarding mining safety standards and dis-
• Repainting the inside and outside of a credit on line 65 of Form 1040, and write “I.R.C.charges into navigable waters.
building. 1341” next to line 65.
A fine or penalty does not include any of the • Repairing roofs and gutters.
Example. For 2000 you filed a return andfollowing.
• Mending leaks. reported your income on the cash method. In• Legal fees and related expenses to defend 2001 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2000yourself in a prosecution or civil action for You cannot deduct the cost of repairs you gross income under a claim of right. Your filinga violation of the law imposing the fine or added to the cost of goods sold as a separate status in 2001 and 2000 is single. Your incomecivil penalty. business expense. and tax for both years are as follows:
• Court costs or stenographic and printing Repayments. If you had to repay an amount 2000 2000charges. you included in your income in an earlier year, With Income Without Income
you may be able to deduct the amount repaid for Taxable• Compensatory damages paid to a govern-
Income $15,000 $10,000the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amountment.
you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be able Tax $ 2,254 $ 1,504
to take a credit against your tax for the year inNonconformance penalty. You can deduct
2001 2001which you repaid it.a nonconformance penalty assessed by the En-
Without Deduction With Deductionvironmental Protection Agency for failing to Type of deduction. The type of deduction Taxablemeet certain emission standards. Income $49,950 $44,950you are allowed in the year of repayment de-
pends on the type of income you included in the Tax $10,362 $ 8,987Political contributions. You cannot deduct earlier year. For instance, if you repay ancontributions or gifts to political parties or candi- Your tax under Method 1 is $8,987. Your taxamount you previously reported as a capitaldates as business expenses. In addition, you gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss on under Method 2 is $9,612, figured as follows:cannot deduct expenses you pay or incur to take Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it aspart in any political campaign of a candidate for Tax previously determined for 2000 .... $  2,254self-employment income, deduct it as a busi-public office. Less: Tax as refigured ............ − 1,504ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedule Decrease in 2000 tax $ 750Indirect political contributions. You can- C-EZ (Form 1040). Regular tax liability for 2001 ......... $10,362
not deduct indirect political contributions and If you reported the amount as wages, unem- Less: Decrease in 2000 tax ......... − 750
Refigured tax for 2001 $ 9,612costs of taking part in political activities as busi- ployment compensation, or other nonbusiness
Page 54 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 55 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Because you pay less tax under Method 1, you • Get information on starting and operating
a small business.should take a deduction for the repayment in
2001.
14. You can also reach us with your computerRepayment does not apply. This discus- using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
sion does not apply to the following.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone at-• Deductions for bad debts. How To Get Tax tached to your fax machine, you can
receive forms and instructions by call-• Deductions from sales to customers, such
ing 703–368–9694. Follow the directions fromas returns and allowances, and similar Help the prompts. When you order forms, enter theitems.
catalog number for the form you need. The items
• Deductions for legal and other expenses You can get help with unresolved tax issues, you request will be faxed to you.
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-of contesting the repayment. For help with transmission problems, call thetions, and get more information from the IRS in FedWorld Help Desk at 703–487–4608.several ways. By selecting the method that isYear of deduction (or credit). If you use
best for you, you will have quick and easy ac-the cash method of accounting, you can take the Phone. Many services are available bycess to tax help.deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the tax phone.
year in which you actually make the repayment.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. If youIf you use any other accounting method, you can • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-have attempted to deal with an IRS problemdeduct the repayment or claim a credit for it only tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order cur-unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-for the tax year in which it is a proper deduction rent and prior year forms, instructions, andpayer Advocate.under your accounting method. For example, if publications.The Taxpayer Advocate represents your in-you use an accrual method, you are entitled to terests and concerns within the IRS by protect- • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withthe deduction or credit in the tax year in which ing your rights and resolving problems that have your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.the obligation for the repayment accrues. not been fixed through normal channels. While
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessTaxpayer Advocates cannot change the tax law to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–or make a technical tax decision, they can clearSubscriptions. You can deduct as a business 4059 to ask tax questions or to orderup problems that resulted from previous con-expense subscriptions to professional, techni- forms and publications.tacts and ensure that your case is given a com-cal, and trade journals that deal with your busi-
plete and impartial review. • TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 toness field.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate: listen to pre-recorded messages covering
various tax topics.• Call the Taxpayer Advocate atSupplies and materials. Unless you have de-
1–877–777–4778.ducted the cost in any earlier year, you generally
Evaluating the quality of our telephone ser-can deduct the cost of materials and supplies • Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040. vices. To ensure that IRS representatives giveactually consumed and used during the tax year. accurate, courteous, and professional answers,• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer AdvocateIf you keep incidental materials and supplies we evaluate the quality of our telephone ser-office in your area.
on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden- vices in several ways.• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are atal materials and supplies you bought during the
TTY/TDD user. • A second IRS representative sometimestax year if all the following requirements are met.
monitors live telephone calls. That person
For more information, see Publication 1546,• You do not keep a record of when they are only evaluates the IRS assistor and does
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS. not keep a record of any taxpayer’s nameused.
or tax identification number.• You do not take an inventory of the Free tax services. To find out what services • We sometimes record telephone calls toamount on hand at the beginning and end are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free evaluate IRS assistors objectively. Weof the tax year. Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi- hold these recordings no longer than onecations and an index of tax topics. It also de-• This method does not distort your income. week and use them only to measure thescribes other free tax information services, quality of assistance.including tax education and assistance pro-You can also deduct the cost of books, profes-
• We value our customers’ opinions.grams and a list of TeleTax topics.sional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor-
Throughout this year, we will be surveyingmally use them up within a year. However, if the Personal computer. With your per- our customers for their opinions on ourusefulness of these items extends substantially sonal computer and modem, you can service.beyond the year they are placed in service, you access the IRS on the Internet at
www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, yougenerally must recover their costs through de-
Walk-in. You can walk in to many postcan:preciation. See Depreciation, earlier.
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick• Find answers to questions you may have. up certain forms, instructions, and pub-Utilities. Your business expenses for heat, lications. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery• Download forms and publications or
lights, power, and telephone service are deduct- stores, copy centers, city and county govern-search for forms and publications by topic
ible. However, any part due to personal use is ments, credit unions, and office supply storesor keyword.
not deductible. have an extensive collection of products avail-• View forms that may be filled in electroni- able to print from a CD-ROM or photocopy fromTelephone. You cannot deduct the cost of cally, print the completed form, and then reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS offices andbasic local telephone service (including any save the form for recordkeeping. libraries have the Internal Revenue Code, regu-taxes) for the first telephone line you have in • View Internal Revenue Bulletins published lations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumu-your home, even though you have an office in in the last few years. lative Bulletins available for research purposes.your home. However, charges for business
• Search regulations and the Internal Reve-long-distance phone calls on that line, as well as Mail. You can send your order fornue Code.the cost of a second line into your home used forms, instructions, and publications to
exclusively for business, are deductible busi- • Receive our electronic newsletters on hot the Distribution Center nearest to you
ness expenses. tax issues and news. and receive a response within 10 workdays after
Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help Page 55

Page 56 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your request is received. Find the address that P.O. Box 85074 • Internal Revenue Bulletins.
applies to your part of the country. Richmond, VA 23261 – 5074
The CD-ROM can be purchased from Na-• Western part of U.S.: tional Technical Information Service (NTIS) byWestern Area Distribution Center CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publica- calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet atRancho Cordova, CA 95743– 0001 tion 1796, Federal Tax Products on www.irs.gov. The first release is available inCD-ROM, and obtain:• Central part of U.S.: mid-December and the final release is available
Central Area Distribution Center • Current tax forms, instructions, and publi- in late January.
P.O. Box 8903 cations. IRS Publication 3207, Small Business Re-
Bloomington, IL 61702– 8903 source Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that• Prior-year tax forms and instructions. contains information important to small busi-• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign • Popular tax forms that may be filled in nesses. It is available in mid-February. You canaddresses: electronically, printed out for submission, get one free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676Eastern Area Distribution Center and saved for recordkeeping. or visiting the IRS web site at www.irs.gov.
Index
Business: Clean-fuel vehicle Form:A
Assets ............... 3 property ............ 4 5 1098 ............... 1 8Accountable plan ......... 4 8
Books and records ...... 3 3 3115 ............... 2 2Clean-fuel vehicleAchievement awards ....... 6
Meal expenses ......... 5 0 4562 ............. 30, 32refueling property ..... 4 5Advertising ............. 5 1 Use of car ...........4 ,  5 1 4952 ............... 1 7Motor vehicle .......... 4 5Amortization: Use of home ........... 3 5213 ................ 5Necessary expense ...... 2Anti-abuse rule ......... 3 5 5304– SIMPLE ......... 1 0Nonqualifying property .... 4 5Anti-churning rules ...... 3 4 5305– S ............. 1 0Ordinary expense ........ 2Corporate organization C 5305– S A ............ 1 0Qualified electric vehicle . . 47costs .............. 3 1 Campaign contribution ..... 5 4 5305– S E P ............ 9Section 197 intangibles . . . 33Dispositions of section Capital expenses .......... 3 5305– SIMPLE ......... 1 0Demolition expenses ...... 5 2197 intangibles ....... 3 5 8582 ............... 1 7Capitalization of interest .... 1 9 Depletion:Experimental costs ...... 3 7 8826 ............... 3 0Car allowance ........... 4 9 Mineral property ........ 3 8Going into business 8834 ............... 4 7Car and truck expenses . . . 4, 51 Oil and gas wells ....... 3 8costs .............. 3 1 T .................. 4 2Percentage table ....... 4 1Carrying charges ......... 2 6How to amortize ........ 3 2 W– 2 ............... 1 1Timber .............. 4 1Charitable:How to deduct ......... 3 0 Franchise ............ 33, 52Who can claim ......... 3 7Contributions .......... 5 1Incorrect amount
Franchise taxes .......... 2 2Depreciation ............ 5 2Sports event .......... 5 1deducted ........... 3 5
Free tax services ......... 5 5Development costs, miners . . 27Partnership organization Circulation costs,
Fringe benefits ........... 7costs .............. 3 1 newspapers and Disabled, improvements for . . 28
Pollution control facilities . . 37 Fuel taxes ............. 2 2periodicals ............ 2 7 Drilling and development
Reforestation costs ...... 3 6 Clean-fuel property ..... 45-47 costs ............... 2 6
Related person ........ 3 4 Cleanup costs, Driveways .............. 3 GResearch costs ........ 3 7 environmental ......... 5 2 Dues, membership ........ 5 2 Gas wells .............. 4 0Section 197 intangibles Club dues .............. 5 2 Geothermal wells ....... 26, 41defined ............ 3 3 Comments .............. 1Start-up costs ......... 3 1 Gifts, nominal value ........ 7ECommitment fees ........ 1 9Anticipated liabilities ....... 5 1 Going into business ......3 ,  3 1Economic interest ........ 3 7Compensation ........... 1 0Assessments, local ....... 2 1 Goodwill ............... 3 3Economic performance ...... 4Computer software ....... 3 4Assistance ( See Tax help) Education expenses ......7 ,  5 2Constant-yield method, OID . . 18At-risk limits ............. 4 Elderly, improvements for . . . 28 HContested liability ......... 4Attorney fees ........... 5 3 Electric vehicle credit ...... 4 7 Health insurance, deductionContributions:Awards: Employee benefit programs . . . 7 for self-employed ....... 2 3Charitable ............ 5 1Achievement ........... 6 Employees’ p a y........... 6Political .............. 5 4 Heating equipment ......... 3Length-of-service ........ 6 Employment taxes ........ 2 2SIMPLE IRA .......... 1 1 Help ( See Tax help)Safety achievement ...... 6 Entertainment tickets ...... 5 1Copyrights ............. 3 3 Hobby losses, not for profit . . . 5
Environmental cleanupCost depletion ........... 3 8 Home, business use ........ 3
B costs ............... 5 2Cost of getting lease .... 15, 32
Bad debts ( See Business bad Excise taxes ............ 2 2Cost of goods sold ......... 2
Idebts) Experimentation costs . . . 26, 37Covenant not to compete . . . 33
Impairment-relatedBlack lung payments ...... 5 1 Exploration costs ......... 2 7Credit, electric vehicle ..... 4 7 expenses, medicalBonuses:
expenses ............ 5 3Employee ............. 7
DF Improvements:Royalties ............. 4 1
By lessee ............ 1 5De minimis OID .......... 1 8 Fees:Bribes ................ 5 1
For disabled and elderly . . . 28Commitment .......... 1 9Debt-financed:Business bad debts:
To business assets ....... 3Legal and professional . . . 53Acquisition ........... 1 7Defined .............. 4 2
Loan origination ........ 1 8 Income taxes ........... 2 2Distributions .......... 1 7How to treat ........... 4 3
Regulatory ........... 5 3 Incorrect amount ofRecovery ............ 4 4 Definitions:
Tax return preparation .... 5 3 amortization deducted .... 3 5Types of ............. 4 3 Achievement award ...... 6
Fines ................. 5 4When worthless ........ 4 3 Business bad debt ...... 4 2 Individual retirement
Where to deduct ........ 4 4 Clean-burning fuel ...... 4 5 Forgone interest ......... 2 0 arrangements (IRAs) ..... 1 3
Page 56 Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help

Page 57 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Insurance: Meals and entertainment .... 5 0 Prepaid expense: S
Capitalized premiums .... 2 5 Extends useful life ...... 2 5Meals and lodging ......... 7 Salaries and wages ........ 6
Deductible premiums .... 2 3 General rule ........... 4Medical expenses ........ 5 3 Sales taxes ............ 2 2
Nondeductible premiums . . 25 Interest ............ 19-20Mining: Self-employed healthSelf-employed individuals . . 23 Rent ................ 1 4Depletion ............ 4 1 insurance deduction ..... 2 3
Intangible drilling costs ..... 2 6 Prepayment penalty ....... 1 8Development costs ...... 2 7 Self-employment tax ...... 2 3
Intangibles, amortization .... 3 2 Profit-sharing plans ....... 1 2Exploration costs ....... 2 7 Self-insurance, reserve for . . 25
Interest: Publications ( See Tax help)Money purchase pension SEP plans .............. 8Allocation of ........... 1 6 plan ................ 1 2 Sick pay ................ 8Below-market .......... 2 0 More information ( See Tax help) Q SIMPLE IRA plans ...... 10-11Business expense for .... 1 5 Mortgage: Qualified plan ........... 1 2 SIMPLE plans ............ 9Capitalized ........... 1 9 Cost of acquiring ....... 1 8 Standard meal allowance . . . 49Carrying charge ........ 2 6 Interest .............. 1 8 Standard mileage rate ..... 4 9RDeductible ............ 1 8 Moving expenses,Forgone ............. 2 0 Standby charges ......... 1 9Real estate taxes ......... 2 1machinery ............ 5 3Life insurance policies .... 1 9 Start-up costs ........... 3 1Recapture:
Not deductible ......... 1 9 Clean-fuel deductions .... 4 6 Subscriptions ......... 52, 55NRefunds of ........... 1 9 Electric vehicle credit .... 4 7 Suggestions ............. 1Natural gas ............. 4 0When to deduct ........ 1 9 Exploration expenses .... 2 7 Supplies and materials ..... 5 5Necessary expense ........ 2Interview expenses ....... 5 3 Timber property ........ 3 6
Net operating loss ......... 4I R A.................. 1 3 Recovery of amount TNonaccountable plan ...... 5 0 deducted .............. 4
Tax help ............... 5 5Nonqualifying intangibles . . . 33 Reforestation costs ....... 3 6K Tax preparation fees ...... 5 3Not-for-profit activities ....... 5 Regulatory fees .......... 5 3Keogh plan ( See Qualified plan) Taxes:Notification requirements . . . 11 Reimbursements:Key person ............. 1 9 Carrying charge ........ 2 6Accountable plan ....... 4 8Kickbacks .............. 5 1 Employment .......... 2 2Mileage .............. 4 9O Excise .............. 2 2Nonaccountable plan .... 5 0Office in home ............ 3 Franchise ............ 2 2L Per diem ............. 4 9 Fuel ................ 2 2Oil and gas wells:Leases: Qualifying requirements . . . 48 Income .............. 2 2Depletion ............ 3 8Canceling ............ 1 4 Related persons: Leased property ........ 1 4Drilling costs .......... 2 6Cost of getting ....... 15, 32 Anti-churning rules ...... 3 4 Personal property ....... 2 2Partnerships .......... 4 0Improvements by lessee . . 15 Clean-fuel vehicle Real estate ........... 2 1S corporations ......... 4 0Leveraged ............ 1 4 deduction ........... 4 6 Sales ............... 2 2Ordinary expense ......... 2Mineral .............. 4 1 Coal or iron ore ........ 4 1 Unemployment fund ..... 2 2Organization costs:Oil and gas ........... 4 1 Payments to .........4 ,  2 0 Taxpayer Advocate ....... 5 5Corporate ............ 3 1Sales distinguished ...... 1 4 Refiners ............. 3 9
Telephone ............. 5 5Partnership ........... 3 1Taxes on ............. 1 4 Unreasonable rent ...... 1 4
Timber .............. 36, 41Original issue discount ..... 1 8Legal and professional fees . . 53 Removal:
Tools .................. 3Outplacement services ..... 5 3Licenses ............ 33, 53 Barrier .............. 2 8
Trademark, trade name . . 33, 52Line of credit ............ 1 7 Costs ............... 5 4
Retired asset .......... 2 8 Travel ................ 4 8Loans: P
Below-market interest Rent expense, capitalizing . . . 15 TTY/TDD information ...... 5 5Passive activities .......... 4
rate ............... 2 0 Repairs ............... 5 4Payments in kind .......... 4Discounted ........... 1 9 Repayments (claim of right) . . 54 UPenalties:Origination fees ........ 1 8 Replacements ............ 3Deductible ............ 5 4 Unemployment fund taxes . . . 22To employees .......... 8 Research costs ........ 26, 37Nondeductible ......... 5 4 Unpaid expenses, relatedLobbying expenses ....... 5 3 Prepayment ........... 1 8 Retirement plans: person .............4 ,  2 0Lodging and meals ........ 7 Defined benefit ......... 1 2Per diem and car allowances: Utilities ............... 5 5Long-term care insurance . . . 23 Defined contribution ..... 1 2High-low rate .......... 4 9
Losses: I R A ................ 1 3Regular rate .......... 4 9 VAt-risk limits ............ 4 Money purchase ........ 1 2Reporting allowance ..... 4 9
Vacation pay ............. 8Limits ................ 4 Profit-sharing .......... 1 2Standard meal allowance . . 49
Net operating ........... 4 Qualified ............. 1 2Standard mileage rate .... 4 9
Not-for-profit rules ........ 5 Salary reduction ......... 9Percentage depletion ...... 3 8 W
Passive activities ........ 4 S E P................. 8Personal expenses ........ 3 Wages and salaries ........ 6
SIMPLE .............. 9Personal property tax ...... 2 2 Welfare benefit funds ....... 7
Roads ................. 3M Points ................ 1 8 IMachinery parts ........... 3 Political contributions ...... 5 4
Materials and supplies ..... 5 5 Pollution control facilities .... 3 7
Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help Page 57

Page 58 of 58 of Publication 535 14:58 -  1-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Business Taxpayers
General Guides
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Spanish Language Publications
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2002
Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Circular E, Employer’s Tax Guide
Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide
Circular A, Agricultural Employer ’s
Tax Guide
Circular SS, Federal Tax Guide For
Employers in the U.S. Virgin Islands,
Guam, American Samoa, and the
Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Circular PR Guía Contributiva
Federal Para Patronos
Puertorriqueños
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Excise Taxes for 2002
Withholding of Tax on Nonresident
Aliens and Foreign Entities
Social Security and Other
Information for Members of the
Clergy and Religious Workers
Residential Rental Property
Self-Employment Tax
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Business Expenses
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Installment Sales
Accounting Periods and Methods
Corporations
Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
Basis of Assets
Examination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund
Retirement Plans for Small Business
(SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans)
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Starting a Business and Keeping
Records
The IRS Collection Process
Information on the United States-
Canada Income Tax Treaty
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
How To Depreciate Property
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of
the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaraci ón de
Impuesto Federal
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
Tax on Unrelated Business Income
of Exempt Organizations
Wage and Tax Statement
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends*
Profit or Loss From Business*
Net Profit From Business*
Capital Gains and Losses*
Supplemental Income and Loss*
Profit or Loss From Farming*
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled*
Estimated Tax for Individuals*
Self-Employment Tax*
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*
Capital Gains and Losses
Partner’s Share of Income,
Credits, Deductions, etc.
U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return
U.S. Income Tax Return for an S Corporation
Employee Business Expenses*
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses*
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative*
Child and Dependent Care Expenses*
General Business Credit
Application for Automatic Extension of Time To
File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*
Moving Expenses*
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Installment Sale Income*
Noncash Charitable Contributions*
Change of Address*
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home*
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
Nondeductible IRAs*
Passive Activity Loss Limitations*
15
15-A
51
80
179
926
378
463
505
510
515
517
527
533
534
535
536
537
541
538
542
Partnerships
544
551
556
560
561
583
594
597
598
901
911
925
946
947
908
1544
1546
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
10134
Sch A & B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes*
Sch R
Sch SE
1040-ES
1040X
Sch D
Sch K-1
1120
1120S
1065 U.S. Return of Partnership Income
2106
2106-EZ
2441
2848
3800
4868
3903
5329
6252
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Specialized Publications
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Employee’s Withholding Allowance Certificate*W-4
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return*
940
940-EZ
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*1040
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return*
Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care
Providers)
587
U.S. Tax Treaties
Practice Before the IRS and Power
of Attorney
Tax Incentives for Empowerment
Zones and Other Distressed
Communities
Employer’s Guides
Certification for Reduced Tax Rates
in Tax Treaty Countries
686
954
Capital Gains and Losses and Built-In Gains
Shareholder’s Share of Income, Credits,
Deductions, etc.
Sch D
Sch K-1
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts*
2210
Report of Cash Payments Over $10,000
Received in a Trade or Business*
8300
Depreciation and Amortization*4562
Sales of Business Property*4797
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
U.S. Corporation Short-Form
Income Tax Return
1120-A
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including by
computer, phone, and mail.
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. Items with an asterisk are available by fax. For these orders only, use the catalog number
when ordering.
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
W-2
10220
11234
10983
17001
11320
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
11346
12187
11358
11340
11360
Employer’s Quarterly Federal Tax Return941
11359
Sch J Farm Income Averaging* 25513
11510
Catalog
Number
20604
11744
11862
11980
12392
12490
12906
13086
13141
13329
13601
62299
63966
12081
13232
63704
6213311390
11393
11394
11450
11456
11700
11520
11516
Form Number and Title
Continuation Sheet for Schedule DSch D-1 10424
Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits
15-B
Page 58 Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help