Userid: EAFING00 DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\62pdb\documents\epicfiles\2009\P501.XML (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 ContentsCat. No. 15000U
What's New for 2009 .............. . 1Department
of the Reminders ..................... . 2Treasury Exemptions,
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue Who Must File .................. . 3StandardService
Who Should File ................ . 4
Filing Status ................... . 5Deduction,
Exemptions .................... . 10
Exemptions for Dependents ........ . 11and Filing
Phaseout of Exemptions ........... . 21
Social Security Numbers forInformation
Dependents ................. . 22
Standard Deduction .............. . 22
2009 Standard DeductionFor use in preparing
Worksheet ............... . 24
How To Get Tax Help ............. . 252009 Returns
Index ......................... . 27
What's New for 2009
Who must file. Generally, the amount of in-
come you can receive before you must file a tax
return has increased. Table 1 shows the filing
requirements for most taxpayers.
Exemption amount. The amount you can de-
duct for each exemption has increased from
$3,500 in 2008 to $3,650 in 2009.
Exemption phaseout. You lose part of the
benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted gross
income (AGI) is above a certain amount. For
2009, the phaseout begins at $125,100 for mar-
ried persons filing separately; $166,800 for sin-
gle individuals; $208,500 for heads of
household; and $250,200 for married persons
filing jointly or qualifying widow(ers). However,
in 2009, you can lose no more than 1/3 of the
amount of your exemptions. In other words,
each exemption cannot be reduced to less than
$2,433.
Exemption for individual displaced by Mid-
western disaster. You may be able to claim a
$500 exemption if you provided housing to a
person displaced by a Midwestern disaster. For
more information, see Exemption for Individual
Displaced by a Midwestern Disaster.
Standard deduction increased. The stan-
dard deduction for most taxpayers who do not
itemize their deductions on Schedule A of Form
1040 is higher in 2009 than it was in 2008. The
amount depends on your filing status. In addition
to the annual increase due to inflation adjust-
ments, your 2009 standard deduction is in-
Get forms and other information creased by:
faster and easier by: • Any state or local real estate taxes you
paid that would be deductible on Schedule
Internet www.irs.gov A if you were itemizing deductions, up to
$500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly),
Dec 18, 2009

Page 2 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Any state or local sales or excise taxes social security number (SSN), you must apply Comments and suggestions. We welcome
you paid on the purchase of a new motor for an individual taxpayer identification number your comments about this publication and your
vehicle after February 16, 2009, and (ITIN). Your spouse also may need an ITIN if he suggestions for future editions.
or she does not have and is not eligible to get an You can write to us at the following address:• Any net disaster loss from a federally de- SSN. See Form W-7, Application for IRS Individ-clared disaster. ual Taxpayer Identification Number. Also, see
Internal Revenue ServiceYou can use the 2009 Standard Deduction Social Security Numbers for Dependents, later.
Individual Forms and Publications BranchWorksheet near the end of this publication to
Photographs of missing children. The Inter- SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Ifigure your standard deduction. But to increase
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526your standard deduction by taxes paid on the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- Washington, DC 20224purchase of a new motor vehicle, you must use
dren. Photographs of missing children selectedSchedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it
by the Center may appear in this publication onto your return. We respond to many letters by telephone.pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-Itemized deductions. Some of your itemized help bring these children home by looking at the
clude your daytime phone number, including thedeductions may be limited if your AGI is more photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
area code, in your correspondence.than $166,800 ($83,400 if you are married filing (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Theseparately). See Who Should Itemize, later.
asterisk must be included in the address.)
Definition of qualifying child revised. Be- Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-
ginning in 2009, the following changes have ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-Introductionbeen made to the definition of a qualifying child. ally to each email, we do appreciate yourThis publication discusses some tax rules that feedback and will consider your comments as• To be your qualifying child, the child must affect every person who may have to file a fed- we revise our tax products.be younger than you unless the child is eral income tax return. It answers some basicpermanently and totally disabled. Ordering forms and publications. Visitquestions: who must file; who should file; what
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andfiling status to use; how many exemptions to• A child cannot be your qualifying child if he
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theclaim; and the amount of the standard deduc-or she files a joint return, unless the return
address below and receive a response within 10tion.was filed only as a claim for refund.
days after your request is received.Who Must File  explains who must file an• If the parents of a child can claim the child income tax return. If you have little or no grossas a qualifying child but no parent so income, reading this section will help you decide Internal Revenue Serviceclaims the child, no one else can claim the if you have to file a return. 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwaychild as a qualifying child unless that per- Who Should File will help you decide if youson's AGI is higher than the highest AGI of Bloomington, IL 61705-6613should file a return, even if you are not requiredany of the child's parents who can claim to do so.the child. Tax questions. If you have a tax question,Filing Status helps you determine which filing
• Your child is a qualifying child for pur- check the information available on www.irs.govstatus to use. Filing status is important in deter-
poses of the child tax credit only if you can or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxmining whether you must file a return, your stan-
and do claim an exemption for him or her. dard deduction, and your tax rate. It also helps questions sent to either of the above addresses.
determine what credits you may be entitled to.
Exemptions, which reduce your taxable in- Useful ItemsDefinition of custodial parent. Beginning in
come, are discussed in Exemptions.2009, new rules apply to determine who is the You may want to see:
Exemptions for Dependents explains the dif-custodial parent for tax purposes. See Custodial
ference between a qualifying child and a qualify-parent and noncustodial parent. Publication
ing relative. Other topics include the social
❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, andRevoking a release of claim to a dependent's security number requirement for dependents,
Administratorsexemption. Beginning in 2009, new rules al- the rules for multiple support agreements, and
low the custodial parent to revoke a release of the rules for divorced or separated parents. ❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children andclaim to exemption that was previously released Standard Deduction gives the rules and dol- Dependentsto the noncustodial parent. See Revocation of lar amounts for the standard deduction Ð a
❏ 4492-B Information for Affectedrelease of claim to an exemption. benefit for taxpayers who do not itemize their
Taxpayers in the Midwesterndeductions. This section also discusses thePost-2008 divorce decree or separation Disaster Areasstandard deduction for taxpayers who are blindagreement. Beginning with 2009 tax returns, or age 65 or older, and special rules for depen-a noncustodial parent claiming an exemption for Form (and Instructions)dents. In addition, this section should help youa child can no longer attach certain pages from a decide whether you would be better off taking ❏ Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040)divorce decree or separation agreement instead the standard deduction or itemizing your deduc- Standard Deduction for Certainof Form 8332 if the decree or agreement went tions. Filersinto effect after 2008. The noncustodial parent How To Get Tax Help explains how to get taxmust attach Form 8332 or a similar statement ❏ 1040X Amended U.S. Individual Incomehelp from the IRS.signed by the custodial parent and whose only Tax ReturnThis publication is for U.S. citizens and resi-purpose is to release a claim to exemption. See dent aliens only. If you are a resident alien for ❏ 2848 Power of Attorney and DeclarationChildren of divorced or separated parents or the entire year, you must follow the same tax of Representativeparents who live apart  under Exemptions for rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules toDependents. ❏ 8332 Release/Revocation of Release ofdetermine if you are a resident or nonresident
Claim to Exemption for Child byalien are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication
Custodial Parent519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
❏ 8814 Parents' Election To Report Child'sReminders Nonresident aliens. If you were a nonresi- Interest and Dividendsdent alien at any time during the year, the rules
❏ 8914 Exemption Amount for TaxpayersTaxpayer identification number for aliens. and tax forms that apply to you may be different
Housing Midwestern DisplacedIf you are a nonresident or resident alien and from those that apply to U.S. citizens. See Publi-
Individualsyou do not have and are not eligible to get a cation 519.
Page 2 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 3 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must file Form 1040 if you owe any U.S. Citizens or Resident Aliens
self-employment tax. Living AbroadWho Must File
TIP
For purposes of determining whether you mustIf you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, file a return, you must include in your grosswhether you must file a federal income tax return income all of the income you earned or receivedFiling status. Your filing status generally de-depends on your gross income, your filing sta- abroad, including any income you can excludepends on whether you are single or married. Intus, your age, and whether you are a dependent. under the foreign earned income exclusion. Forsome cases, it depends on other factors as well.For details, see Table 1 and Table 2. You also more information on special tax rules that mayWhether you are single or married is determinedmust file if one of the situations described in apply to you, see Publication 54, Tax Guide foras of the last day of your tax year, which isTable 3 applies. The filing requirements apply U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad.December 31 for most taxpayers. Filing status iseven if you owe no tax.
discussed in detail later in this publication. You may have to pay a penalty if you are
required to file a return but fail to do so. If you Residents of Puerto RicoAge. Age is a factor in determining if you mustwillfully fail to file a return, you may be subject to file a return only if you are 65 or older at the end Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a bonacriminal prosecution. of your tax year. For 2009, you are 65 or older if fide resident of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S.For information on what form to use Ð Form you were born before January 2, 1945. income tax return if you meet the income re-1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040 Ð see the quirements. This is in addition to any legal re-instructions in your tax package. Filing Requirements quirement you may have to file an income tax
return with Puerto Rico.for Most TaxpayersGross income. Gross income is all income If you are a bona fide resident of Puerto Ricoyou receive in the form of money, goods, prop- You must file a return if your gross income for for the whole year, your U.S. gross income doeserty, and services that is not exempt from tax. If the year was at least the amount shown on the not include income from sources within Puertoyou are married and live with your spouse in a appropriate line in Table 1. Dependents should Rico. However, include in your U.S. gross in-community property state, half of any income see Table 2 instead. come any income you received for your servicesdefined by state law as community income may as an employee of the United States or any U.S.be considered yours. For a list of community agency. If you receive income from Puerto Ri-property states, see Community property states Deceased Persons can sources that is not subject to U.S. tax, youunder Married Filing Separately, later. must reduce your standard deduction, whichYou must file an income tax return for a dece- reduces the amount of income you can haveSelf-employed persons. If you are dent (a person who died) if both of the following before you must file a U.S. income tax return.self-employed in a business that provides serv- are true. For more information, see Publication 570,ices (where products are not a factor), your
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income Fromgross income from that business is the gross 1. You are the surviving spouse, executor,
U.S. Possessions.receipts. If you are self-employed in a business administrator, or legal representative.
involving manufacturing, merchandising, or min- 2. The decedent met the filing requirementsing, your gross income from that business is the described in this publication at the time of Individuals With Income From U.S.total sales minus the cost of goods sold. To this his or her death. Possessionsfigure, you add any income from investments
and from incidental or outside operations or For more information, see Final Return for If you had income from Guam, the Common-sources. Decedent in Publication 559. wealth of Northern Mariana Islands, American
Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special rulesTable 1. 2009 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers may apply when determining whether you must
file a U.S. federal income tax return. In addition,
THEN file a return you may have to file a return with the individual
if your gross possession government. See Publication 570
AND at the end of 2009 you income was at for more information.
IF your filing status is... were...* least...**
Dependentsunder 65  $ 9,350single
A person who is a dependent may still have to65 or older $10,750
file a return. This depends on the amount of the
under 65 $12,000head of household dependent's earned income, unearned income,
and gross income. For details, see Table 2. A65 or older $13,400 dependent may also have to file if one of the
situations described in Table 3 applies.under 65 (both spouses) $18,700married, filing jointly***
Responsibility of parent. If a dependent65 or older (one spouse) $19,800
child who must file an income tax return cannot
65 or older (both spouses) $20,900 file it for any reason, such as age, a parent,
guardian, or other legally responsible personmarried, filing separately any age  $ 3,650 must file it for the child. If the child cannot sign
the return, the parent or guardian must sign theunder 65 $15,050qualifying widow(er) with
child's name followed by the words ªBy (yourdependent child 65 or older $16,150 signature), parent for minor child.º
*  If you were born before January 2, 1945, you are considered to be 65 or older at the end of 2009. Earned income. This is salaries, wages, pro-
**  Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and services that fessional fees, and other amounts received as
 is not exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United States or from the sale pay for work you actually perform. Earned in- of your main home (even if you can exclude part or all of it). Do not include any social security benefits come (only for purposes of filing requirements unless (a) you are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during 
and the standard deduction) also includes any 2009, or (b) one-half of your social security benefits plus your other gross income and any tax-exempt 
part of a scholarship that you must include in interest is more than $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) applies, see the Form 1040 
 instructions to figure the taxable part of social security benefits you must include in gross income. your gross income. See chapter 1 of Publication
*** If you did not live with your spouse at the end of 2009 (or on the date your spouse died) and 970, Tax Benefits for Education, for more infor-your gross income was at least $3,650, you must file a return regardless of your age. mation on taxable and nontaxable scholarships.
Publication 501 (2009) Page 3

Page 4 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Child's earnings. Amounts a child earns by Table 2. 2009 Filing Requirements for Dependents 
performing services are his or her gross income. See Exemptions for Dependents to find out if you are a dependent.This is true even if under local law the child's
parents have the right to the earnings and may If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to seeactually have received them. If the child does not
if you must file a return.pay the tax due on this income, the parent is
In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, andliable for the tax.
capital gain distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation, taxable
Unearned income. This is income such as social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned incomeinterest, dividends, and capital gains. Trust dis- from a trust. Earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, andtributions of interest, dividends, capital gains, taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. Gross income is the total of your unearnedand survivor annuities are considered unearned and earned income.income also. Caution. If your gross income was $3,650 or more, you usually cannot be claimed
Election to report child's unearned income as a dependent unless you are a qualifying child. For details, see Exemptions for
on parent's return.  You may be able to in- Dependents.
clude your child's interest and dividend income
on your tax return. If you choose to do this, your
Single dependentsÐ Were you either age 65 or older or blind?child will not have to file a return. However, all of
the following conditions must be met. M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your unearned income was more than $950.• Your child was under age 19 (or under
age 24 if a full-time student). (A child born 2. Your earned income was more than $5,700.
on January 1, 1991, is considered to be 3. Your gross income was more than the larger of Ð
age 19 at the end of 2009; you cannot
a. $950, ormake the election for this child unless the
b. Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $300.child was a full-time student. Similarly, a
child born on January 1, 1986, is consid-
ered to be age 24 at the end of 2009; you M Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
cannot make the election for this child.) 1. Your unearned income was more than $2,350 ($3,750 if 65 or older and
• Your child had gross income only from in- blind).
terest and dividends (including capital gain 2. Your earned income was more than $7,100 ($8,500 if 65 or older anddistributions and Alaska Permanent Fund blind).dividends). 3. Your gross income was more than the larger of±
• The interest and dividend income was less a. $2,350 ($3,750 if 65 or older and blind), orthan $9,500.
b. Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $1,700 ($3,100 if 65 or older• Your child is required to file a return for and blind).
2009 unless you make this election.
• Your child does not file a joint return for
2009. Married dependentsÐWere you either age 65 or older or blind?
M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.• No estimated tax payment was made for
2009 and no 2008 overpayment was ap- 1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate
plied to 2009 under your child's name and return and itemizes deductions.
social security number. 2. Your unearned income was more than $950.
• No federal income tax was withheld from 3. Your earned income was more than $5,700.
your child's income under the backup with- 4. Your gross income was more than the larger of Ðholding rules.
a. $950, or• You are the parent whose return must be b.  Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $300.used when making the election to report
your child's unearned income.
M Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
For more information, see Form 8814 and 1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate
Parent's Election To Report Child's Interest and return and itemizes deductions.
Dividends in Publication 929. 2. Your unearned income was more than $2,050 ($3,150 if 65 or older and
blind).
Other Situations 3. Your earned income was more than $6,800 ($7,900 if 65 or older and
blind).You may have to file a tax return even if your
4. Your gross income was more than the larger of±gross income is less than the amount shown in
Table 1  or Table 2  for your filing status. See a. $2,050 ($3,150 if 65 or older and blind), or
Table 3 for those other situations when you must b. Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $1,400 ($2,500 if 65 or olderfile. and blind).
Who Should File 2. You made estimated tax payments for the 3. You qualify for the making work pay credit
year or had any of your overpayment for or the government retiree credit. SeeEven if you do not have to file, you should file a
last year applied to this year's estimated Schedule M (Form 1040A or 1040).tax return if you can get money back. For exam-
tax.ple, you should file if one of the following applies. 4. You qualify for the earned income credit.
See Publication 596, Earned Income1. You had income tax withheld from your Credit (EIC), for more information.pay.
Page 4 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 5 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
State law governs whether you are marriedTable 3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2009 Return
or legally separated under a divorce or separate
maintenance decree.If any of the four conditions listed below applied to you for 2009, you must file a
return. Divorced persons.  If you are divorced
under a final decree by the last day of the year,
1. You owe any special taxes, including any of the following. you are considered unmarried for the whole
year.
a. Alternative minimum tax. (See the Form 1040 instructions for line 45.) Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a
divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing
b. Additional tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the
arrangement (IRA), or other tax-favored account. (See Publication 590, time of divorce you intended to and did remarry
Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), and Publication 969, Health each other in the next tax year, you and your
Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.) But if you are filing a spouse must file as married individuals.
return only because you owe this tax, you can file Form 5329 by itself. Annulled marriages. If you obtain a court
decree of annulment, which holds that no valid
c. Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer (see marriage ever existed, you are considered un-
Publication 531, Reporting Tip Income) or on wages you received from an married even if you filed joint returns for earlier
employer who did not withhold these taxes (see Form 8919). years. You must file amended returns (Form
1040X) claiming single or head of household
status for all tax years affected by the annulmentd. Write-in taxes, including uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad
that are not closed by the statute of limitationsretirement tax on tips you reported to your employer or on group-term life
for filing a tax return. The statute of limitationsinsurance and additional tax on health savings accounts. (See Publication 531,
generally does not end until 3 years after yourPublication 969, and the Form 1040 instructions for line 60.)
original return was filed.
e. Household employment taxes. But if you are filing a return only because you Head of household or qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child. If you are consideredowe these taxes, you can file Schedule H by itself.
unmarried, you may be able to file as a head of
household or as a qualifying widow(er) with af. Recapture taxes. (See the Form 1040 instructions for lines 44 and 60.)
dependent child. See Head of Household  and
Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child  to2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your see if you qualify.employer. These payments should be shown in box 9 of your Form W-2. (See
Publication 596, Earned Income Credit (EIC).) Married persons. If you are considered mar-
ried for the whole year, you and your spouse can
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Schedule SE file a joint return, or you can file separate re-
(Form 1040) and its instructions.) turns.
Considered married. You are considered4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled married for the whole year if on the last day oforganization that is exempt from employer social security and Medicare taxes. your tax year you and your spouse meet any one(See Schedule SE (Form 1040) and its instructions.) of the following tests.
1. You are married and living together as
husband and wife.5. You qualify for the additional child tax the column in the Tax Table that applies to your
credit. See the instructions in your tax filing status. 2. You are living together in a common lawforms package for more information on this You also use your filing status in determining marriage that is recognized in the statecredit. whether you are eligible to claim certain other where you now live or in the state wheredeductions and credits. the common law marriage began.6. You qualify for the refundable American There are five filing statuses:opportunity education credit. See Form 3. You are married and living apart, but not8863, Education Credits. • Single, legally separated under a decree of di-
vorce or separate maintenance.7. You qualify for the health coverage tax • Married Filing Jointly,
credit. For information about this credit, 4. You are separated under an interlocutory• Married Filing Separately,see Form 8885, Health Coverage Tax (not final) decree of divorce. For purposes• Head of Household, andCredit. of filing a joint return, you are not consid-
ered divorced.• Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent8. You qualify for the refundable credit for
Child.prior year minimum tax. See Form 8801,
Spouse died during the year. If yourCredit for Prior Year Minimum Tax Ð Indi- If more than one filing status applies to you, spouse died during the year, you are consideredviduals, Estates, and Trusts. choose the one that will give you the lowest tax. married for the whole year for filing status pur-9. You qualify for the first-time homebuyer poses.credit. See Form 5405, First-Time Marital Status If you did not remarry before the end of theHomebuyer Credit. tax year, you can file a joint return for yourselfIn general, your filing status depends on and your deceased spouse. For the next 2whether you are considered unmarried or mar- years, you may be entitled to the special benefitsried. For federal tax purposes, a marriage described later under Qualifying Widow(er) Withmeans only a legal union between a man and a Dependent Child.Filing Status woman as husband and wife. If you remarried before the end of the tax
year, you can file a joint return with your newYou must determine your filing status before you Unmarried persons. You are considered un- spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status iscan determine your filing requirements, stan- married for the whole year if, on the last day of married filing separately for that year.dard deduction (discussed later), and correct your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa-
tax. You figure your correct tax by using the rated from your spouse under a divorce or sepa- Married persons living apart. If you live
section of the Tax Computation Worksheet or rate maintenance decree. apart from your spouse and meet certain tests,
Publication 501 (2009) Page 5

Page 6 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you may be considered unmarried. If this applies Divorced persons. If you are divorced under Wife).º Be sure to also sign in the space pro-
to you, you can file as head of household even a final decree by the last day of the year, you are vided for your signature. Attach a dated state-
though you are not divorced or legally sepa- considered unmarried for the whole year and ment, signed by you, to the return. The
rated. If you qualify to file as head of household you cannot choose married filing jointly as your statement should include the form number of the
instead of as married filing separately, your filing status. return you are filing, the tax year, the reason
standard deduction will be higher. Also, your tax your spouse cannot sign, and that your spouse
may be lower, and you may be able to claim the has agreed to your signing for him or her.
Filing a Joint Returnearned income credit. See Head of Household,
Signing as guardian of spouse. If you arelater.
Both you and your spouse must include all of the guardian of your spouse who is mentally
your income, exemptions, and deductions on incompetent, you can sign the return for yourSingle your joint return. spouse as guardian.
Your filing status is single if, on the last day of Spouse in combat zone. If your spouse isAccounting period. Both of you must use thethe year, you are unmarried or legally separated unable to sign the return because he or she issame accounting period, but you can use differ-from your spouse under a divorce or separate serving in a combat zone (such as the Persianent accounting methods.maintenance decree, and you do not qualify for Gulf area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), and youanother filing status. To determine your marital do not have a power of attorney or other state-Joint responsibility. Both of you may be heldstatus on the last day of the year, see Marital ment, you can sign for your spouse. Attach aresponsible, jointly and individually, for the taxStatus, earlier. signed statement to your return that explainsand any interest or penalty due on your joint
that your spouse is serving in a combat zone.Widow(er). Your filing status may be single if return. One spouse may be held responsible for
For more information on special tax rules foryou were widowed before January 1, 2009, and all the tax due even if all the income was earned
persons who are serving in a combat zone, ordid not remarry before the end of 2009. How- by the other spouse.
who are in missing status as a result of servingever, you might be able to use another filing Divorced taxpayer. You may be held jointly in a combat zone, see Publication 3, Armedstatus that will give you a lower tax. See Head of and individually responsible for any tax, interest,Household and Qualifying Widow(er) With De- Forces' Tax Guide.and penalties due on a joint return filed beforependent Child, later, to see if you qualify. Other reasons spouse cannot sign. Ifyour divorce. This responsibility may apply even
your spouse cannot sign the joint return for anyif your divorce decree states that your formerHow to file. You can file Form 1040EZ (if you
spouse will be responsible for any amounts due other reason, you can sign for your spouse onlyhave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,
on previously filed joint returns. if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legaland meet other requirements), Form 1040A, or
document giving you permission to act for yourForm 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form Relief from joint responsibility. In some spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copy1040, show your filing status as single by check- cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint liabil-
of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848.ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of ity for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return
the Tax Table, or Section A of the Tax Computa- for items of the other spouse which were incor-
tion Worksheet, to figure your tax. rectly reported on the joint return. You can ask Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. A
for relief no matter how small the liability. joint return generally cannot be filed if either
Married Filing Jointly There are three types of relief available. spouse is a nonresident alien at any time during
the tax year. However, if one spouse was aYou can choose married filing jointly as your 1. Innocent spouse relief. nonresident alien or dual-status alien who wasfiling status if you are married and both you and married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the2. Separation of liability, which applies to jointyour spouse agree to file a joint return. On a joint end of the year, the spouses can choose to file afilers who are divorced, widowed, legallyreturn, you report your combined income and
joint return. If you do file a joint return, you andseparated, or who have not lived togetherdeduct your combined allowable expenses. You
for the 12 months ending on the date elec- your spouse are both treated as U.S. residentscan file a joint return even if one of you had no
tion of this relief is filed. for the entire tax year. See chapter 1 of Publica-income or deductions.
tion 519. If you and your spouse decide to file a joint 3. Equitable relief.
return, your tax may be lower than your com-
 You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your Married Filing Separatelycent Spouse Relief, to request any of thesestandard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc-
kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spouse You can choose married filing separately astions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax
Relief, explains these kinds of relief and who your filing status if you are married. This filingbenefits that do not apply to other filing statuses.
may qualify for them. status may benefit you if you want to be respon-If you and your spouse each have in- sible only for your own tax or if it results in lesscome, you may want to figure your tax Signing a joint return. For a return to be tax than filing a joint return.both on a joint return and on separate
TIP considered a joint return, both husband and wife If you and your spouse do not agree to file areturns (using the filing status of married filing generally must sign the return. joint return, you have to use this filing statusseparately). You can choose the method that
Spouse died before signing. If your unless you qualify for head of household status,gives the two of you the lower combined tax.
spouse died before signing the return, the exec- discussed next.
utor or administrator must sign the return forHow to file. If you file as married filing jointly, You may be able to choose head of house-your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else hasyou can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you hold filing status if you live apart from youryet been appointed as executor or administrator,have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind, spouse, meet certain tests, and are consideredyou can sign the return for your spouse andand meet other requirements, you can file Form unmarried (explained later, under Head ofenter ªFiling as surviving spouseº in the area1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A, Household). This can apply to you even if youwhere you sign the return.show this filing status by checking the box on are not divorced or legally separated. If youline 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of the Spouse away from home. If your spouse is qualify to file as head of household, instead of asTax Table, or Section B of the Tax Computation away from home, you should prepare the return, married filing separately, your tax may be lower,Worksheet, to figure your tax. sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so that you may be able to claim the earned income
it can be filed on time. credit and certain other credits, and your stan-Spouse died during the year. If your spouse
dard deduction will be higher. The head ofdied during the year, you are considered mar- Injury or disease prevents signing. If your
household filing status allows you to choose theried for the whole year and can choose married spouse cannot sign because of injury or disease
standard deduction even if your spouse choosesfiling jointly as your filing status. See Spouse and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse's
to itemize deductions. See Head of Household,died during the year , under Married persons , name in the proper space on the return followed
later, for more information.earlier. by the words ªBy (your name), Husband (or
Page 6 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 7 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Unless you are required to file sepa- equivalent railroad retirement benefits Joint Return After
rately, you should figure your tax both you received, and Separate Returns
ways (on a joint return and on separate
TIP c. You cannot roll over amounts from an You can change your filing status by filing anreturns). This way you can make sure you are eligible retirement plan (other than a amended return using Form 1040X.using the filing status that results in the lowest
Roth IRA or designated Roth account) If you or your spouse (or both of you) file acombined tax. However, you will generally pay
into a Roth IRA. separate return, you generally can change to amore combined tax on separate returns than
joint return any time within 3 years from the dueyou would on a joint return for the reasons listed
9. The following credits and deductions are date of the separate return or returns. This doesunder Special Rules, later.
reduced at income levels that are half of not include any extensions. A separate return
includes a return filed by you or your spousethose for a joint return:How to file. If you file a separate return, you claiming married filing separately, single, orgenerally report only your own income, exemp- a. The child tax credit, head of household filing status.tions, credits, and deductions on your individual
b. The retirement savings contributionsreturn. You can claim an exemption for your
credit,spouse if your spouse had no gross income and Separate Returnswas not the dependent of another person. How- c. Itemized deductions, and After Joint Returnever, if your spouse had any gross income or
d. The deduction for personal exemptions.was the dependent of someone else, you cannot Once you file a joint return, you cannot choose
claim an exemption for him or her on your sepa- to file separate returns for that year after the due10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500rate return. date of the return.(instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-If you file as married filing separately, you
turn). Exception. A personal representative for acan use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select this
decedent can change from a joint return electedfiling status by checking the box on line 3 of 11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you
by the surviving spouse to a separate return foreither form. You also must enter your spouse's cannot claim the standard deduction. If you the decedent. The personal representative hasfull name in the space provided and must enter can claim the standard deduction, your ba- 1 year from the due date (including extensions)your spouse's SSN or ITIN in the space provided sic standard deduction is half the amount of the return to make the change. See Publica-unless your spouse does not have and is not allowed on a joint return. tion 559 for more information on filing income taxrequired to have an SSN or ITIN. Use the Mar-
returns for a decedent.12. Your first-time homebuyer credit is limitedried filing separately column of the Tax Table or
to $4,000 (instead of $8,000 if you filed aSection C of the Tax Computation Worksheet to
figure your tax. joint return). If the special rule for long-time Head of Household
residents of the same main home applies,
You may be able to file as head of household ifthe credit is limited to $3,250 (instead of
you meet all the following requirements.Special Rules $6,500 if you filed a joint return).
1. You are unmarried or ªconsidered unmar-If you choose married filing separately as your
riedº on the last day of the year.filing status, the following special rules apply. Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).Because of these special rules, you will usually 2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-You may not be able to deduct all or part of yourpay more tax on a separate return than if you ing up a home for the year.contributions to a traditional IRA if you or yourused another filing status that you qualify for.
spouse was covered by an employee retirement 3. A ªqualifying personº lived with you in the
1. Your tax rate generally will be higher than plan at work during the year. Your deduction is home for more than half the year (except
it would be on a joint return. reduced or eliminated if your income is more for temporary absences, such as school).
However, if the ªqualifying personº is yourthan a certain amount. This amount is much2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al- dependent parent, he or she does notlower for married individuals who file separatelyternative minimum tax will be half that al- have to live with you. See Special rule forand lived together at any time during the year.lowed to a joint return filer. parent, later, under Qualifying Person.For more information, see How Much Can You3. You cannot take the credit for child and Deduct? in chapter 1 of Publication 590, Individ-dependent care expenses in most cases, If you qualify to file as head of house-ual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs).and the amount that you can exclude from hold, your tax rate usually will be lower
income under an employer's dependent than the rates for single or married fil-
TIP
Rental activity losses. If you actively partici-care assistance program is limited to ing separately. You will also receive a higher
$2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed a joint pated in a passive rental real estate activity that standard deduction than if you file as single or
return). married filing separately.produced a loss, you generally can deduct the
loss from your nonpassive income up to4. You cannot take the earned income credit.
$25,000. This is called a special allowance. How to file. If you file as head of household,
5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit for However, married persons filing separate re- you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040.
adoption expenses in most cases. Indicate your choice of this filing status byturns who lived together at any time during the
checking the box on line 4 of either form. Use theyear cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-6. You cannot take the education credits (the
Head of a household column of the Tax Table orried persons filing separate returns who livedHope credit, American opportunity credit,
Section D of the Tax Computation Worksheet toand lifetime learning credit), the deduction apart at all times during the year are each al-
figure your tax.for student loan interest, or the tuition and lowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance
fees deduction. for losses from passive real estate activities.
See Rental Activities in Publication 925, Passive7. You cannot exclude any interest income Considered UnmarriedActivity and At-Risk Rules.from qualified U.S. savings bonds that you
used for higher education expenses. To qualify for head of household status, you
must be either unmarried or considered unmar-Community property states. If you live in Ari-8. If you lived with your spouse at any time ried on the last day of the year. You are consid-zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,during the tax year: ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year ifNew Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsin you meet all the following tests. a. You cannot claim the credit for the eld- and file separately, your income may be consid-
erly or the disabled. ered separate income or community income for 1. You file a separate return (defined earlier
income tax purposes. See Publication 555,b. You will have to include in income more under Joint Return After Separate Re-
Community Property.(up to 85%) of any social security or turns).
Publication 501 (2009) Page 7

Page 8 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep- the year and his gross income was $5,000. Be-Cost of Keeping Up a Home cause he does not meet the age test (explaineding up your home for the tax year. Keep for Your Records
 later under Qualifying Child ), your son is not3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur- your qualifying child. Because he does not meeting the last 6 months of the tax year. Your the gross income test (explained later underAmountspouse is considered to live in your home Qualifying Relative ), he is not your qualifyingYou Totaleven if he or she is temporarily absent due relative. As a result, he is not your qualifyingPaid Costto special circumstances. See Temporary person for head of household purposes.
Property taxes $ $absences, later.
Mortgage interest expense Example 3 Ð girlfriend. Your girlfriend4. Your home was the main home of your Rent lived with you all year. Even though she may bechild, stepchild, or foster child for more Utility charges your qualifying relative if the gross income andthan half the year. (See Home of qualifying Repairs/maintenance support tests (explained later) are met, she isperson, later, for rules applying to a child's Property insurance not your qualifying person for head of householdbirth, death, or temporary absence during Food consumed purposes because she is not related to you inthe year.) on the premises one of the ways listed under Relatives who do
Other household expenses not have to live with you. See Table 4.5. You must be able to claim an exemption
Totals $ $for the child. However, you meet this test if
Example 4 Ðgirlfriend's child. The factsyou cannot claim the exemption only be-
are the same as in Example 3 except your girl-Minus total amount you ( )cause the noncustodial parent can claim
friend's 10-year-old son also lived with you allpaidthe child using the rules described later in year. He is not your qualifying child and, be-Children of divorced or separated parents cause he is your girlfriend's qualifying child, he isAmount others paid $or parents who live apart under Qualifying not your qualifying relative (see Not a QualifyingChild or in Support Test for Children of Child Test , later). As a result, he is not yourDivorced or Separated Parents or Parents If the total amount you paid is more than the amount qualifying person for head of household pur-Who Live Apart under Qualifying Relative. others paid, you meet the requirement of paying more poses.
than half the cost of keeping up the home.The general rules for claiming an exemp-
tion for a dependent are explained later Home of qualifying person. Generally, theunder Exemptions for Dependents. qualifying person must live with you for moreCosts you include. Include in the cost of up- than half of the year.keep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest,If you were considered married for part
real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re- Special rule for parent. If your qualifyingof the year and lived in a community
pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home. person is your father or mother, you may beproperty state (listed earlier under Mar-
CAUTION
!
If you used payments you received under eligible to file as head of household even if yourried Filing Separately), special rules may apply
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families father or mother does not live with you. How-in determining your income and expenses. See
(TANF) or other public assistance programs to ever, you must be able to claim an exemption forPublication 555 for more information.
pay part of the cost of keeping up your home, your father or mother. Also, you must pay more
you cannot count them as money you paid. than half the cost of keeping up a home that was
However, you must include them in the total costNonresident alien spouse. You are consid- the main home for the entire year for your father
of keeping up your home to figure if you paidered unmarried for head of household purposes or mother. You are keeping up a main home for
over half the cost.if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any your father or mother if you pay more than half
the cost of keeping your parent in a rest home ortime during the year and you do not choose to Costs you do not include. Do not include in home for the elderly.treat your nonresident spouse as a resident the cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifying Death or birth. You may be eligible to file aseducation, medical treatment, vacations, life in-person for head of household purposes. You head of household if the individual who qualifiessurance, or transportation. Also, do not includemust have another qualifying person and meet you for this filing status is born or dies during thethe rental value of a home you own or the valuethe other tests to be eligible to file as a head of year. You must have provided more than half ofof your services or those of a member of yourhousehold. the cost of keeping up a home that was thehousehold.
individual's main home for more than half of theAlso do not include any government or chari-Earned income credit. Even if you are con-
year, or, if less, the period during which thetable assistance you received because of yoursidered unmarried for head of household pur-
individual lived.temporary relocation due to the storms, torna-poses because you are married to a nonresident
does, or flooding in a Midwestern disaster area.alien, you are still considered married for pur- Example. You are unmarried. Your mother,poses of the earned income credit (unless you for whom you can claim an exemption, lived inmeet the five tests listed earlier under Consid- an apartment by herself. She died on Septem-Qualifying Personered Unmarried ). You are not entitled to the ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartmentcredit unless you file a joint return with your See Table 4 , later, to see who is a qualifying for the year until her death was $6,000. You paidspouse and meet other qualifications. person. $4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your
Any person not described in Table 4 is not a See Publication 596 for more information. brother made no other payments towards your
qualifying person. mother's support. Your mother had no income.Choice to treat spouse as resident. You Because you paid more than half of the cost ofare considered married if you choose to treat Example 1 Ðchild. Your unmarried son keeping up your mother's apartment from Janu-your spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1 lived with you all year and was 18 years old at ary 1 until her death, and you can claim anof Publication 519. the end of the year. He did not provide more exemption for her, you can file as a head ofthan half of his own support and does not meet household.the tests to be a qualifying child of anyone else.
Temporary absences. You and your quali-Keeping Up a Home As a result, he is your qualifying child (see Quali-
fying person are considered to live togetherfying Child, later) and, because he is single, is aTo qualify for head of household status, you even if one or both of you are temporarily absentqualifying person for you to claim head of house-must pay more than half of the cost of keeping from your home due to special circumstanceshold filing status.
up a home for the year. You can determine such as illness, education, business, vacation,
whether you paid more than half of the cost of or military service. It must be reasonable toExample 2 Ðchild who is not qualifying
keeping up a home by using the following work- assume that the absent person will return to theperson. The facts are the same as in Example
sheet. home after the temporary absence. You must1 except your son was 25 years old at the end of
Page 8 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 9 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
continue to keep up the home during the ab- 1. The year there is a determination that the This filing status entitles you to use joint
child is dead, or return tax rates and the highest standard deduc-sence.
tion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).2. The year the child would have reachedKidnapped child. You may be eligible to file This status does not entitle you to file a jointage 18.as head of household even if the child who is return.your qualifying person has been kidnapped. You
How to file. If you file as a qualifying widow(er)can claim head of household filing status if all Qualifying Widow(er) with dependent child, you can use either Formthe following statements are true.
With Dependent Child 1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing status
1. The child must be presumed by law en- by checking the box on line 5 of either form. UseIf your spouse died in 2009, you can use marriedforcement authorities to have been kid- the Married filing jointly column of the Tax Tablefiling jointly as your filing status for 2009 if younapped by someone who is not a member or Section B of the Tax Computation Worksheetotherwise qualify to use that status. The year ofof your family or the child's family. to figure your tax.death is the last year for which you can file jointly
2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child with your deceased spouse. See Married Filing Eligibility rules. You are eligible to file your
lived with you for more than half the part of Jointly, earlier. 2009 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-
the year before the kidnapping. You may be eligible to use qualifying pendent child if you meet all the following tests.
widow(er) with dependent child as your filing3. You would have qualified for head of • You were entitled to file a joint return withstatus for 2 years following the year your spousehousehold filing status if the child had not your spouse for the year your spousedied. For example, if your spouse died in 2008been kidnapped. died. It does not matter whether you actu-and you have not remarried, you may be able to ally filed a joint return.This treatment applies for all years until the use this filing status for 2009 and 2010. The
child is returned. However, the last year this rules for using this filing status are explained in • Your spouse died in 2007 or 2008 and you
treatment can apply is the earlier of: detail here. did not remarry before the end of 2009.
Table 4. Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not youqualifying child (such as a son,
can claim an exemption for the person.daughter, or grandchild who lived
with you more than half the year he or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.and meets certain other tests)2
exemption for him or her
he or she is married and you cannot claim an not a qualifying person.3
exemption for him or her
you can claim an exemption for him or her5 a qualifying person.6qualifying relative4 who is your
father or mother you cannot claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
he or she lived with you more than half the year, a qualifying person.qualifying relative4 other than your
and he or she is related to you in one of thefather or mother (such as a
ways listed under Relatives who do not have tograndparent, brother, or sister who
live with you on page 17, and you can claim anmeets certain tests).
exemption for him or her5
he or she did not live with you more than half the not a qualifying person.
year
he or she is not related to you in one of the ways not a qualifying person
listed under Relatives who do not have to live
with you on page 17 and is your qualifying
relative only because he or she lived with you all
year as a member of your household
you cannot claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term ªqualifying childº is defined under Exemptions for Dependents, later. Note: If you are a noncustodial parent, the term ªqualifying childº for
head of household filing status does not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described
under Children of divorced or separated parents or parents who live apart under Qualifying Child, later. If you are the custodial parent and those
rules apply, the child generally is your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child is not a qualifying child for whom
you can claim an exemption.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you cannot claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone
else's return.
4The term ªqualifying relativeº is defined under Exemptions for Dependents, later.
5If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See Multiple
Support Agreement.
6See Special rule for parent for an additional requirement.
Publication 501 (2009) Page 9

Page 10 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You have a child or stepchild for whom • Exemptions for dependents (dependency you as a dependent, you cannot take an exemp-
you can claim an exemption. This does exemptions). tion for yourself even if the other taxpayer does
not include a foster child. not actually claim you as a dependent.While each is worth the same amount ($3,650
• This child lived in your home all year, ex- for 2009), different rules, discussed later, apply
cept for temporary absences. See Tempo- to each type. Your Spouse's Exemptionrary absences, earlier, under Head of
Dependent cannot claim a personal exemp-Household. There are also exceptions, de- Your spouse is never considered your depen-
tion. If you are entitled to claim an exemptionscribed later, for a child who was born or dent.
for a dependent (such as your child), that depen-died during the year and for a kidnapped
dent cannot claim a personal exemption on hischild. Joint return. On a joint return, you can claim
or her own tax return. one exemption for yourself and one for your• You paid more than half the cost of keep- spouse.ing up a home for the year. See Keeping Exemption for individual displaced by a Mid-
Up a Home, earlier, under Head of House- western disaster. You may be able to claim a Separate return. If you file a separate return,hold. $500 exemption if you provided housing to a you can claim an exemption for your spouse
person displaced by the storms, tornadoes, or only if your spouse had no gross income, is not
flooding in a Midwestern disaster area. See Ex- filing a return, and was not the dependent ofExample. John Reed's wife died in 2007.
emption for Individual Displaced by a Midwest- another taxpayer. This is true even if the otherJohn has not remarried. He has continued dur-
ern Disaster, later. taxpayer does not actually claim your spouse asing 2008 and 2009 to keep up a home for himself
a dependent. This is also true if your spouse is aand his child, who lives with him and for whom How to claim exemptions. How you claim an nonresident alien.he can claim an exemption. For 2007 he was exemption on your tax return depends on whichentitled to file a joint return for himself and his Head of household. If you qualify for headform you file.deceased wife. For 2008 and 2009, he can file of household filing status because you are con-Form 1040EZ filers. If you file Formas a qualifying widower with a dependent child. sidered unmarried, you can claim an exemption1040EZ, the exemption amount is combinedAfter 2009, he can file as head of household if he for your spouse if the conditions described in thewith the standard deduction and entered on linequalifies. preceding paragraph are satisfied.5. To claim the exemption for your spouse,Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as a
check the box on line 6b of Form 1040 or FormForm 1040A filers. If you file Form 1040A,qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if the
1040A and enter the name of your spouse in thecomplete lines 6a through 6d. The total numberchild who qualifies you for this filing status is
space to the right of the box. Enter the SSN orof exemptions you can claim is the total in theborn or dies during the year. You must have
ITIN of your spouse in the space provided at thebox on line 6d. Also complete line 26.provided more than half of the cost of keeping up
top of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.a home that was the child's main home during Form 1040 filers. If you file Form 1040,the entire part of the year he or she was alive. complete lines 6a through 6d.The total number Death of spouse. If your spouse died during
of exemptions you can claim is the total in theKidnapped child. You may be eligible to file the year and you file a joint return for yourself
box on line 6d. Also complete line 42.as a qualifying widow(er) with dependent child, and your deceased spouse, you generally can
even if the child who qualifies you for this filing claim your spouse's exemption under the rulesU.S. citizen or resident alien.  If you are astatus has been kidnapped. You can claim quali- just explained in Joint return. If you file a sepa-U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. nationalfying widow(er) with dependent child filing status rate return for the year, you may be able to claim(defined later) or a resident of Canada or Mex-if all the following statements are true. your spouse's exemption under the rules justico, you may qualify for any of the exemptions described in Separate return.discussed here.1. The child must be presumed by law en- If you remarried during the year, you cannot
forcement authorities to have been kid- take an exemption for your deceased spouse.Nonresident aliens.  Generally, if you are anapped by someone who is not a member If you are a surviving spouse without grossnonresident alien (other than a resident of Can-of your family or the child's family. income and you remarry in the year your spouseada or Mexico, or certain residents of India or died, you can be claimed as an exemption on2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child Korea), you can qualify for only one personal both the final separate return of your deceasedlived with you for more than half the part of exemption for yourself. You cannot claim ex- spouse and the separate return of your newthe year before the kidnapping. emptions for a spouse or dependents. spouse for that year. If you file a joint return withThese restrictions do not apply if you are a3. You would have qualified for qualifying your new spouse, you can be claimed as annonresident alien married to a U. S. citizen orwidow(er) with dependent child filing status exemption only on that return.resident alien and have chosen to be treated asif the child had not been kidnapped. a resident of the United States. Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-
As mentioned earlier, this filing status tained a final decree of divorce or separateMore information. For more information on
is available for only 2 years following maintenance by the end of the year, you cannotexemptions if you are a nonresident alien, see
the year your spouse died. take your former spouse's exemption. This rulechapter 5 in Publication 519.
CAUTION
!
applies even if you provided all of your former
Dual-status taxpayers. If you have been both spouse's support.
a nonresident alien and a resident alien in the
same tax year, you should see Publication 519 Exemption for IndividualExemptions for information on determining your exemptions.
Displaced by a Midwestern
Exemptions reduce your taxable income. Gen- DisasterPersonal Exemptionserally, you can deduct $3,650 for each exemp-
tion you claim in 2009. If you are entitled to two You may be able to take an additional exemptionYou are generally allowed one exemption forexemptions for 2009, you would deduct $7,300 amount of $500 for providing housing to a per-yourself. If you are married, you may be allowed($3,650 ×  2). But you may lose part of the dollar son displaced by the storms, tornadoes, orone exemption for your spouse. These areamount of your exemptions if your adjusted flooding in a Midwestern disaster area. You can-called personal exemptions.gross income is above a certain amount. See not claim this amount for housing your spouse or
Phaseout of Exemptions, later. any of your dependents.
You can take this exemption for up to fourYour Own ExemptionTypes of exemptions. There are two types of individuals. Since the exemption is $500 perexemptions you may be able to take: You can take one exemption for yourself unless person, the maximum you can claim is $2,000.
• Personal exemptions for yourself and your you can be claimed as a dependent by another You may be able to take this exemption for 2009
spouse, and taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claim if all of the following are true.
Page 10 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 11 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You provided housing in your main home Child's place of residence. Children usually
for a period of at least 60 consecutive are citizens or residents of the country of their
days ending in 2009 to a person displaced parents.Dependent Taxpayer Testby the storms, tornadoes, or flooding in a If you were a U.S. citizen when your child
Midwestern disaster area. was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen even ifIf you could be claimed as a dependent by an- the other parent was a nonresident alien and theother person, you cannot claim anyone else as a• The person lived in a Midwestern disaster child was born in a foreign country. If so, this testdependent. Even if you have a qualifying child orarea when the disaster occurred. is met.qualifying relative, you cannot claim that person• You did not receive rent or any other as a dependent. Foreign students' place of residence. For-amount for providing the housing. If you are filing a joint return and your spouse eign students brought to this country under acould be claimed as a dependent by someone• You did not claim the maximum additional qualified international education exchange pro-else, you and your spouse cannot claim anyexemption amount of $2,000 in 2008. gram and placed in American homes for a tem-dependents on your joint return. porary period generally are not U.S. residentsYou cannot claim this exemption in 2009 for a and do not meet this test. You cannot claim anperson for whom you claimed this type of ex- exemption for them. However, if you provided aJoint Return Testemption in 2008. home for a foreign student, you may be able to
To claim the additional exemption amount, take a charitable contribution deduction. SeeYou generally cannot claim a married person as
file Form 8914, Exemption Amount for Taxpay- Expenses Paid for Student Living With You ina dependent if he or she files a joint return.
ers Housing Midwestern Displaced Individuals. Publication 526, Charitable Contributions.
For more information, see Publication 4492-B, Exception. An exception to the joint returnInformation for Affected Taxpayers in the Mid- U.S. national. A U.S. national is an individualtest applies if your child and his or her spousewestern Disaster Areas. who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or herfile a joint return merely as a claim for refund and allegiance to the United States. U.S. nationalsno tax liability would exist for either spouse on include American Samoans and Northern Mari-separate returns. ana Islanders who chose to become U.S. na-
tionals instead of U.S. citizens.Example 1. You supported your 18-year-oldExemptions for
daughter, and she lived with you all year while
Dependents Qualifying Childher husband was in the Armed Forces. The
couple files a joint return. You cannot take an
There are six tests that must be met for a child toYou are allowed one exemption for each person exemption for your daughter.
be your qualifying child. The six tests are:you can claim as a dependent. You can claim an
exemption for a dependent even if your depen- Example 2. Your 18-year-old son and his 1. Relationship,dent files a return. 17-year-old wife had $800 of interest income
and no other income. Neither is required to file a 2. Age,The term ªdependentº means:
tax return. Taxes were taken out of their interest 3. Residency,• A qualifying child, or income due to backup withholding so they file a
joint return only to get a refund of the withheld 4. Support,• A qualifying relative.
taxes. The exception to the joint return test ap- 5. Joint return, andThe terms ªqualifying childº and ªqualifying rela- plies, so you are not disqualified from claiming
tiveº are defined later. an exemption for each of them just because they 6. Special test for qualifying child of more
file a joint return. You can claim exemptions for than one person.You can claim an exemption for a qualifying
each of them if all the other tests to do so arechild or qualifying relative only if these three These tests are explained next.met.tests are met.
Example 3. The facts are the same as in1. Dependent taxpayer test. Relationship TestExample 2 except your son had $2,000 of wages2. Joint return test. and no interest income or backup withholding. To meet this test, a child must be:
No taxes were taken out of his pay and he and3. Citizen or resident test.
• Your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child,his wife are not required to file a tax return, butThese three tests are explained in detail later. or a descendant (for example, yourthey file a joint return to claim a making work pay
grandchild) of any of them, orAll the requirements for claiming an exemp- credit of $124 and get a refund of that amount.
tion for a dependent are summarized in Table 5. They file the return to get the making work pay • Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
credit, so they are not filing it only as a claim for ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descen-
refund. The exception to the joint return testDependent not allowed a personal dant (for example, your niece or nephew)
does not apply, so you cannot claim an exemp-exemption. If you can claim an ex- of any of them.
tion for either of them.emption for your dependent, the de-
CAUTION
!
pendent cannot claim his or her own personal Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaysexemption on his or her own tax return. This is treated as your own child. The term ªadoptedCitizen or Resident Testtrue even if you do not claim the dependent's childº includes a child who was lawfully placedexemption on your return or if the exemption will You cannot claim a person as a dependent un- with you for legal adoption.be reduced under the phaseout rule described less that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. residentunder Phaseout of Exemptions, later. alien, U.S. national, or a resident of Canada or Foster child. A foster child is an individual
Mexico. However, there is an exception for cer- who is placed with you by an authorized place-
Housekeepers, maids, or servants. If these tain adopted children, as explained next. ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other
people work for you, you cannot claim exemp- order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
tions for them. Exception for adopted child. If you are a
U.S. citizen or U.S. national who has legally
Age TestChild tax credit. You may be entitled to a child adopted a child who is not a U.S. citizen, U.S.
tax credit for each qualifying child who was resident alien, or U.S. national, this test is met if To meet this test, a child must be:under age 17 at the end of the year if you the child lived with you as a member of your
claimed an exemption for that child. For more household all year. This exception also applies if • Under age 19 at the end of the year and
information, see the instructions in your tax the child was lawfully placed with you for legal younger than you (or your spouse if filing
forms package. adoption. jointly),
Publication 501 (2009) Page 11

Page 12 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 5. Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this publication.
• You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
• You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is only a claim for refund
and there would be no tax liability for either spouse on separate returns. 
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a
resident of Canada or Mexico.1
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 1. The person cannot be your qualifying child or the
child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, qualifying child of any other taxpayer.
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year ways listed under Relatives who do not have to live with
and younger than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly), (b) you, or (b) must live with you all year as a member of your
under age 24 at the end of the year, a full-time student, household2 (and your relationship must not violate local
and younger than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly), or law).
(c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. 
3. The person's gross income for the year must be less than
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of $3,650.3
the year.2
4. You must provide more than half of the person's total
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or support for the year.4
her own support for the year.
5. The child is not filing a joint return for the year (unless that
joint return is filed only as a claim for refund).
6. If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more
than one person, you must be the person entitled to claim
the child as a qualifying child.
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents or
parents who live apart, and kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents or parents who live apart, and kidnapped
children.
• A full-time student under age 24 at the end and your spouse. He is not disabled. Both you 1.  A full-time student at a school that has a
of the year and younger than you (or your regular teaching staff, course of study, andand your spouse are 21 years old, and you file a
spouse if filing jointly), or a regularly enrolled student body at thejoint return. Your brother is not your qualifying
school, orchild because he is not younger than you or your• Permanently and totally disabled at any
spouse.time during the year, regardless of age. 2.  A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
ing course given by a school described inExample 2 ± child younger than your (1), or by a state, county, or local govern-Example. Your son turned 19 on December spouse but not younger than you. The facts ment agency.10. Unless he was permanently and totally dis- are the same as in Example 1 except that yourabled or a full-time student, he does not meet The 5 calendar months do not have to be con-spouse is 25 years old. Because your brother isthe age test because, at the end of the year, he secutive.younger than your spouse and you and yourwas not under age 19. spouse are filing a joint return, your brother is Special rules may apply for people who
your qualifying child, even though he is not had to relocate because of the Mid-Child must be younger than you or spouse. younger than you. western storms, tornadoes, or flooding.To be your qualifying child, a child who is not
TIP
For details, see Publication 4492-B.permanently and totally disabled must be
younger than you. However, if you are married Full-time student. A full-time student is a stu- School defined. A school can be an ele-filing jointly, the child must be younger than you dent who is enrolled for the number of hours or mentary school, junior or senior high school,or your spouse but does not have to be younger courses the school considers to be full-time at- college, university, or technical, trade, orthan both of you. tendance. mechanical school. However, an on-the-job
Student defined. To qualify as a student, training course, correspondence school, orExample 1 ± child not younger than you or
your child must be, during some part of each of school offering courses only through the Internetspouse. Your 23-year-old brother, who is a
any 5 calendar months of the year:full-time student and unmarried, lives with you does not count as a school.
Page 12 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 13 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Vocational high school students. Stu- This treatment applies for all years until the • At that parent's home, whether or not the
child is returned. However, the last year thisdents who work on ªco-opº jobs in private indus- parent is present, or
treatment can apply is the earlier of:try as a part of a school's regular course of • In the company of the parent, when theclassroom and practical training are considered child does not sleep at a parent's home1. The year there is a determination that thefull-time students. (for example, the parent and child are onchild is dead, or
vacation together).Permanently and totally disabled. Your 2. The year the child would have reached
child is permanently and totally disabled if both age 18. Equal number of nights. If the child livedof the following apply. with each parent for an equal number of nights
Children of divorced or separated parents or• He or she cannot engage in any substan- during the year, the custodial parent is the par-
parents who live apart. In most cases, be-tial gainful activity because of a physical or ent with the higher adjusted gross income.
cause of the residency test, a child of divorced ormental condition. December 31. The night of December 31 isseparated parents is the qualifying child of the• A doctor determines the condition has treated as part of the year in which it begins. Forcustodial parent. However, the child will belasted or can be expected to last continu- example, December 31, 2009, is treated as parttreated as the qualifying child of the noncus-ously for at least a year or can lead to of 2009.todial parent if all four of the following state-death. ments are true. Emancipated child. If a child is emanci-
pated under state law, the child is treated as not1. The parents:Residency Test living with either parent. See Examples 5 and 6.
a. Are divorced or legally separated under Absences. If a child was not with either par-To meet this test, your child must have lived with a decree of divorce or separate mainte- ent on a particular night (because, for example,you for more than half of the year. There are nance,exceptions for temporary absences, children the child was staying at a friend's house), the
b. Are separated under a written separa-who were born or died during the year, kid- child is treated as living with the parent with
tion agreement, ornapped children, and children of divorced or whom the child normally would have lived for
separated parents. that night, except for the absence. But if it cannotc. Lived apart at all times during the last 6
be determined with which parent the child nor-months of the year, whether or not theyTemporary absences. Your child is consid- mally would have lived or if the child would notare or were married.ered to have lived with you during periods of have lived with either parent that night, the child
time when one of you, or both, are temporarily is treated as not living with either parent that2. The child received over half of his or her
absent due to special circumstances such as: night.support for the year from the parents.
• Illness, Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's3. The child is in the custody of one or both
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for aparents for more than half of the year.• Education,
greater number of days but not nights with the4. Either of the following statements is true.• Business, parent who works at night, that parent is treated
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the• Vacation, or a. The custodial parent signs a written
child is treated as living at the primary residencedeclaration, discussed later, that he or• Military service. registered with the school.she will not claim the child as a depen-
dent for the year, and the noncustodial
Example 1 ± child lived with one parentDeath or birth of child. A child who was born parent attaches this written declaration
greater number of nights. You and youror died during the year is treated as having lived to his or her return. (If the decree or
child's other parent are divorced. In 2009, yourwith you all year if your home was the child's agreement went into effect after 1984
child lived with you 210 nights and with the otherhome the entire time he or she was alive during and before 2009, see Post-1984 and
parent 155 nights. You are the custodial parent.the year. The same is true if the child lived with pre-2009 divorce decree or separation
you all year except for any required hospital stay agreement, later. If the decree or agree-
Example 2 ± child is away at camp. Infollowing birth. ment went into effect after 2008, see
2009, your daughter lives with each parent forPost-2008 divorce decree or separationChild born alive. You may be able to claim alternate weeks. In the summer, she spends 6agreement, later.)an exemption for a child who was born alive weeks at summer camp. During the time she isduring the year, even if the child lived only for a b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa- at camp, she is treated as living with you for 3moment. State or local law must treat the child rate maintenance or written separation weeks and with her other parent, youras having been born alive. There must be proof agreement that applies to 2009 states ex-spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how longof a live birth shown by an official document, that the noncustodial parent can claim she would have lived with each parent if she hadsuch as a birth certificate. The child must be the child as a dependent, the decree or not attended summer camp.your qualifying child or qualifying relative, and all agreement was not changed after 1984
the other tests to claim an exemption for a de- to say the noncustodial parent cannot Example 3 ± child lived same number ofpendent must be met. claim the child as a dependent, and the days with each parent. Your son lived withnoncustodial parent provides at leastStillborn child. You cannot claim an ex- you 180 nights during the year and lived the$600 for the child's support during theemption for a stillborn child. same number of nights with his other parent,year. your ex-spouse. Your adjusted gross income is
Kidnapped child. You can treat your child as $40,000. Your ex-spouse's adjusted gross in-
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.meeting the residency test even if the child has come is $25,000. You are treated as your son's
The custodial parent is the parent with whom thebeen kidnapped, but both of the following state- custodial parent because you have the higher
child lived for the greater number of nights dur-ments must be true. adjusted gross income.
ing the year. The other parent is the noncus-
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement todial parent. Example 4 ± child is at parent's home but
authorities to have been kidnapped by If the parents divorced or separated during with other parent. Your son normally livessomeone who is not a member of your the year and the child lived with both parents with you during the week and with his otherfamily or the child's family. before the separation, the custodial parent is the parent, your ex-spouse, every other weekend.
one with whom the child lived for the greater You become ill and are hospitalized. The other2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the
number of nights during the rest of the year. parent lives in your home with your son for 10child lived with you for more than half of
the part of the year before the date of the consecutive days while you are in the hospital.A child is treated as living with a parent for a
kidnapping. night if the child sleeps: Your son is treated as living with you during this
Publication 501 (2009) Page 13

Page 14 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
10-day period because he was living in your signed by the custodial parent and whose only taxes. The exception to the joint return test ap-
home. purpose is to release a claim to exemption. plies, so your son may be your qualifying child if
all the other tests are met.The noncustodial parent must attachExample 5 ± child emancipated in May. the required information even if it wasWhen your son turned age 18 in May 2009, he Example 3. The facts are the same as infiled with a return in an earlier year.
CAUTION
!became emancipated under the law of the state Example 2 except your son had $2,000 of wages
where he lives. As a result, he is not considered and no interest income or backup withholding.Revocation of release of claim to an ex-in the custody of his parents for more than half of No taxes were taken out of his pay and he andemption. For 2009, new rules allow the custo-the year. The special rule for children of divorced his wife are not required to file a tax return, butdial parent to revoke a release of claim toor separated parents does not apply. they file a joint return to claim a making work payexemption that the custodial parent previously
credit of $124 and get a refund of that amount.released to the noncustodial parent on FormExample 6 ± child emancipated in August. They file the return to get the making work pay8332 or a similar statement. If the custodialYour daughter lives with you from January 1, credit, so they are not filing it only as a claim forparent provides, or makes reasonable efforts to2009, until May 31, 2009, and lives with her refund. The exception to the joint return testprovide, the noncustodial parent with written no-other parent, your ex-spouse, from June 1, does not apply, so your son is not your qualifyingtice of the revocation in 2009, the revocation can2009, through the end of the year. She turns 18 child.be effective no earlier than 2010. The custodialand is emancipated under state law on August 1, parent can use Part III of Form 8332 for this2009. Because she is treated as not living with purpose and must attach a copy of the revoca-either parent beginning on August 1, she is Special Test for Qualifying Child oftion to his or her return for each tax year he ortreated as living with you the greater number of More Than One Personshe claims the child as a dependent as a resultnights in 2009. You are the custodial parent. of the revocation.
Written declaration. The custodial parent If your qualifying child is not a qualify-Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement ing child of anyone else, this test doesport provided by your new spouse is treated as(containing the same information required by the not apply to you and you do not need to
TIPprovided by you.form) to make the written declaration to release read about it. This is also true if your qualifyingthe exemption to the noncustodial parent. The Parents who never married. This special child is not a qualifying child of anyone elsenoncustodial parent must attach the form or rule for divorced or separated parents also ap- except your spouse with whom you file a jointstatement to his or her tax return. plies to parents who never married and lived return.apart at all times during the last 6 months of theThe exemption can be released for 1 year, year. If a child is treated as the qualifyingfor a number of specified years (for example, child of the noncustodial parent underalternate years), or for all future years, as speci- the rules for children of divorced or
CAUTION
!fied in the declaration. If the exemption is re- Support Test (To Be a separated parents or parents who live apart,leased for more than 1 year, the original release Qualifying Child) described earlier, see Applying this special testmust be attached to the return of the noncus- to divorced or separated parents or parents whotodial parent for the first year, and a copy must To meet this test, the child cannot have provided live apart, later.be attached for each later year. more than half of his or her own support for the Sometimes, a child meets the relationship,year.Post-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree or age, residency, support, and joint return tests toThis test is different from the support test toseparation agreement. If the divorce decree be a qualifying child of more than one person.be a qualifying relative, which is described later.or separation agreement went into effect after Although the child is a qualifying child of each ofHowever, to see what is or is not support, see1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parent these persons, only one person can actuallySupport Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) ,may be able to attach certain pages from the treat the child as a qualifying child. To meet thislater. If you are not sure whether a child provideddecree or agreement instead of Form 8332. The special test, you must be the person who canmore than half of his or her own support, youdecree or agreement must state all three of the treat the child as a qualifying child. Only thatmay find Worksheet 1 helpful.following. person can treat the child as a qualifying child to
take all of the following tax benefits (provided the1. The noncustodial parent can claim the Scholarships. A scholarship received by a
person is eligible for each benefit).child as a dependent without regard to any child who is a full-time student is not taken into
condition, such as payment of support. account in determining whether the child pro- • The exemption for the child.vided more than half of his or her own support.2. The custodial parent will not claim the child • The child tax credit.as a dependent for the year.
• Head of household filing status.3. The years for which the noncustodial par- Joint Return Test (To Be a
• The credit for child and dependent careent, rather than the custodial parent, can Qualifying Child)
claim the child as a dependent. expenses.
To meet this test, the child cannot file a jointThe noncustodial parent must attach all of • The exclusion from income for dependentreturn for the year.the following pages of the decree or agreement care benefits.
to his or her tax return. Exception. An exception to the joint return • The earned income credit.
• The cover page (write the other parent's test applies if your child and his or her spouse
social security number on this page). file a joint return merely as a claim for refund. The other person cannot take any of these
benefits based on this qualifying child. In other• The pages that include all of the informa- Example 1. You supported your 18-year-old words, you and the other person cannot agree totion identified in items (1) through (3) daughter, and she lived with you all year while divide these tax benefits between you. The otherabove. her husband was in the Armed Forces. The person cannot take any of these benefits unless
couple files a joint return. Because your daugh-• The signature page with the other parent's he or she has a different qualifying child.
ter and her husband file a joint return, she is notsignature and the date of the agreement.
your qualifying child. Tiebreaker rules. To determine which personPost-2008 divorce decree or separation can treat the child as a qualifying child to claimagreement. Beginning with 2009 tax returns, Example 2. Your 18-year-old son and his these six tax benefits, the following tiebreakerthe noncustodial parent can no longer attach 17-year-old wife had $800 of interest income rules apply.pages from the decree or agreement instead of and no other income. Neither is required to file a
• If only one of the persons is the child'sForm 8332 if the decree or agreement went into tax return. Taxes were taken out of their interest
parent, the child is treated as the qualify-effect after 2008. The noncustodial parent will income due to backup withholding so they file a
ing child of the parent.have to attach Form 8332 or a similar statement joint return only to get a refund of the withheld
Page 14 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 15 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 4 Ðqualifying children split be-• If the parents do not file a joint return to- with you. If you claimed an exemption, the child
tween two persons. The facts are the same tax credit, or the exclusion for dependent caregether but both parents claim the child as
as in Example 1 except you also have two other benefits for your son, the IRS will disallow youra qualifying child, the IRS will treat the
young children who are qualifying children of claim to all these tax benefits, unless you havechild as the qualifying child of the parent
both you and your mother. Only one of you can another qualifying child. In addition, becausewith whom the child lived for the longer
claim each child. However, if your mother's AGI you and your husband did not live apart for theperiod of time during the year. If the child
is higher than yours, you can allow your mother last 6 months of the year, your husband cannotlived with each parent for the same
to claim one or more of the children. For exam- claim head of household filing status. As a re-amount of time, the IRS will treat the child ple, if you claim one child, your mother can claim sult, his filing status is married filing separately,as the qualifying child of the parent who the other two. so he cannot claim the earned income credit orhad the higher adjusted gross income
the credit for child and dependent care ex-(AGI) for the year. Example 5 Ðtaxpayer who is a qualifying penses.child. The facts are the same as in Example 1• If no parent can claim the child as a quali-
except you are only 18 years old and did notfying child, the child is treated as the quali- Example 9 Ð unmarried parents. You,provide more than half of your own support forfying child of the person who had the your 5-year-old son, and your son's father livedthe year. This means you are your mother'shighest AGI for the year. together all year. You and your son's father arequalifying child. If she can claim you as a depen- not married. Your son is a qualifying child of both• If a parent can claim the child as a qualify- dent, then you cannot claim your daughter as a you and his father because he meets the rela-ing child but no parent does so claim the dependent because of the Dependent Taxpayer tionship, age, residency, support, and joint re-child, the child is treated as the qualifying Test explained earlier. turn tests for both you and his father. Your AGI ischild of the person who had the highest $12,000 and your son's father's AGI is $14,000.AGI for the year, but only if that person's Example 6 Ðchild lived with both parents Your son's father agrees to let you claim theand grandparent. The facts are the same asAGI is higher than the highest AGI of any child as a qualifying child. This means you canin Example 1 except that you and your daugh-of the child's parents who can claim the claim him as a qualifying child for the depen-ter's father are married to each other, live withchild. If the child's parents file a joint return dency exemption, child tax credit, head ofyour daughter and your mother, and have AGI ofwith each other, this rule can be applied household filing status, credit for child and de-$20,000 on a joint return. If you and your hus-by dividing the parents' combined AGI pendent care expenses, exclusion for depen-band do not claim your daughter as a qualifyingequally between the parents. See Exam- dent care benefits, and the earned incomechild, your mother can claim her instead. Evenple 6. credit, if you qualify for each of those tax benefitsthough the AGI on your joint return, $20,000, is
(and if your son's father does not, in fact, claimmore than your mother's AGI of $15,000, for thisSubject to these tiebreaker rules, you and the your son as a qualifying child for any of those taxpurpose each parent's AGI can be treated asother person may be able to choose which of benefits).$10,000, so your mother's $15,000 AGI isyou claims the child as a qualifying child. treated as higher than the highest AGI of any of
Example 10 Ðunmarried parents claimthe child's parents who can claim the child.Example 1 Ðchild lived with parent and same child. The facts are the same as ingrandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh- Example 9 except that you and your son's fatherExample 7 Ð separated parents. You,ter Jane lived with your mother all year. You are both claim your son as a qualifying child. In thisyour husband, and your 10-year-old son lived25 years old, unmarried, and your AGI is $9,000. case, only your son's father will be allowed totogether until August 1, 2009, when your hus-Your mother's AGI is $15,000. Jane's father did treat your son as a qualifying child. This is be-band moved out of the household. In August andnot live with you or your daughter. The rule cause his AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI,September, your son lived with you. For the restexplained earlier for children of divorced or sep- $12,000. If you claimed an exemption, the childof the year, your son lived with your husband,arated parents or parents who live apart does tax credit, head of household filing status, creditthe boy's father. Your son is a qualifying child ofnot apply. Jane is a qualifying child of both you for child and dependent care expenses, exclu-both you and your husband because your sonand your mother because she meets the rela- sion for dependent care benefits, or the earnedlived with each of you for more than half the year
tionship, age, residency, support, and joint re- and because he met the relationship, age, sup- income credit for your son, the IRS will disallow
turn tests for both you and your mother. port, and joint return tests for both of you. At the your claim to all these tax benefits, unless you
However, only one of you can claim her. Jane is end of the year, you and your husband still were have another qualifying child.
not a qualifying child of anyone else, including not divorced, legally separated, or separated
her father. You agree to let your mother claim Example 11Ðchild did not live with a par-under a written separation agreement, so the
Jane. This means your mother can claim Jane ent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your sis-rule for children of divorced or separated par-
as a qualifying child for the dependency exemp- ter's child, lived with your mother all year. Youents or parents who live apart does not apply.
tion, child tax credit, head of household filing are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. YourYou and your husband will file separate re- mother's AGI is $15,000. Your niece's parentsstatus, credit for child and dependent care ex- turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, andpenses, exclusion for dependent care benefits, son as a qualifying child. This means, if your do not live with you or their child. Your niece is aand the earned income credit, if she qualifies for husband does not claim your son as a qualifying qualifying child of both you and your mothereach of those tax benefits (and if you do not child, you can claim your son as a qualifying because she meets the relationship, age, resi-claim Jane as a qualifying child for any of those child for the dependency exemption, child tax dency, support, and joint return tests for bothtax benefits). credit, and exclusion for dependent care bene- you and your mother. However, only yourfits, if you qualify for each of those tax benefits.Example 2 Ðparent has higher AGI than mother can treat her as a qualifying child. This isHowever, you cannot claim head of householdgrandparent. The facts are the same as in because your mother's AGI, $15,000, is morefiling status because you and your husband did
Example 1 except your AGI is $18,000. Because than your AGI, $9,300.not live apart for the last 6 months of the year. As
your mother's AGI is not higher than yours, she a result, your filing status is married filing sepa-
cannot claim Jane. Only you can claim Jane. Applying this special test to divorced or sep-rately, so you cannot claim the earned income
arated parents or parents who live apart. Ifcredit or the credit for child and dependent careExample 3 Ð two persons claim same a child is treated as the qualifying child of theexpenses.child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 noncustodial parent under the rules described
except that you and your mother both claim Jane earlier for children of divorced or separated par-Example 8 Ð separated parents claim
as a qualifying child. In this case, you as the ents or parents who live apart, only the noncus-same child. The facts are the same as in
child's parent will be the only one allowed to todial parent can claim an exemption and theExample 7 except that you and your husband
claim Jane as a qualifying child. The IRS will child tax credit for the child. However, the custo-both claim your son as a qualifying child. In this
disallow your mother's claim to the six tax bene- dial parent, if eligible, or other eligible personcase, only your husband will be allowed to treat
fits listed earlier unless she has another qualify- can claim the child as a qualifying child for headyour son as a qualifying child. This is because,
of household filing status, the credit for child anding child. during 2009, the boy lived with him longer than
Publication 501 (2009) Page 15

Page 16 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
dependent care expenses, the exclusion for de- Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rel- tax return. Both your friend and her child are
ative can be any age. There is no age test for a your qualifying relatives if the member of house-pendent care benefits, and the earned income
qualifying relative. hold or relationship test, gross income test, andcredit. If the child is the qualifying child of more
support test are met.than one person for these benefits, then the Kidnapped child. You can treat a child astiebreaker rules determine which person can your qualifying relative even if the child has been Example 2 Ðreturn filed to claim refund.treat the child as a qualifying child. kidnapped, but both of the following statements The facts are the same as in Example 1 except
must be true. your friend had wages of $1,500 during the yearExample 1. You and your 5-year-old son and had income tax withheld from her wages.lived all year with your mother, who paid the 1. The child is presumed by law enforcement She files a return only to get a refund of theentire cost of keeping up the home. Your AGI is authorities to have been kidnapped by income tax withheld and does not claim the$10,000. Your mother's AGI is $25,000. Your someone who is not a member of your earned income credit or any other tax credits orfamily or the child's family.son's father did not live with you or your son. deductions. Both your friend and her child are
Under the rules explained earlier for children of your qualifying relatives if the member of house-2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, thedivorced or separated parents or parents who hold or relationship test, gross income test, andchild met the tests to be your qualifying
live apart, your son is treated as the qualifying support test are met.relative for the part of the year before the
child of his father, who can claim an exemption date of the kidnapping.
Example 3 Ð earned income creditand the child tax credit for him. Because of this, This treatment applies for all years until the claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam-you cannot claim an exemption or the child tax child is returned. However, the last year this ple 2 except your friend had wages of $8,000credit for your son. However, your son's father treatment can apply is the earlier of: during the year and claimed the earned incomecannot claim your son as a qualifying child for
credit on her return. Your friend's child is thehead of household filing status, the credit for 1. The year there is a determination that the qualifying child of another taxpayer (your friend),child is dead, orchild and dependent care expenses, the exclu- so you cannot claim your friend's child as yoursion for dependent care benefits, or the earned 2. The year the child would have reached qualifying relative.income credit. You and your mother did not have age 18.
any child care expenses or dependent care ben- Child in Canada or Mexico. A child who lives
efits, but the boy is a qualifying child of both you in Canada or Mexico may be your qualifying
and your mother for head of household filing relative, and you may be able to claim the childNot a Qualifying Child Teststatus and the earned income credit because he as a dependent. If the child does not live with
meets the relationship, age, residency, support, you, the child does not meet the residency testA child is not your qualifying relative if the child is
and joint return tests for both you and your to be your qualifying child. If the persons theyour qualifying child or the qualifying child of any
child does live with are not U.S. citizens andmother. (Note: The support test does not apply other taxpayer.
have no U.S. gross income, those persons arefor the earned income credit.) However, you
Example 1. Your 22-year-old daughter, who not ªtaxpayers,º so the child is not the qualifyingagree to let your mother claim your son. This
is a full-time student, lives with you and meets all child of any other taxpayer. If the child is not yourmeans she can claim him for head of household
the tests to be your qualifying child. She is not qualifying child or the qualifying child of anyfiling status and the earned income credit if she your qualifying relative. other taxpayer, the child is your qualifying rela-qualifies for each and if you do not claim him as tive if the gross income test and the support testa qualifying child for the earned income credit. Example 2. Your 2-year-old son lives with are met.(You cannot claim head of household filing sta- your parents and meets all the tests to be their You cannot claim as a dependent a child whotus because your mother paid the entire cost of qualifying child. He is not your qualifying rela- lives in a foreign country other than Canada orkeeping up the home.) tive. Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S.
resident alien, or U.S. national. There is an ex-Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 3. Your son lives with you but is ception for certain adopted children who livedExample 1 except that your AGI is $25,000 and not your qualifying child because he is 30 years with you all year. See Citizen or Resident Test,your mother's AGI is $21,000. Your mother can- old and does not meet the age test. He may be earlier.
not claim your son as a qualifying child for any your qualifying relative if the gross income test
and the support test are met.purpose because her AGI is not higher than Example. You provide all the support of
yours. your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in
Example 4. Your 13-year-old grandson Mexico with your mother and have no income.
lived with his mother for 3 months, with his uncleExample 3. The facts are the same as in You are single and live in the United States.
for 4 months, and with you for 5 months duringExample 1 except that you and your mother both Your mother is not a U.S. citizen and has no
the year. He is not your qualifying child because U.S. income, so she is not a ªtaxpayer.º Yourclaim your son as a qualifying child for the
he does not meet the residency test. He may be children are not your qualifying children becauseearned income credit. Your mother also claims your qualifying relative if the gross income test they do not meet the residency test. Also, theyhim as a qualifying child for head of household and the support test are met. are not the qualifying children of any other tax-filing status. You as the child's parent will be the
payer, so they are your qualifying relatives andonly one allowed to claim your son as a qualify- Child of person not required to file a return. you can claim them as dependents if all the testsing child for the earned income credit. The IRS A child is not the qualifying child of any other are met. You may also be able to claim yourwill disallow your mother's claim to the earned taxpayer and so may qualify as your qualifying mother as a dependent if all the tests are met,income credit and head of household filing sta- relative if the child's parent (or other person for including the gross income test and the supportwhom the child is defined as a qualifying child) istus unless she has another qualifying child. test.not required to file an income tax return and
either:Qualifying Relative
Member of Household or• Does not file an income tax return, orThere are four tests that must be met for a Relationship Test• Files a return only to get a refund of in-person to be your qualifying relative. The four
come tax withheld. To meet this test, a person must either:tests are:
1. Live with you all year as a member of your1. Not a qualifying child test, Example 1 Ðreturn not required. You household, orsupport an unrelated friend and her 3-year-old2. Member of household or relationship test,
2. Be related to you in one of the ways listedchild, who lived with you all year in your home.3. Gross income test, and under Relatives who do not have to liveYour friend has no gross income, is not required
with you.4. Support test. to file a 2009 tax return, and does not file a 2009
Page 16 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 17 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If at any time during the year the person was Death or birth. A person who died during the income test), the gross income of an individual
your spouse, that person cannot be your qualify- year, but lived with you as a member of your who is permanently and totally disabled at any
ing relative. However, see Personal Exemp- household until death, will meet this test. The time during the year does not include income for
tions, earlier. same is true for a child who was born during the services the individual performs at a sheltered
year and lived with you as a member of your workshop. The availability of medical care at the
household for the rest of the year. The test is workshop must be the main reason for the indi-Relatives who do not have to live with you.
also met if a child lived with you as a member of vidual's presence there. Also, the income mustA person related to you in any of the following
your household except for any required hospital come solely from activities at the workshop thatways does not have to live with you all year as a
stay following birth. are incident to this medical care.member of your household to meet this test.
If your dependent died during the year and A ªsheltered workshopº is a school that:• Your child, stepchild, foster child, or a de- you otherwise qualified to claim an exemption • Provides special instruction or training de-scendant of any of them (for example, for the dependent, you can still claim the exemp- signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-your grandchild). (A legally adopted child tion. vidual, andis considered your child.)
Example. Your dependent mother died on • Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
January 15. She met the tests to be your qualify- zations or by a state, a U.S. possession, ater, stepbrother, or stepsister.
ing relative. The other tests to claim an exemp- political subdivision of a state or posses-• Your father, mother, grandparent, or other tion for a dependent were also met. You can sion, the United States, or the District ofdirect ancestor, but not foster parent. claim an exemption for her on your return. Columbia.
• Your stepfather or stepmother. Local law violated. A person does not meet ªPermanently and totally disabledº has thethis test if at any time during the year the rela-• A son or daughter of your brother or sister. same meaning here as under Qualifying Child,tionship between you and that person violates earlier.• A brother or sister of your father or local law.mother.
Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a• Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa- Support Test (To Be amember of your household all year. However,ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, Qualifying Relative)your relationship with her violated the laws of theor sister-in-law.
state where you live, because she was married To meet this test, you generally must provideAny of these relationships that were established to someone else. Therefore, she does not meet more than half of a person's total support duringby marriage are not ended by death or divorce. this test and you cannot claim her as a depen- the calendar year.dent. However, if two or more persons provideExample. You and your wife began sup-
support, but no one person provides more thanAdopted child. An adopted child is alwaysporting your wife's father, a widower, in 2003.
half of a person's total support, see Multipletreated as your own child. The term ªadoptedYour wife died in 2008. In spite of your wife's
Support Agreement, later.childº includes a child who was lawfully placeddeath, your father-in-law continues to meet this
with you for legal adoption.test, even if he does not live with you. You can How to determine if support test is met.claim him as a dependent if all other tests are You figure whether you have provided moreCousin. Your cousin meets this test only if hemet, including the gross income test and support than half of a person's total support by compar-or she lives with you all year as a member oftest. ing the amount you contributed to that person'syour household. A cousin is a descendant of a
support with the entire amount of support thatbrother or sister of your father or mother.Foster child. A foster child is an individual
person received from all sources. This includeswho is placed with you by an authorized place-
support the person provided from his or her ownment agency or by judgment, decree, or other
funds.Gross Income Testorder of any court of competent jurisdiction.
You may find Worksheet 1 helpful in figuring
To meet this test, a person's gross income for whether you provided more than half of a per-Joint return. If you file a joint return, the per- the year must be less than $3,650. son's support.son can be related to either you or your spouse.
Also, the person does not need to be related to Gross income defined. Gross income is all Person's own funds not used for support.the spouse who provides support. income in the form of money, property, and A person's own funds are not support unlessFor example, your spouse's uncle who re- services that is not exempt from tax. they are actually spent for support.ceives more than half of his support from you In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
may be your qualifying relative, even though he ing business, gross income is the total net sales Example. Your mother received $2,400 in
does not live with you. However, if you and your minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella- social security benefits and $300 in interest. She
spouse file separate returns, your spouse's un- neous income from the business. paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation.
cle can be your qualifying relative only if he lives Gross receipts from rental property are gross She put $300 in a savings account.
with you all year as a member of your house- income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., to Even though your mother received a total of
hold. determine the gross income from rental prop- $2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400
erty. ($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If you
Temporary absences. A person is consid- Gross income includes a partner's share of spent more than $2,400 for her support and no
ered to live with you as a member of your house- the gross (not a share of the net) partnership other support was received, you have provided
hold during periods of time when one of you, or income. more than half of her support.
both, are temporarily absent due to special cir- Gross income also includes all taxable un-
Child's wages used for own support. Youcumstances such as: employment compensation and certain scholar-
cannot include in your contribution to yourship and fellowship grants. Scholarships• Illness, child's support any support that is paid for by thereceived by degree candidates that are used for
child with the child's own wages, even if you paid• Education, tuition, fees, supplies, books, and equipment
the wages.required for particular courses may not be in-• Business, cluded in gross income. For more information Year support is provided. The year you pro-• Vacation, or about scholarships, see chapter 1 of Publication vide the support is the year you pay for it, even if970, Tax Benefits for Education. you do so with borrowed money that you repay• Military service. Tax-exempt income, such as certain social in a later year.security benefits, is not included in gross in-If the person is placed in a nursing home for If you use a fiscal year to report your income,come.an indefinite period of time to receive constant you must provide more than half of the depen-
medical care, the absence may be considered Disabled dependent working at sheltered dent's support for the calendar year in which
temporary. workshop. For purposes of this test (the gross your fiscal year begins.
Publication 501 (2009) Page 17

Page 18 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Armed Forces dependency allotments. The If you are not in the trade or business of Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) .... . 1,040part of the allotment contributed by the govern- providing foster care and your unreimbursed
Total support .............. . $6,440ment and the part taken out of your military pay out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster
are both considered provided by you in figuring child were mainly to benefit an organization
The support Frank and Mary provide ($1,800whether you provide more than half of the sup- qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-
lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + $1,040port. If your allotment is used to support persons butions, the expenses are deductible as charita-
food = $4,040) is more than half of Grace'sother than those you name, you can take the ble contributions but are not considered support
$6,440 total support.exemptions for them if they otherwise qualify. you provided. For more information about the
deduction for charitable contributions, see Publi-
Example 2. Your parents live with you, yourExample. You are in the Armed Forces. cation 526. If your unreimbursed expenses are
spouse, and your two children in a house youYou authorize an allotment for your widowed not deductible as charitable contributions, they
own. The fair rental value of your parents' sharemother that she uses to support herself and her are considered support you provided.
of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each),sister. If the allotment provides more than half of If you are in the trade or business of provid- which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa-each person's support, you can take an exemp- ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200,tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify, are not considered support provided by you. which he spends equally between your mothereven though you authorize the allotment only for
and himself for items of support such as cloth-your mother. Example.  Lauren, a foster child, lived with ing, transportation, and recreation. Your totalMr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 months of theTax-exempt military quarters allowances. food expense for the household is $6,000. Youryear. The Smiths cared for Lauren because theyThese allowances are treated the same way as heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Yourwanted to adopt her (although she had not beendependency allotments in figuring support. The mother has hospital and medical expenses ofplaced with them for adoption). They did notallotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow- $600, which you pay during the year. Figurecare for her as a trade or business or to benefitance for quarters are both considered as pro- your parents' total support as follows:the agency that placed her in their home. Thevided by you for support.
Smiths' unreimbursed expenses are not deduct-
Support provided Father Motherible as charitable contributions but are consid-Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's
ered support they provided for Lauren.total support, include tax-exempt income, sav- Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000
ings, and borrowed amounts used to support Pension spent for theirHome for the aged. If you make a lump-sumthat person. Tax-exempt income includes cer- support ............ . 2,100 2,100advance payment to a home for the aged to taketain social security benefits, welfare benefits,
Share of food (1/6 ofcare of your relative for life and the payment isnontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed
$6,000) ............ . 1,000 1,000based on that person's life expectancy, theForces family allotments, nontaxable pensions,
amount of support you provide each year is theand tax-exempt interest. Medical expenses for
lump-sum payment divided by the relative's life mother ............. . 600
expectancy. The amount of support you provideExample 1. You provide $4,000 toward Parents' total support .. . $4,100 $4,700also includes any other amounts you providedyour mother's support during the year. She has
during the year.earned income of $600, nontaxable social se- You must apply the support test separatelycurity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter- to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000est of $200. She uses all these for her support. lodging, $1,000 food) of your father's total sup-Total SupportYou cannot claim an exemption for your mother port of $4,100 Ð less than half. You providebecause the $4,000 you provide is not more $2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000To figure if you provided more than half of athan half of her total support of $9,600. food, $600 medical) Ð more than half of herperson's support, you must first determine the
total support of $4,700. You meet the supporttotal support provided for that person. Total sup-Example 2. Your brother's daughter takes test for your mother, but not your father. Heatport includes amounts spent to provide food,out a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay and utility costs are included in the fair rentallodging, clothing, education, medical and dentalher college tuition. She is personally responsible value of the lodging, so these are not consideredcare, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-for the loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total separately.cessities.support. You cannot claim an exemption for her
because you provide less than half of her sup- Generally, the amount of an item of support
Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging,port. is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-
you are considered to provide support equal toing that item. For lodging, the amount of supportSocial security benefits. If a husband and the fair rental value of the room, apartment,is the fair rental value of the lodging.wife each receive benefits that are paid by one house, or other shelter in which the person lives.Expenses that are not directly related to anycheck made out to both of them, half of the total Fair rental value includes a reasonable allow-one member of a household, such as the cost ofpaid is considered to be for the support of each ance for the use of furniture and appliances, andfood for the household, must be divided amongspouse, unless they can show otherwise. for heat and other utilities that are provided.the members of the household.If a child receives social security benefits and Fair rental value defined. This is theuses them toward his or her own support, the amount you could reasonably expect to receiveExample 1. Grace Brown, mother of Marybenefits are considered as provided by the child. from a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It isMiller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and their
used instead of actual expenses such as taxes,Support provided by the state (welfare, two children. Grace gets social security benefits
interest, depreciation, paint, insurance, utilities,food stamps, housing, etc.). Benefits pro- of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-
cost of furniture and appliances, etc. In somevided by the state to a needy person generally portation, and recreation. Grace has no other
cases, fair rental value may be equal to the rentare considered support provided by the state. income. Frank and Mary's total food expense for
paid.However, payments based on the needs of the the household is $5,200. They pay Grace's
recipient will not be considered as used entirely medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fair If you provide the total lodging, the amount of
for that person's support if it is shown that part of rental value of the lodging provided for Grace is support you provide is the fair rental value of the
the payments were not used for that purpose. $1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar room the person uses, or a share of the fair
rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total support rental value of the entire dwelling if the person
as follows:Foster care payments and expenses. Pay- has use of your entire home. If you do not pro-
ments you receive for the support of a foster vide the total lodging, the total fair rental value
child from a child placement agency are consid- must be divided depending on how much of theFair rental value of lodging ..... . $ 1,800
ered support provided by the agency. Similarly, total lodging you provide. If you provide only aClothing, transportation, andpayments you receive for the support of a foster part and the person supplies the rest, the fairrecreation ................. . 2,400child from a state or county are considered sup- rental value must be divided between both of
Medical expenses ........... . 1,200port provided by the state or county. you according to the amount each provides.
Page 18 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 19 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Your parents live rent free in a total support, so he is not your qualifying rela- claim an exemption for that person as a qualify-
tive. You cannot claim an exemption for yourhouse you own. It has a fair rental value of ing relative. Each of the others must sign a
son.$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair statement agreeing not to claim the exemption
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 for that year. The person who claims the exemp-Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur-for the furniture. This does not include heat and tion must keep these signed statements for hisance premiums you pay, including premiums forutilities. The house is completely furnished with or her records. A multiple support declarationsupplementary Medicare coverage, are in-furniture belonging to your parents. You pay identifying each of the others who agreed not tocluded in the support you provide.$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usually claim the exemption must be attached to the
included in rent for houses in the area where return of the person claiming the exemption.Medical insurance benefits. Medical in-
your parents live. Therefore, you consider the Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, cansurance benefits, including basic and supple-
total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 be used for this purpose.mentary Medicare benefits, are not part of
($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished support. You can claim an exemption under a multiple
house, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro- support agreement for someone related to youTuition payments and allowances under thevided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities) or for someone who lived with you all year as aGI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under theof which you are considered to provide $4,200 member of your household.GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances while($3,600 + $600). they attend school are included in total support. Example 1. You, your sister, and your twoPerson living in his or her own home. The brothers provide the entire support of yourtotal fair rental value of a person's home that he Example. During the year, your son re- mother for the year. You provide 45%, youror she owns is considered support contributed ceives $2,200 from the government under the GI sister 35%, and your two brothers each provideBill. He uses this amount for his education. Youby that person. 10%. Either you or your sister can claim anprovide the rest of his support Ð $2,000. Be-Living with someone rent free. If you live exemption for your mother. The other must signcause GI benefits are included in total support,with a person rent free in his or her home, you a statement agreeing not to take an exemptionyour son's total support is $4,200 ($2,200 +must reduce the amount you provide for support for your mother. The one who claims the exemp-$2,000). You have not provided more than halfof that person by the fair rental value of lodging tion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara-of his support.he or she provides you. tion, to his or her return and must keep the
Child care expenses. If you pay someone to statement signed by the other for his or her
provide child or dependent care, you can includeProperty. Property provided as support is records. Because neither brother provides more
these payments in the amount you provided formeasured by its fair market value. Fair market than 10% of the support, neither can take the
the support of your child or disabled dependent,value is the price that property would sell for on exemption and neither has to sign a statement.
even if you claim a credit for the payments. Forthe open market. It is the price that would be
information on the credit, see Publication 503, Example 2. You and your brother each pro-agreed upon between a willing buyer and a
Child and Dependent Care Expenses. vide 20% of your mother's support for the year.willing seller, with neither being required to act,
The remaining 60% of her support is providedand both having reasonable knowledge of the Other support items. Other items may be equally by two persons who are not related torelevant facts. considered as support depending on the facts in her. She does not live with them. Because moreCapital expenses. Capital items, such as each case. than half of her support is provided by personsfurniture, appliances, and cars, that are bought who cannot claim an exemption for her, no onefor a person during the year can be included in can take the exemption.Do Not Include in Total Supporttotal support under certain circumstances.
The following examples show when a capital Example 3. Your father lives with you andThe following items are not included in totalitem is or is not support. receives 25% of his support from social security,support.
40% from you, 24% from his brother (your un-Example 1. You buy a $200 power lawn 1. Federal, state, and local income taxes paid cle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or yourmower for your 13-year-old child. The child is by persons from their own income. uncle can take the exemption for your father ifgiven the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. the other signs a statement agreeing not to. The2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid byBecause the lawn mower benefits all members one who takes the exemption must attach Formpersons from their own income. of the household, you cannot include the cost of 2120, or a similar declaration, to his return andthe lawn mower in the support of your child. 3. Life insurance premiums. must keep for his records the signed statement
from the one agreeing not to take the exemption.4. Funeral expenses. Example 2. You buy a $150 television set
as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child. 5. Scholarships received by your child if your
The television set is placed in your child's bed- child is a full-time student. Support Test for Children of
room. You can include the cost of the television Divorced or Separated Parents or6. Survivors' and Dependents' Educationalset in the support of your child. Parents Who Live ApartAssistance payments used for the support
of the child who receives them.Example 3. You pay $5,000 for a car and In most cases, a child of divorced or separated
register it in your name. You and your parents or parents who live apart will be a quali-Government or charitable assistance you re-
17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be- fying child of one of the parents. See Children ofceived because of your temporary relocation
cause you own the car and do not give it to your divorced or separated parents or parents whodue to the storms, tornadoes, or flooding in a
daughter but merely let her use it, you cannot live apart under Qualifying Child, earlier. How-Midwestern disaster area is not included in total
include the cost of the car in your daughter's ever, if the child does not meet the requirementssupport. Disregard these amounts in determin-
total support. However, you can include in your to be a qualifying child of either parent, the childing who provided a person's support.
daughter's support your out-of-pocket expenses may be a qualifying relative of one of the par-
of operating the car for her benefit. ents. In that case, the following rules must be
used in applying the support test.Multiple Support Agreement
Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, using A child will be treated as being the qualifyingpersonal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro- Sometimes no one provides more than half of relative of his or her noncustodial parent if allvide all the rest of your son's support Ð $4,000. the support of a person. Instead, two or more four of the following statements are true.Since the car is bought and owned by your son, persons, each of whom would be able to take
the car's fair market value ($4,500) must be the exemption but for the support test, together 1. The parents:
included in his support. Your son has provided provide more than half of the person's support.
more than half of his own total support of $8,500 a. Are divorced or legally separated underWhen this happens, you can agree that any
($4,500 + $4,000), so he is not your qualifying a decree of divorce or separate mainte-one of you who individually provides more than
child. You did not provide more than half of his nance,10% of the person's support, but only one, can
Publication 501 (2009) Page 19

Page 20 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 1. Worksheet for Determining Support Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year ........................................... . 1.
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support ...................... . 2.
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes .......................... . 3.
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ...... . 4.
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ............................. . 5.
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
 6a. Enter the total rent paid ................................................. . 6a.
 6b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21. ........................................... . 6b.
7. Enter the total food expenses ................................................ . 7.
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b) ......... . 8.
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ......................... . 9.
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance. ................................ . 10.
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses ...................... . 11.
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ............................ . 12.
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............. . 13.
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses ....................................... . 14.
15. Enter the person's total education expenses ...................................... . 15.
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance .. . 16.
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses .............................. . 17.
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses ..................................... . 18.
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year ........... . 19.
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50) ................................................. . 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support ............... . 21.
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
 No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a
qualifying child, stop here; do not complete lines 23±26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 Yes. You do not meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state,
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. .. . 23.
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ....................................................... . 24.
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ........ . 25.
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
 Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 No. You do not meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You cannot claim an exemption for this
person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or separated
parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support Test for Children of Divorced or
Separated Parents or Parents Who Live Apart, or Kidnapped child under Qualifying Relative.
Page 20 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 21 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Are separated under a written separa- Absences. If a child was not with either par- The noncustodial parent must attach
ent on a particular night (because, for example, the required information even if it wastion agreement, or
the child was staying at a friend's house), the filed with a return in an earlier year.
CAUTION
!c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 child is treated as living with the parent withmonths of the year, whether or not they Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-whom the child normally would have lived forare or were married. that night, except for the absence. But if it cannot port provided by your new spouse is treated as
be determined with which parent the child nor- provided by you.2. The child received over half of his or her mally would have lived or if the child would notsupport for the year from the parents (and have lived with either parent that night, the child Child support under pre-1985 agreement.the rules on multiple support agreements, is treated as not living with either parent that All child support payments actually receivedexplained earlier, do not apply). night. from the noncustodial parent under a pre-1985
3. The child is in the custody of one or both agreement are considered used for the supportParent works at night. If, due to a parent'sparents for more than half of the year. of the child.nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a
greater number of days but not nights with the4. Either of the following statements is true. Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, theparent who works at night, that parent is treated
noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for thea. The custodial parent signs a written as the custodial parent. On a school day, the
child's support. This amount is considered sup-declaration, discussed later, that he or child is treated as living at the primary residence
port provided by the noncustodial parent even ifshe will not claim the child as a depen- registered with the school.
the $1,200 was actually spent on things otherdent for the year, and the noncustodial Written declaration. The custodial parent than support.parent attaches this written declaration may use either Form 8332 or a similar statementto his or her return. (If the decree or Alimony. Payments to a spouse that are(containing the same information required by theagreement went into effect after 1984 includible in the spouse's gross income as eitherform) to make the written declaration to releaseand before 2009, see Post-1984 and alimony, separate maintenance payments, orthe exemption to the noncustodial parent. Thepre-2009 divorce decree or separation similar payments from an estate or trust, are notnoncustodial parent must attach the form oragreement, later. If the decree or agree- treated as a payment for the support of a depen-statement to his or her tax return.ment went into effect after 2008, see dent.The exemption can be released for 1 year,Post-2008 divorce decree or separation for a number of specified years (for example,agreement, later.) alternate years), or for all future years, as speci- Parents who never married. This special rule
fied in the declaration. If the exemption is re-b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa- for divorced or separated parents also applies to
leased for more than 1 year, the original releaserate maintenance or written separation parents who never married and lived apart at all
must be attached to the return of the noncus-agreement that applies to 2009 states times during the last 6 months of the year.
todial parent for the first year, and a copy mustthat the noncustodial parent can claim
be attached for each later year.the child as a dependent, the decree or Multiple support agreement. If the support of
agreement was not changed after 1984 the child is determined under a multiple supportPost-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree orto say the noncustodial parent cannot agreement, this special support test for divorcedseparation agreement. If the divorce decreeclaim the child as a dependent, and the or separated parents or parents who live apartor separation agreement went into effect afternoncustodial parent provides at least does not apply.1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parent$600 for the child's support during the may be able to attach certain pages from the
year. decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. The
decree or agreement must state all three of the
following.Custodial parent and noncustodial parent. Phaseout ofThe custodial parent is the parent with whom the 1. The noncustodial parent can claim thechild lived for the greater number of nights dur- Exemptionschild as a dependent without regard to anying the year. The other parent is the noncus- condition, such as payment of support.todial parent. The amount you can claim as a deduction for
2. The custodial parent will not claim the childIf the parents divorced or separated during exemptions is reduced once your adjusted gross
as a dependent for the year.the year and the child lived with both parents income (AGI) goes above a certain level for your
before the separation, the custodial parent is the filing status. These levels are as follows:3. The years for which the noncustodial par-one with whom the child lived for the greater ent, rather than the custodial parent, cannumber of nights during the rest of the year. AGI Levelclaim the child as a dependent. That ReducesA child is treated as living with a parent for a
The noncustodial parent must attach all of Filing Status Exemption Amountnight if the child sleeps: the following pages of the decree or agreement Married filing separately . . $125,100
• At that parent's home, whether or not the to his or her tax return. Single ............. . 166,800
parent is present, or Head of household ..... . 208,500• The cover page (write the other parent's Married filing jointly .... . 250,200• In the company of the parent, when the social security number on this page). Qualifying widow(er) .... . 250,200child does not sleep at a parent's home • The pages that include all of the informa-(for example, the parent and child are on You must reduce the dollar amount of yourtion identified in items (1) through (3)vacation together). exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part ofabove.
$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-Equal number of nights. If the child lived • The signature page with the other parent's rately), that your AGI exceeds the amountwith each parent for an equal number of nights signature and the date of the agreement. shown above for your filing status. However, youduring the year, the custodial parent is the par- can lose no more than 1/3 of the dollar amount ofent with the higher adjusted gross income. Post-2008 divorce decree or separation your exemptions. In other words, each exemp-agreement. Beginning with 2009 tax returns,December 31. The night of December 31 is tion cannot be reduced to less than $2,433.the noncustodial parent can no longer attachtreated as part of the year in which it begins. For If your AGI exceeds the level for your filingpages from the decree or agreement instead ofexample, December 31, 2009, is treated as part status, use Worksheet 2 to figure the amount ofForm 8332 if the decree or agreement went intoof 2009. your deduction for exemptions. However, if youeffect after 2008. The noncustodial parent will
are claiming a $500 exemption for housing aEmancipated child. If a child is emanci- have to attach Form 8332 or a similar statement
Midwestern displaced individual, use Form 8914pated under state law, the child is treated as not signed by the custodial parent and whose only
instead.living with either parent. purpose is to release a claim to exemption.
Publication 501 (2009) Page 21

Page 22 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Worksheet for Determining the Deduction for Exemptions Keep for Your Records
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22, more than the amount on line 4 below for your
filing status?
M No. Stop. Multiply $3,650 by the total number of exemptions claimed on line 6d of Form 1040 or Form
1040A and enter the result on Form 1040, line 42, or Form 1040A, line 26.
M Yes. Continue.
2. Multiply $3,650 by the total number of exemptions claimed on line 6d of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. ....... . 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22 ........ . 3.
4. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status:
• Married filing separatelyÐ$125,100
• SingleÐ$166,800
}
.......... . 4.• Head of householdÐ$208,500
• Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)Ð$250,200
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. . .................................. . 5.
6. Is line 5 more than $122,500 ($61,250 if married filing
separately)?
M Yes. Multiply $2,433 by the total number of exemptions
claimed on line 6d of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 42, or
Form 1040A, line 26. Do not complete the rest of
this worksheet.
M No. Divide line 5 by $2,500 ($1,250 if married filing
separately). If the result is not a whole number,
increase it to the next whole number (for example,
increase 0.0004 to 1). ........... . 6.
7. Multiply line 6 by 2% (.02) and enter the result as a decimal . ................................. . 7.
8. Multiply line 2 by line 7 ........................................................... . 8.
9. Divide line 8 by 3.0 ............................................................. . 9.
10. Deduction for exemptions. Subtract line 9 from line 2. Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 42, or
Form 1040A, line 26 ............................................................ . 10.
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the
child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-Social Security Standard Deduction
pital records instead. The document must show
Numbers for the child was born alive. If you do this, enter Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking a
ªDIEDº in column (2) of line 6c of your Form standard deduction or itemizing their deduc-Dependents 1040 or Form 1040A. tions. If you have a choice, you can use the
method that gives you the lower tax.You must list the social security number (SSN) The standard deduction is a dollar amountAlien or adoptee with no SSN. If your depen-of any dependent for whom you claim an exemp-
that reduces the amount of income on which youdent does not have and cannot get an SSN, yoution in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 or
are taxed. It is a benefit that eliminates the needmust list the individual taxpayer identificationForm 1040A.
for many taxpayers to itemize actual deductions,number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifica-If you do not list the dependent's SSN such as medical expenses, charitable contribu-tion number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.when required or if you list an incorrect tions, and taxes, on Schedule A of Form 1040.
SSN, the exemption may be disal- Taxpayer identification numbers for
CAUTION
! The standard deduction is higher for taxpayerslowed. aliens. If your dependent is a resident or non- who:
resident alien who does not have and is not
• Are 65 or older,No SSN. If a person for whom you expect to eligible to get an SSN, your dependent must
claim an exemption on your return does not apply for an individual taxpayer identification • Are blind,have an SSN, either you or that person should number (ITIN). For details on how to apply, see • Pay state or local real estate taxes,apply for an SSN as soon as possible by filing Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual Tax-Form SS-5, Application for a Social Security • Have a net disaster loss from a federallypayer Identification Number.Card, with the Social Security Administration declared disaster, orTaxpayer identification numbers for(SSA). You can get Form SS-5 online at www.
• Paid state or local sales or excise tax (oradoptees. If you have a child who was placedsocialsecurity.gov or at your local SSA office.
certain other taxes or fees in a state with-It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN. with you by an authorized placement agency,
out a sales tax) on the purchase of a newIf you do not have a required SSN by the filing you may be able to claim an exemption for the
motor vehicle after February 16, 2009.due date, you can file Form 4868, Application for child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or an
Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S. Indi- ITIN for the child, you must get an adoption
vidual Income Tax Return, for an extension of taxpayer identification number (ATIN) for the You benefit from the standard deduc-time to file. child from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Application tion if your standard deduction is more
for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending than the total of your allowable item-Born and died in 2009. If your child was
TIP
ized deductions.born and died in 2009, and you do not have an U.S. Adoptions, for details.
Page 22 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 23 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Persons not eligible for the standard deduc- 1. You cannot see better than 20/200 in the If you are increasing your standard deduc-
tion. Your standard deduction is zero and you better eye with glasses or contact lenses, tion by the amount of these state or local sales
or or excise taxes, complete Schedule L (Formshould itemize any deductions you have if:
1040A or 1040), attach it to your return, and be2. Your field of vision is not more than 201. You are married, filing a separate return, sure to check the box on line 40b of Form 1040degrees.and your spouse itemizes deductions, or line 24b of Form 1040A.
If your eye condition will never improve be-2. You are filing a tax return for a short tax yond these limits, the statement should includeyear because of a change in your annual this fact. You must keep the statement in your Higher Standard Deduction for Netaccounting period, or records. Disaster Loss
3. You are a nonresident or dual-status alien If your vision can be corrected beyond these
Your standard deduction is increased by any netduring the year. You are considered a limits only by contact lenses that you can wear
disaster loss from a federally declared disasteronly briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-
that occurred in 2009. This amount is on Formyou can take the higher standard deduction fordent and resident alien during the year.
4684, line 18.blindness if you otherwise qualify.If you are a nonresident alien who is mar-
If you are increasing your standard deduc-ried to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the
tion by the amount of your net disaster loss,end of the year, you can choose to be Spouse 65 or Older or Blind complete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040),treated as a U.S. resident. (See Publication
attach it your return, and be sure to check the519.) If you make this choice, you can take You can take the higher standard deduction if box on line 40b of Form 1040.the standard deduction. your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:
1. You file a joint return, orIf an exemption for you can be Examplesclaimed on another person's return 2. You file a separate return and can claim an(such as your parents' return), your
CAUTION
! The following examples illustrate how to deter-exemption for your spouse because yourstandard deduction may be limited. See Stan- mine your standard deduction using Worksheetspouse had no gross income and an ex-dard Deduction for Dependents, later. 3.emption for your spouse could not be
claimed by another taxpayer.
Standard Deduction Amount Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are
filing a joint return for 2009. Neither is blind, andYou cannot claim the higher standardThe standard deduction amount depends on neither can be claimed as a dependent. They diddeduction for an individual other than
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or not pay real estate taxes or sales or excise taxesyourself and your spouse.
CAUTION
!
blind, whether an exemption can be claimed for on the purchase of a new motor vehicle or have
you by another taxpayer, whether you pay state a net disaster loss. They decide not to itemize
or local real estate taxes, whether you have a their deductions. Because they are married filingHigher Standard Deduction fornet disaster loss from a federally declared disas- jointly, they enter $11,400 on line 1 of Work-Real Estate Taxes sheet 3. They check the ªNoº box on line 2, soter, and whether you paid state or local sales or
they also enter $11,400 on lines 4 and 10. Theirexcise tax (or certain other taxes or fees in a Your standard deduction is increased by any
standard deduction is $11,400.state without a sales tax) on the purchase of a state and local real estate taxes you paid in
new motor vehicle after February 16, 2009. 2009, up to $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly).
Example 2. The facts are the same as inGenerally, the standard deduction amounts are The taxes must be state or local real estate
Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the endtaxes that would be deductible on Form 1040adjusted each year for inflation. Use Worksheet
of 2009, so he and Donna enter $1,100 on line 5(Schedule A) if you were itemizing your deduc-3 to figure your standard deduction amount. of Worksheet 3 . They then enter $12,500tions. Taxes deductible in arriving at adjustedThe amount of the standard deduction for a ($11,400 + $1,100) on line 10, so their standardgross income, such as taxes on business realdecedent's final tax return is the same as it deduction is $12,500.estate, and taxes on foreign real estate cannotwould have been had the decedent continued to be used to increase your standard deduction.live. However, if the decedent was not 65 or Example 3. Bill and Lisa are filing a jointIf you are increasing your standard deduc-older at the time of death, the higher standard return for 2009. Both are over age 65. Neither istion by the amount of real estate taxes you paid,deduction for age cannot be claimed. blind, and neither can be claimed as a depen-complete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040),
dent. They did not pay real estate taxes or salesattach it to your return, and be sure to check the
or excise taxes on the purchase of a new motorbox on line 40b of Form 1040 or line 24b of FormHigher Standard Deduction for Age vehicle or have a net disaster loss. They do not1040A.(65 or Older) itemize deductions, so they use Worksheet 3 .
Because they are married filing jointly, theyIf you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled enter $11,400 on line 1. They check the ªNoº boxHigher Standard Deduction forto a higher standard deduction if you are age 65 on line 2, so they also enter $11,400 on line 4.Sales Taxes on New Motoror older at the end of the year. You are consid- Because they are both over age 65, they enterVehiclesered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday. $2,200 ($1,100 ×  2) on line 5. They enter
Therefore, you can take a higher standard $13,600 ($11,400 + $2,200) on line 10, so theirYour standard deduction is increased by any
deduction for 2009 if you were born before Janu- standard deduction is $13,600.state or local sales or excise taxes you paid in
ary 2, 1945. 2009 on the purchase of a new vehicle after
Example 4. The facts are the same as inFebruary 16, 2009. The amount is limited to tax
Example 3 except that Bill and Lisa paid $3,000on the first $49,500 of the purchase price. The
Higher Standard Deduction for in local real estate taxes on their home in 2009,taxes must be state or local sales or excise
Blindness so they enter $3,000 on line 7 of Worksheet 3.taxes that would be deductible on Form 1040
They then enter $1,000 on lines 8 and 9 and(Schedule A) if you were itemizing your deduc-If you are blind on the last day of the year and $14,600 ($11,400 + $2,200 + $1,000) on line 10.tions. In states without a sales tax, certain other
you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled taxes or fees qualify if they are assessed on the Their standard deduction is $14,600. Because
to a higher standard deduction. You qualify for purchase of the vehicle and are based on the line 9 is greater than zero, they must complete
this benefit if you are totally or partly blind. vehicle's sales price or as a per unit fee. Taxes Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it
deductible in arriving at adjusted gross income, to their return.
Partly blind. If you are partly blind, you must such as taxes on a vehicle used in your busi-
get a certified statement from an eye doctor or Example 5. The facts are the same as inness, cannot be used to increase your standard
registered optometrist that: Example 4 except that Bill and Lisa had a netdeduction.
Publication 501 (2009) Page 23

Page 24 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
disaster loss from a federally declared disaster from a federally declared disaster, the standard line 1 and line 3) on line 4. He leaves lines 5, 6,
deduction may be higher.of $8,000. That is the amount on line 18 of their 7, 8, and 9 blank and enters $950 on line 10. His
Form 4684. They enter $8,000 on line 6 of Work- standard deduction is $950.If an exemption for you (or your spouse if you
sheet 3. On line 10 of the worksheet, they enter are married filing jointly) can be claimed on
Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col-$22,600 ($11,400 + $2,200 + $8,000 + $1,000), someone else's return, use Worksheet 3 to de-
lege student, is claimed on his parents' 2009 taxtermine your standard deduction.which is their standard deduction. Because line
return. Joe is married and files a separate return.6 (and line 9) is greater than zero, they must Earned income defined. Earned income is His wife does not itemize deductions on hercomplete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and separate return. Joe has $1,500 in interest in-attach it to their return. other amounts received as pay for work you come and wages of $3,800. He did not pay realactually perform. estate taxes or sales or excise taxes on theStandard Deduction for For purposes of the standard deduction, purchase of a new motor vehicle or have a netearned income also includes any part of a schol-Dependents disaster loss. He has no itemized deductions.arship or fellowship grant that you must include Joe finds his standard deduction by using Work-The standard deduction for an individual for in your gross income. See chapter 1 of Publica- sheet 3. Because he is married filing a separatewhom an exemption can be claimed on another tion 970 for more information on what qualifies return, he enters $5,700 on line 1. He checks theperson's tax return is generally limited to the as a scholarship or fellowship grant.
ªYesº box on line 2, enters $4,100 ($3,800 +greater of:
$300) on line 3, and also enters $4,100 (theExample 1. Michael is single. His parents
1. $950, or smaller of line 1 and line 3) on line 4. He leavesclaim an exemption for him on their 2009 tax
lines 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 blank and enters $4,100 onreturn. He has interest income of $780 and2. The individual's earned income for the line 10. His standard deduction is $4,100.wages of $150. He did not pay real estate taxesyear plus $300 (but not more than the reg- or sales or excise taxes on the purchase of aular standard deduction amount, generally Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimednew motor vehicle or have a net disaster loss.$5,700). on her parents' 2009 return. She is 18 years oldHe has no itemized deductions. Michael uses
However, if the individual is 65 or older or blind, and blind. She has interest income of $1,300Worksheet 3 to find his standard deduction. Be-
paid state or local real estate taxes, paid state or and wages of $2,900. She did not pay real es-cause he is single, he enters $5,700 on line 1.
local sales or excise taxes on the purchase of a tate taxes or sales or excise taxes on theHe checks the ªYesº box on line 2, enters $950
new motor vehicle, or had a net disaster loss on line 3, and also enters $950 (the smaller of purchase of a new motor vehicle or have a net
Worksheet 3. 2009 Standard Deduction Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Caution. If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, do not complete this
worksheet. You cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before January 2, 1945, are blind, paid real estate taxes, had a net
disaster loss, or paid state or local sales or excise tax on the purchase of a new motor vehicle.
If you paid state or local sales or excise tax on the purchase of a new motor vehicle after February 16, 2009, you cannot use this worksheet to
figure your standard deduction. You must use Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it to your return.
If you are filing Form 1040EZ, do not use this worksheet. Instead, see line 5 of Form 1040EZ.
1. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status.
• Single or married filing separately Ð $5,700
...................... . 1.• Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er) Ð
$11,400 }
• Head of household Ð $8,350
2. Can you (or your spouse if filing jointly) be claimed as a dependent on someone else's
return?
 No. Skip line 3; enter the amount from line 1 on line 4, and go to line 5. 
 Yes. Go to line 3.
3. Is your earned income* more than $650?
 Yes. Add $300 to your earned income. Enter the total } ...................... . 3.
 No. Enter $950
4. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 3 .................................................... . 4.
5. If born before January 2, 1945, or blind, multiply the number on Form 1040, line 39a (or Form 1040A, line
23a**) by $1,100 ($1,400 if single or head of household). Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... . 5.
6. Enter any net disaster loss from Form 4684, line 18** ...................................... . 6.
7. Enter the state and local real estate taxes you paid that would be deductible on Schedule A
(Form 1040), line 6, if you were itemizing your deductions. See the instructions for Schedule
A (Form 1040), line 6. Do not include foreign real estate taxes .................... . 7.
8. Enter $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly) ................................... . 8.
9. Enter the smaller of line 7 or line 8** .................................................. . 9.
10.  Add lines 4, 5, 6, and 9. This is your standard deduction for 2009. ........................... . 10.
*Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also
includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must include in your income. Generally, your earned income is the total of the amount(s)
you reported on Form 1040, lines 7, 12, and 18, minus the amount, if any, on line 27 (or the amount you reported on Form 1040A, line 7). 
**If the amount on line 6 or line 9 of this worksheet is more than zero, you must complete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it to your
return. Also, if the amount on line 6 of this worksheet is more than zero, you cannot file Form 1040A; you must file Form 1040.
Page 24 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 25 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
disaster loss. She has no itemized deductions. have itemized Ð or if you itemize your deduc- • You can learn about your rights and re-
Amy finds her standard deduction by using sponsibilities as a taxpayer by visiting ourtions and later find you should not have Ð you
Worksheet 3. Because she is single, she enters online tax toolkit at www.taxtoolkit.irs.gov.can change your return by filing Form 1040X.
$5,700 on line 1. She checks the ªYesº box on Married persons who filed separate re- Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs).line 2, enters $3,200 ($2,900 + $300) on line 3, turns. You can change methods of taking de- The Low Income Taxpayer Clinic programand also enters $3,200 (the smaller of line 1 and ductions only if you and your spouse both make serves individuals who have a problem with theline 3) on line 4. Because she is blind, she enters the same changes. Both of you must file a con- IRS and whose income is below a certain level.$1,400 on line 5. She leaves lines 6, 7, 8, and 9
sent to assessment for any additional tax either LITCs are independent from the IRS. Mostblank and enters $4,600 ($3,200 + $1,400) on
one may owe as a result of the change. LITCs can provide representation before theline 10. Her standard deduction is $4,600.
You and your spouse can use the method IRS or in court on audits, tax collection disputes,
that gives you the lower total tax, even though and other issues for free or a small fee. If anWho Should Itemize individual's native language is not English, someone of you may pay more tax than you would
clinics can provide multilingual informationhave paid by using the other method. You bothYou should itemize deductions if your total de-
about taxpayer rights and responsibilities. Formust use the same method of claiming deduc-ductions are more than the standard deduction
more information, see Publication 4134, Lowamount. Also, you should itemize if you do not tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other
Income Taxpayer Clinic List. This publication isqualify for the standard deduction, as discussed should itemize because he or she will not qualify
available at www.irs.gov , by callingearlier under Persons not eligible for the stan- for the standard deduction. See Persons not
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or at yourdard deduction. eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.
local IRS office.You should first figure your itemized deduc-
tions and compare that amount to your standard
Free tax services. To find out what servicesdeduction to make sure you are using the
are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide tomethod that gives you the greater benefit. How To Get Tax Help Free Tax Services. It contains lists of free taxYou may be subject to a limit on some information sources, including publications,You can get help with unresolved tax issues,of your itemized deductions if your ad- services, and free tax education and assistanceorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques-justed gross income (AGI) is more than
CAUTION
! programs. It also has an index of over 100$166,800 ($83,400 if you are married filing sep- tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) youarately). See the instructions for Schedule A eral ways. By selecting the method that is best can listen to on your telephone.(Form 1040), line 29, for more information on for you, you will have quick and easy access to Accessible versions of IRS published prod-figuring the correct amount of your itemized de- tax help. ucts are available on request in a variety ofductions. alternative formats for people with disabilities.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. TheWhen to itemize. You may benefit from Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- Free help with your return. Free help in pre-itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form pendent organization within the IRS whose em- paring your return is available nationwide from1040) if you: ployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income
economic harm, who are seeking help in resolv-1. Do not qualify for the standard deduction, Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to
ing tax problems that have not been resolvedor the amount you can claim is limited, help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun-
through normal channels, or who believe that an seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed2. Had large uninsured medical and dental IRS system or procedure is not working as it to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with theirexpenses during the year, should. Here are seven things every taxpayer tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronic
3. Paid interest and taxes on your home, should know about TAS: filing and all volunteers will let you know about
credits and deductions you may be entitled to4. Had large unreimbursed employee busi- • TAS is your voice at the IRS. claim. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, callness expenses or other miscellaneous de- • Our service is free, confidential, and tai- 1-800-829-1040.ductions, lored to meet your needs. As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the
5. Had large uninsured casualty or theft Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near-• You may be eligible for TAS help if youlosses, est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 orhave tried to resolve your tax problem visit AARP's website at6. Made large contributions to qualified chari- through normal IRS channels and have www.aarp.org/money/taxaide.ties, or gotten nowhere, or you believe an IRS For more information on these programs, goprocedure just isn't working as it should.7. Have total itemized deductions that are to more than the standard deduction to which • TAS helps taxpayers whose problems are www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in theyou otherwise are entitled. causing financial difficulty or significant upper right-hand corner.
cost, including the cost of professionalIf you decide to itemize your deductions, Internet. You can access the IRS web-representation. This includes businessescomplete Schedule A and attach it to your Form site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7as well as individuals.1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, line days a week to:
29, on Form 1040, line 40a. • TAS employees know the IRS and how to • E-file your return. Find out about commer-navigate it. We will listen to your problem, cial tax preparation and e-file servicesElecting to itemize for state tax or other pur- help you understand what needs to be available free to eligible taxpayers.poses. Even if your itemized deductions are done to resolve it, and stay with you everyless than the amount of your standard deduc- • Check the status of your 2009 refund. Gostep of the way until your problem is re-tion, you can elect to itemize deductions on your to solved.federal return rather than take the standard de- www.irs.gov and click on Where's My Re-• TAS has at least one local taxpayer advo-duction. You may want to do this, for example, if fund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS
cate in every state, the District of Colum-the tax benefit of being able to itemize your acknowledges receipt of your e-filed re-
bia, and Puerto Rico. You can call yourdeductions on your state tax return is greater turn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper
local advocate, whose number is in yourthan the tax benefit you lose on your federal return. If you filed Form 8379 with your
return by not taking the standard deduction. To phone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer Ad- return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you
make this election, you must check the box on vocate ServiceÐYour Voice at the IRS, filed electronically). Have your 2009 tax
line 30 of Schedule A. and on our website at www.irs.gov/advo- return available so you can provide your
cate. You can also call our toll-free line at social security number, your filing status,
1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDDChanging your mind. If you do not itemize and the exact whole dollar amount of your
1-800-829-4059.your deductions and later find that you should refund.
Publication 501 (2009) Page 25

Page 26 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Download forms, instructions, and publica- (automated refund information 24 hours a can call your local Center and leave a
tions. day, 7 days a week). Wait at least 72 message requesting an appointment to re-
hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt solve a tax account issue. A representa-• Order IRS products online. of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after tive will call you back within 2 business
• Research your tax questions online. mailing a paper return. If you filed Form days to schedule an in-person appoint-
8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11 ment at your convenience. If you have an• Search publications online by topic or
weeks if you filed electronically). Have ongoing, complex tax account problem orkeyword.
your 2009 tax return available so you can a special need, such as a disability, an• Use the online Internal Revenue Code, provide your social security number, your appointment can be requested. All otherRegulations, or other official guidance. filing status, and the exact whole dollar issues will be handled without an appoint-amount of your refund. Refunds are sent• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) ment. To find the number of your localout weekly on Fridays. If you check thepublished in the last few years. office, go to status of your refund and are not given the www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the• Figure your withholding allowances using date it will be issued, please wait until the phone book under United States Govern-the withholding calculator online at www. next week before checking back.irs.gov/individuals. ment, Internal Revenue Service.
• Other refund information. To check the• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by status of a prior year refund or amended Mail. You can send your order forusing our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) return refund, call 1-800-829-1954. forms, instructions, and publications toAssistant.
the address below. You should receive
• Sign up to receive local and national tax Evaluating the quality of our telephone a response within 10 days after your request is
news by email. services. To ensure IRS representatives give received.
accurate, courteous, and professional answers,• Get information on starting and operating we use several methods to evaluate the qualitya small business. Internal Revenue Serviceof our telephone services. One method is for a
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwaysecond IRS representative to listen in on or
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613record random telephone calls. Another is to askPhone. Many services are available by some callers to complete a short survey at the DVD for tax products. You can orderphone. end of the call. Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products
DVD, and obtain:
Walk-in. Many products and services• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
are available on a walk-in basis. • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-tions. Call 1-800-TAX FORM
lications.(1-800-829-3676) to order current-year
forms, instructions, and publications, and • Products. You can walk in to many post • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-prior-year forms and instructions. You offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up tions.should receive your order within 10 days. certain forms, instructions, and publica- • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andtions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with finding aid.stores, copy centers, city and county gov-your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.
ernment offices, credit unions, and office • Tax law frequently asked questions.• Solving problems. You can get supply stores have a collection of productsface-to-face help solving tax problems • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-available to print from a CD or photocopyevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As- sponse system.from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRSsistance Centers. An employee can ex- offices and libraries have the Internal Rev- • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of theplain IRS letters, request adjustments to enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue U.S. Code.your account, or help you set up a pay- Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis- • Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxable for research purposes.tance Center for an appointment. To find forms.
the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon- • Services. You can walk in to your local • Internal Revenue Bulletins.tacts or look in the phone book under Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
United States Government, Internal Reve- ness day for personal, face-to-face tax • Toll-free and email technical support.
nue Service. help. An employee can explain IRS letters, • Two releases during the year.request adjustments to your tax account,• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access ± The first release will ship the beginningor help you set up a payment plan. If youto TTY/TDD equipment, call of January 2010.need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to ± The final release will ship the beginningtions about how the tax law applies to yourorder forms and publications. of March 2010.individual tax return, or you are more com-• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis- fortable talking with someone in person,ten to pre-recorded messages covering Purchase the DVD from National Technicalvisit your local Taxpayer Assistancevarious tax topics. Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/Center where you can spread out your
cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or callrecords and talk with an IRS representa-• Refund information. To check the status of
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-your 2009 refund, call 1-800-829-1954
(plus a $6 handling fee).during business hours or 1-800-829-4477 essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you
Page 26 Publication 501 (2009)

Page 27 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Child support under pre-1985 Disaster loss, standard Food stamps ............... . 18A
agreement ............... . 21 deduction increased Foreign employment, filingAbroad, citizens living, filing
by ........................ . 23Child tax credit ............. . 11 requirements .............. . 3requirements .............. . 3
Divorced parents ........... . 13Child, qualifying ............ . 11 Foreign students ........... . 11Absence, temporary ..... . 8, 13,
Divorced taxpayers:17 Children: Form 1040:
Child custody ............. . 13Adopted child (See Adoption) Personal exemption ....... . 10Accounting periods, joint
Filing status .............. . 5, 6returns .................... . 6 Adoption (See Adopted child) Schedule A, itemized deduction
Joint returns, responsibility limit .................... . 25Birth of child ............ . 8, 10Additional exemption amount:
for ....................... . 6 Social security numbers ... . 22Claiming parent, when child isMidwestern disaster ....... . 10 Personal exemption ....... . 10head of household ....... . 8 Use of ................... . 6, 7Adopted child .......... . 11, 17 Domestic help, no exemptionCustody of ................ . 13 Form 1040A:Taxpayer identification for ....................... . 11Death of child ........... . 8, 10 Personal exemption ....... . 10number ................. . 22
Dual-status taxpayers:Dividends of ............... . 4 Social security numbers ... . 22Advance earned income credit, Exemptions ............... . 10Filing requirements as Use of ................... . 6, 7effect on filing requirements Joint returns not available ... . 6dependents (Table 2) ..... . 4(Table 3) .................. . 5 Form 1040EZ:
Investment income of child Personal exemption ....... . 10Age:
under age 18 ............ . 4 Use of ..................... . 6Filing status EKidnapped ............ . 13, 16determination ............ . 3 Form 1040X:Earned income:Social security number .... . 22Gross income and filing Change of filing status ...... . 7Defined for purposes ofStillborn .................. . 13requirements (Table 1) ... . 3 Itemized deductions, change tostandard deduction ...... . 24Church employees, filingStandard deduction for age 65 standard deduction ...... . 25Dependent filing requirementsrequirements (Table 3) .... . 5or older ................. . 23 Standard deduction, change to(Table 2) ................ . 4
Citizen or resident test ..... . 11Test ...................... . 11 itemized deductions ..... . 25Earned income credit ........ . 5
Citizens outside U.S., filingAliens: Form 8814, parents' election toNonresident alien spouse ... . 8
requirements .............. . 3 report child's interest andDual-status (See Dual-status Two persons with same
Comments on publication ... . 2 dividends ................. . 4taxpayers) qualifying child .......... . 14
Nonresident (See Nonresident Common law marriage ...... . 5 Form 8857, innocent spouseElderly persons:
aliens) relief ...................... . 6Community property Home for the aged ........ . 18
Alimony .................... . 21 states ..................... . 7 Form SS-5, social securityStandard deduction for age 65
number request .......... . 22or older ................. . 23Alternative minimum tax (AMT), Cousin ..................... . 17
effect on filing requirements Form W-7, individual taxpayerEquitable relief, InnocentCustody of child ............ . 13
(Table 3) .................. . 5 identification numberspouse .................... . 6
request .................. . 22Amended returns  (See also Exemptions ............. . 10-22
DForm 1040X) ............ . 7, 25 Form W-7A, adoption taxpayerAmount .................... . 1
Death:Change from itemized to identification numberDeduction for exemptions,
Of child ................... . 13standard deduction (or vice request .................. . 22determination of (Worksheet
versa) .................. . 25 Of dependent ........... . 8, 17 2) ...................... . 21 Foster care payments and
Of spouse ........... . 5, 6, 10 Dependents ............... . 11American citizens abroad ... . 3 expenses ................ . 18
Midwestern disaster ........ . 1Decedents  (See also Death ofAnnulled marriages, filing Foster child ......... . 11, 17, 18
Midwestern displacedspouse) .................... . 5status ..................... . 5 Free tax services ........... . 25
individual ............... . 10Filing requirements ......... . 3Armed forces: Funeral expenses .......... . 19Personal (See PersonalDeductions:Combat zone, signing return for
exemption)Personal exemption ....... . 10spouse .................. . 6
Phaseout ............... . 1, 21 GStandard deduction ........ . 22Dependency allotments .... . 18
GI Bill benefits ............. . 19GI Bill benefits ............ . 19 Dependent taxpayer test ... . 11
Military quarters Gross income:Dependents: F
allotments .............. . 18 Defined .................... . 3Birth of ................... . 17 Fair rental value ............ . 18
Filing requirements (TableAssistance  (See Tax help) Born and died within Figures  (See Tables and figures) 1) ..................... . 3year .................... . 22ATINs (Adoption taxpayer Filing requirements ....... . 3-5 Dependent filing requirementsChild's earnings ............ . 4identification Filing status .............. . 5-10 (Table 2) ................ . 4numbers) ................ . 22 Death of .................. . 17 Annulled marriages ......... . 5 Test ...................... . 17Earned income ............. . 3 Change to: Group-term life insurance ... . 5Exemption for ............. . 11 Joint return after separateB Filing requirements ....... . 3, 4 returns ................ . 7Birth of child ................ . 8 Married, filing joint Separate returns after joint HBlind persons, standard return .............. . 11, 14 return ............... . 7, 9 Head of household ........ . 7-9deduction ................ . 23 Not allowed to claim Determination of ......... . 3, 5 Exemption for spouse ..... . 10dependents ............. . 11 Head of household ....... . 5, 7 Filing requirements (TableQualifying child ............ . 11 Marital status, determinationC 1) ....................... . 3Qualifying relative ......... . 16 of ....................... . 5Canada, resident of .... . 10, 11, Health insuranceSocial security number .... . 22 Married filing jointly (See Joint16 premiums ................ . 19Standard deduction for .... . 24 returns)Capital expenses ........... . 19 Unearned income .......... . 4 Help  (See Tax help)Married filing separately (See
Child born alive ............ . 13 Disabled: Home:Married filing separately)
Child care expenses ........ . 19 Child ..................... . 13 Aged, home for ............ . 18Unmarried persons (See Single
Child custody .............. . 13 Dependent ................ . 17 taxpayers) Cost of keeping up ......... . 8
Publication 501 (2009) Page 27

Page 28 of 28 of Publication 501 14:17 - 18-DEC-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Household workers, no Married taxpayers  (See also Gross income filingR
exemption for ............ . 11 Joint returns) ............... . 6 requirements (Table 1) ... . 3Real estate taxes, standard
Age 65 or older spouse, Single filing status .......... . 6deduction increased
standard deduction ...... . 23 Widow(er) with dependentby ........................ . 23I Blind spouse, standard child .................. . 9, 10Recapture taxes ............. . 5Income: deduction ............... . 23 Relationship test ....... . 11, 16Gross .................... . 17 Dual-status alien spouse .... . 6 TRelative, qualifying ......... . 16Tax exempt ............... . 18 Filing status ................ . 5 Tables and figures  (See alsoRemarriage after divorce .... . 5Individual retirement Medical insurance Worksheets) .............. . 21arrangements (IRAs): Rental losses ................ . 7premiums ................ . 19 Filing requirements:Filing requirements (Table Residency test ............. . 13Medical savings accounts Dependents (Table 2) .... . 43) ....................... . 5 (MSAs, effect on filing Gross income levels (TableMarried filing separately .... . 7 requirements (Table 3) .... . 5 S 1) ..................... . 3Individual taxpayer Medicare taxes, not Sales taxes, standard deduction Other situations requiringidentification numbers support .................. . 19 increased by ............. . 23 filing (Table 3) ......... . 5(ITINs) .................. . 2, 22 Member of household or Scholarships ..... . 3, 14, 17, 19, Tax help .................... . 25Innocent spouse relief ....... . 6 relationship test .......... . 16 24 Tax returns:Insurance premiums: Mexico, resident of ..... . 10, 11, Self-employed persons: Amended (See Form 1040X)Life ....................... . 19 16 Filing requirements (Table Filing of (See FilingMedical ................... . 19 3) ....................... . 5Midwestern disaster ..... . 8, 10, requirements)IRAs  (See Individual retirement Gross income .............. . 312, 19 Joint returns (See Joint returns)arrangements (IRAs)) Separate returns  (See MarriedMilitary  (See Armed forces) Who must file ......... . 1, 3, 4Itemized deductions: filing separately)Missing children, photographs Taxes, not support ......... . 19Changing from standard to Separated parents .......... . 13of in IRS publications ..... . 2 Tax-exempt income ........ . 18itemized deduction (or vice
Separated taxpayers:More information  (See Tax help) Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 25versa) .................. . 25
Filing status ................ . 5Multiple supportChoosing to itemize ....... . 25 Temporary absences ... . 13, 17
Living apart but not legallyagreement ............... . 19Limits on ................ . 2, 25 Tiebreaker rules ............ . 14separated ................ . 5Married filing separately ... . 25 Tips, reporting of (TablePersonal exemption ....... . 10When to itemize ........... . 25 3) ......................... . 5N Signatures, joint returns ..... . 6ITINs (Individual taxpayer Total support ............... . 18National of the United Single taxpayers:identification States .................... . 11 TTY/TDD information ....... . 25Filing status .............. . 5, 6numbers) ................ . 22 Nonresident aliens .......... . 2 Tuition, benefits under GIGross income filingDependents ............... . 22 Bill ....................... . 19requirements (Table 1) ... . 3Earned income credit ....... . 8J How to file and forms ....... . 6Exemptions ............... . 10Joint return test ........ . 11, 14 Personal exemption ....... . 10 UJoint return ................ . 6Joint returns ................ . 6 Social security and Medicare U.S. citizen or resident ..... . 11Spouse .................... . 8Dependents on ............ . 17 taxes: U.S. citizens filing abroad, filingTaxpayer identificationPersonal exemption ....... . 10 Reporting of (Table 3) ...... . 5 requirements:number ................. . 22 Support, not included in .... . 19 Filing requirements ......... . 3
Social security benefits .... . 18K U.S. national ............... . 11O Social security numbers (SSNs)Kidnapped children: U.S. possessions, incomeOverseas taxpayers ......... . 3 for dependents ........... . 22Qualifying child ............ . 13 from ...................... . 3
Qualifying relative ......... . 16 Spouse  (See also Joint Unmarried persons  (See Single
Widow(er) with dependent returns) .................... . 6 taxpayers)P
child .................... . 10 Deceased ............... . 6, 10Parent, claiming head of
Dual-status alien spouse .... . 6household for ............. . 8 WExemption for ............. . 10Parents who neverL Welfare benefits ............ . 18Innocent spouse relief ...... . 6married .................. . 14Life insurance premiums ... . 19 What's New for 2009:Nonresident alien .......... . 8Parents, divorced orLimit on itemized Exemption amount ......... . 1Signing joint returns ........ . 6separated ................ . 13deductions ............... . 25 Exemption phaseout ........ . 1Surviving (See SurvivingPenalty, failure to file ........ . 3Local income taxes, itemized Limit on itemizedspouse)
Personal exemption ........ . 10deductions ............... . 25 deduction ................ . 2SSNs  (See Social securityPhaseout ............... . 1, 21 Midwestern disaster ........ . 1Local law violated .......... . 17 numbers (SSNs) for
Phaseout of exemptions ..... . 1 Qualifying child definition ... . 2Lodging .................... . 18 dependents)
Standard deduction ......... . 1Photographs of missingLosses, rental real estate .... . 7 Standard deduction ... . 1, 22-25 Who must file .............. . 1children in IRS Married filing jointly ......... . 6
publications ............... . 2 Widow/widower  (See SurvivingState or local incomeM spouse)Publications  (See Tax help) taxes ..................... . 25Marital status, determination Worksheets:Puerto Rico, residents of .... . 3 Stillborn child .............. . 13of ......................... . 5 Deduction for exemptions,Students:Married dependents, filing joint determination of ......... . 21Defined ................... . 12Qreturn ................ . 11, 14 Head of household status andForeign ................... . 11Qualifying:  (See also SurvivingMarried filing jointly  (See Joint cost of keeping upSuggestions forspouse)returns) home .................... . 8publication ................ . 2Child ..................... . 11Married filing separately ..... . 6 Support test ............... . 21Relative .................. . 16 Support test:Changing method from or to
■Surviving spouse ........... . 9 Qualifying child ............ . 14itemized deductions ..... . 25
Widow/widower ............ . 9 Qualifying relative ......... . 17Exemption for spouse ..... . 10
Surviving spouse:Itemized deductions ....... . 25
Death of spouse (See Death of
spouse)
Page 28 Publication 501 (2009)