Publication 17
Your Federal Catalog Number 10311G
Income Tax
Department For use inFor Individualsof the
Treasury preparing
Internal
2007Revenue
Service Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet • www.irs.gov

Your Federal
Income Tax
Department For Individualsof the
Treasury
Internal
ContentsRevenue
Service
What's New for 2007 .................... 1 Part Five. Standard Deduction and Itemized
Deductions
What's New for 2008 .................... 2 20 Standard Deduction ................ 134
21 Medical and Dental Expenses ......... 137
Reminders ........................... 2 22 Taxes ......................... 142
23 Interest Expense .................. 146Introduction .......................... 4 24 Contributions .................... 153
25 Nonbusiness Casualty and TheftPart One. The Income Tax Return Losses ........................ 1621 Filing Information .................. 5 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee2 Filing Status ..................... 20 Business Expenses ............... 1683 Personal Exemptions and Dependents ... 24 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ..... 35 Education ...................... 187
28 Miscellaneous Deductions ........... 191Part Two. Income
29 Limit on Itemized Deductions ......... 1975 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings .... 44
6 Tip Income ...................... 51 Part Six. Figuring Your Taxes and Credits7 Interest Income ................... 53 30 How To Figure Your Tax ............ 1998 Dividends and Other Corporate 31 Tax on Investment Income of CertainDistributions .................... 61 Minor Children ................... 2029 Rental Income and Expenses ......... 65 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit ....... 20910 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled .... 218Annuities ...................... 71 34 Child Tax Credit .................. 22211 Social Security and Equivalent 35 Education Credits ................. 226Railroad Retirement Benefits ......... 77 36 Earned Income Credit .............. 23212 Other Income .................... 81 37 Other Credits .................... 246
Part Three. Gains and Losses 2007 Tax Table ........................ 25113 Basis of Property ................. 91
14 Sale of Property .................. 95 2007 Tax Computation Worksheet .......... 26315 Selling Your Home ................ 102
16 Reporting Gains and Losses .......... 107 2007 Tax Rate Schedules ................ 264
Part Four. Adjustments to Income Your Rights as a Taxpayer ............... 265
17 Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) ........................ 115 How To Get Tax Help ................... 266
18 Alimony ........................ 127
19 Education-Related Adjustments ........ 129 Index ............................... 268
Order Blank
(Inside back cover)
All material in this The explanations and examples in this publication reflect This publication covers some subjects on which a
publication may be the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) court may have made a decision more favorable to tax-
reprinted freely. A of: payers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until thesecitation to Your Federal differing interpretations are resolved by higher court deci-Income Tax (2007) • Tax laws enacted by Congress, sions or in some other way, this publication will continuewould be appropriate. • Treasury regulations, and to present the interpretations by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working with• Court decisions. the IRS. These rights are described in Your Rights as a
Taxpayer in the back of this publication.However, the information given does not cover every
situation and is not intended to replace the law or change
its meaning.

What's New for 2007
Traditional IRA income limits. insurance. See Publication 575 for may be limited if your adjustedThis section summarizes important You may be able to take an IRA more information. gross income is more thantax changes that took effect in deduction if you were covered by a $156,400 ($78,200 if you are mar-Retirement savings contribu-2007. Most of these changes are retirement plan and your modified ried filing separately). See chaptertions credit. The adjusted grossdiscussed in more detail through- adjusted gross income is less than 29.income limit for claiming this creditout this publication. $62,000 ($103,000, if you are mar- Tax benefits for adoption.is increased to $26,000 ($39,000 ifChanges are also discussed in ried filing jointly or a qualifying The adoption credit and the maxi-head of household; $52,000 if mar-Publication 553, Highlights of 2007 widow(er)). See chapter 17. mum exclusion from income ofried filing jointly). See chapter 37.Tax Changes. Roth IRA income limit. You benefits under an employer's adop-Mortgage insurance premiums.may be able to make a Roth IRA tion assistance program are in-Extended tax provisions. The You may be able to treat mortgagecontribution if your modified ad- creased to $11,390. See Adoptionfollowing tax provisions have been insurance premiums paid in con-justed gross income is less than Credit in chapter 37.extended through 2007. nection with home acquisition debt$114,000 ($166,000, if you are Hope or lifetime learningas home mortgage interest. See• The deduction from adjusted married filing jointly or a qualifying credit income limits increased.chapter 23.gross income (AGI) for edu- widow(er)). The amount of income you can
cator expenses. Catch-up contributions in have and still receive a Hope orQualified joint venture. A quali-certain employer bankruptcies. lifetime learning credit has in-• The deduction for qualified tu- fied joint venture conducted by youYou may be able to deduct up to an creased. See chapter 35.ition and fees. and your spouse may not beadditional $3,000 contributed to Social security and Medicaretreated as a partnership if you file a• The District of Columbia your IRA if you were a participant in taxes. The maximum wages sub-joint return for the tax year. Seefirst-time homebuyer credit a 401(k) plan and your employer ject to social security tax (6.2%)chapter 12.(for homes purchased before was in bankruptcy in an earlier increased to $97,500. All wages
January 1, 2008). year. See Publication 590, Individ- are subject to Medicare taxNew recordkeeping require-
ual Retirement Arrangements (1.45%).ments for cash contributions.• The election to include non- (IRAs). You cannot deduct a cash contribu-taxable combat pay in earned Expired tax provision. The taxQualified health savings ac- tion, regardless of the amount, un-income for figuring the earned provision allowing an additional ex-count (HSA) funding distribu- less you keep as a record of theincome credit. emption amount for housing a per-tion. Generally, you can make a contribution a bank record (such as son displaced by Hurricane Katrinaone-time direct transfer from your• The itemized deduction for a canceled check, a bank copy of a has expired.IRA to your HSA and exclude thestate and local general sales canceled check, or a bank state-
amount transferred from your in-taxes. ment containing the name of the Frivolous tax submissions.come. See Publication 969, Health charity, the date, and amount) or a The IRS has published a list of po-Savings Accounts and Other written communication from theTelephone excise tax credit. sitions that are identified as frivo-Tax-Favored Health Plans. charity. The written communicationThis credit was available on your lous. The penalty for filing aLimit on elective deferrals. must include the name of the char-2006 tax return. If you filed but did frivolous tax return is $5,000. Also,Generally, the maximum amount of ity, date of the contribution, andnot claim this credit on your 2006 the $5,000 penalty will apply toelective deferrals under a salary re- amount of the contribution. Seereturn, file Form 1040X, Amended other specified frivolous submis-duction agreement that could be chapter 24.U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, sions. See chapter 1.contributed to a qualified plan in-using a simplified procedure ex- Certain amounts increased.creased to $15,500 ($20,500 if you Filing erroneous claim for refundplained in its instructions to amend Some tax items that are indexed forwere age 50 or older). However, for or credit. You may have to pay ayour 2006 return. If you were not inflation increased for 2007.SIMPLE plans, the amount is penalty if, after May 25, 2007, yourequired to file a 2006 return, see Earned income credit (EIC).$10,500 ($13,000 if you were age file an erroneous claim for refund orthe 2006 Form 1040EZ-T, Request The maximum amount of income50 or older). credit. See chapter 1.for Refund of Federal Telephone you can earn and still get EIC in-Rollovers by nonspouse ben-Excise Tax. Mailing your return. If you arecreased. The amount depends oneficiaries. For distributions after
filing a paper return, you may beStandard mileage rates. The your filing status and number of2006, a nonspouse designated
mailing your return to a differentstandard mileage rate for the cost children. The maximum amount ofbeneficiary may have a distribution
address because the IRS hasof operating your car is 48.5 cents a investment income you can havefrom an eligible retirement plan of a
changed the filing location for sev-mile for all business miles driven in and still be eligible for the creditdeceased employee directly trans-
eral areas. If you received an en-2007. See chapter 26. increased to $2,900. See chapterfered (trustee-to-trustee) to his or
velope with your tax package,36.her own IRA set up to receive theThe standard mileage rate al-
please use it. Otherwise, seedistribution. The transfer will be Standard deduction. Thelowed for use of your car for medi-
Where To File near the end of thistreated as an eligible rollover distri- standard deduction for taxpayerscal reasons is 20 cents a mile for
publication for a list of IRS ad-bution and the receiving IRA will be who do not itemize deductions on2007. See chapter 21.
dresses.treated as an inherited IRA. See Schedule A (Form 1040) has in-The standard mileage rate al- Publication 575, Pension and An- creased. The amount depends onlowed for use of your car for deter- nuity Income, for more information. your filing status. See chapter 20.mining moving expenses is 20 Retired public safety officer. Exemption amount. You arecents a mile for 2007. See Publica- For distributions after 2006, an eli- allowed a $3,400 deduction fortion 521, Moving Expenses. gible retired public safety officer each exemption to which you are
Retirement savings plans.  The can elect to exclude from income entitled. However, your exemption
following paragraphs highlight distributions of up to $3,000 made amount could be phased out if you
changes that affect individual re- directly from a governmental retire- have high income. See chapter 3.
tirement arrangements (IRAs) and ment plan to the providers of acci- Limit on itemized deductions.
pension plans. dent, health, or long-term care Some of your itemized deductions
■
Page 1Publication 17 (2007)

What's New for 2008
This section summarizes the im- IRA income limits. You may Capital gain tax rate reduced. (for homes purchased after
portant changes that take effect in be able to take an IRA deduction if 2007).The 5% capital gain tax rate is re-
2008 that could affect your esti- you were covered by a retirement duced to zero. • The election to include non-mated tax payments for 2008. plan and your 2008 modified ad- taxable combat pay in earnedExpiring tax provisions. TheMore information on these and justed gross income is less than income for figuring the earnedfollowing tax provisions are sched-other changes can be found in Pub- $63,000 ($105,000, if you are mar- income credit.uled to expire at the end of 2007.lication 553. ried filing jointly or a qualifying
widow(er)). • The deduction for educatorRetirement savings plans.  The At the time this publicationexpenses in figuring adjustedPhaseouts reduced.following paragraphs highlight went to print, Congressgross income (AGI).Personal exemptions. Thechanges that affect individual re- was considering legisla-
CAUTION
!
phaseout of the limit on personaltirement arrangements (IRAs) and tion that would extend these provi-• The deduction for qualified tu-exemptions is reduced by 2/3.pension plans. sions. To find out if this legislationition and fees.Itemized deductions. The was enacted, and for more details,IRA deduction increases. The • The exclusion from income ofphaseout of the limit on itemized go to www.irs.gov, click on ªMoreamount you, and your spouse if fil- qualified charitable distribu-deductions is reduced by 2/3. Forms and Publications,º and thening jointly, may be able to deduct as tions. on ªWhat's Hot in forms and publi-an IRA contribution will increase to Child's investment income. Be- cations,º or see Publication 553.• The itemized deduction for$5,000 ($6,000 if age 50 or older at ginning in 2008, the rules regarding
the end of 2008). state and local general salesthe age at which a child's invest-
taxes.You may be able to deduct up to ment income may be subject to tax
an additional $3,000 contributed to at the parent's tax rate is changed • The credit for nonbusinessyour IRA if you were a participant in to include a child who is age 18 or a energy property.a 401(k) plan and your employer student under age 24, whose
• The District of Columbiawas in bankruptcy in an earlier earned income is not more than
year. See Publication 590. one-half of the child's support. first-time homebuyer credit ■
Reminders
Listed below are important remind- used inappropriately for tax pur- Administration toll-free at sources outside the United States
poses. 1-800-366-4484. You can forward (foreign income), you must reporters and other items that may help
suspicious emails to the Federal all such income on your tax return Victims of identity theft who areyou file your 2007 tax return. Many
Trade Commission at: spam@uce. unless it is exempt by U.S. law.experiencing economic harm or aof these items are explained in
gov or contact them at www.ftc. This is true whether you reside in-systemic problem, or are seekingmore detail later in this publication.
gov/idtheft or 1-877-IDTHEFT side or outside the United Stateshelp in resolving tax problems that
Write in your social security (1-877-438-4338). and whether or not you receive ahave not been resolved through
number. To protect your privacy, Visit the IRS website at www. Form W-2 or 1099 from the foreignnormal channels, may be eligible
social security numbers (SSNs) are irs.gov to learn more about identity payer. This applies to earned in-for Taxpayer Advocate Service
theft and how to reduce your risk. come (such as wages and tips) asnot printed on the peel-off label that (TAS) assistance. You can reach
well as unearned income (such asTAS by calling the TAS toll-freecomes in the mail with your tax in- Taxpayer identification num- interest, dividends, capital gains,case intake line at 1-877-777-4778struction booklet. This means you bers. You must provide the tax- pensions, rents and royalties).or TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059.must enter your SSN in the space payer identification number for If you reside outside the UnitedProtect yourself from suspi-provided on your tax form. If you each person for whom you claim States, you may be able to excludecious emails or phishingfiled a joint return for 2006 and are certain tax benefits. This applies part or all of your foreign sourceschemes. Phishing is the creationfiling a joint return for 2007 with the even if the person was born in earned income. For details, seeand use of email and websites de-same spouse, enter your names 2007. Generally, this number is the Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.signed to mimic legitimate busi-and SSNs in the same order as on person's social security number Citizens and Resident Aliensness emails and websites. Theyour 2006 return. See chapter 1. (SSN). See chapter 1. Abroad.most common form is the act of
sending an email to a user falselySecure your tax records from Individual retirement arrange- Automatic six month extensionclaiming to be an established legiti-identity theft. Identity theft oc- ments (IRAs). The following to file tax return. You can usemate enterprise in an attempt tocurs when someone use your per- paragraphs highlight information Form 4868, Application for Auto-scam the user into surrenderingsonal information such as your that affects IRAs. matic Extension of Time To Fileprivate information that will be usedname, social security number Combat pay. For purposes of U.S. Individual Income Tax Return,for identity theft.(SSN), or other identifying informa- taking an IRA deduction, earned to obtain an automatic 6-month ex-The IRS does not initiate con-tion, without your permission, to income includes any nontaxable tension of time to file your tax re-tacts with taxpayers via emails.commit fraud or other crimes. An combat pay received by a member turn. See chapter 1.Also, the IRS does not request de-identity thief may use your SSN to of the U.S. Armed Forces.
tailed personal information throughget a job or may file a tax return Qualified charitable distribu- Advance earned income credit.
email or ask taxpayers for the PINusing your SSN to receive a refund. tions. If you have reached age If a qualifying child lives with you
numbers, passwords, or similar se- 701/2, you can make a qualified and you expect to qualify for theTo reduce your risk: cret access information for their charitable distribution directly from earned income credit in 2008, you• Protect your SSN, credit card, bank, or other financial your IRA to a qualified organiza- may be able to get part of the credit
accounts. tion. You do not include the distri- paid to you in advance throughout• Ensure your employer is pro- If you receive an unsolicited bution in your income. See the year (by your employer) insteadtecting your SSN, and email claiming to be from the IRS, Publication 590, Individual Retire- of waiting until you file your tax re-
• Be careful when choosing a forward this message to: phish- ment Arrangements (IRAs), for turn. See chapter 36.
tax preparer. ing@irs.gov. You may also report more information.
misuse of the IRS name, logo, Tax Computation Worksheet. If
Call the IRS at 1-800-829-1040 if forms or other IRS property to the Foreign source income. If you your taxable income is $100,000 or
you think your identity has been Treasury Inspector General for Tax are a U.S. citizen with income from more, figure your tax using the Tax
Page 2 Publication 17 (2007)

Computation Worksheet. The Tax to perform certain actions. See Refund on a late filed return. If expanded customer service for tax-
Computation Worksheet is found chapter 1. you were due a refund but you did payers. You can set up a personal
near the end of this publication im- not file a return, you generally must appointment at the most conve-Payment of taxes. Make yourmediately following the Tax Tables. file your return within 3 years from nient Taxpayer Assistance Center,check or money order payable to the date the return was due (includ- on the most convenient businessJoint return responsibility. ªUnited States Treasury.º You can ing extensions) to get that refund. day. See How To Get Tax Help inGenerally, both spouses are re- pay your taxes by credit card, using See chapter 1. the back of this publication.sponsible for the tax and any inter- the Electronic Federal Tax Pay-
est or penalties on a joint tax return. ment System (EFTPS), or, if you Split refunds. If you choose di- Treasury Inspector General forIn some cases, one spouse may be file electronically, by electronic rect deposit of your refund, you Tax Administration. If you wantrelieved of that responsibility for funds withdrawal. See chapter 1. may be able to split the refund into to confidentially report misconduct,items of the other spouse that were two or three accounts. See chapter waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRSFaster ways to file your return.incorrectly reported on the joint re- 1. employee, you can callThe IRS offers fast, accurate waysturn. See chapter 2.
1-800-366-4484 (1-800-877-8339to file your tax return information Privacy Act and paperwork re-Include your phone number on for TTY/TDD users). You can re-without filing a paper tax return. duction information. The IRSyour return. To promptly resolve main anonymous.You can use IRS e-file (electronic Restructuring and Reform Act ofany questions we have in process- filing). See chapter 1. 1998, the Privacy Act of 1974, and Photographs of missing chil-ing your tax return, we would like to the Paperwork Reduction Act ofbe able to call you. Please enter Free electronic filing.  You may dren. The Internal Revenue1980 require that when we ask youyour daytime telephone number on be able to file your 2007 taxes on- Service is a proud partner with thefor information we must first tell youyour tax form next to your signa- line for free thanks to an electronic National Center for Missing andwhat our legal right is to ask for theture. filing agreement. See chapter 1. Exploited Children. Photographs ofinformation, why we are asking for missing children selected by theThird party designee. You can it, how it will be used, what couldChange of address. If you Center may appear in this publica-check the ªYesº box in the ªThird happen if we do not receive it, andchange your address, you should tion on pages that would otherwiseParty Designeeº area of your return whether your response is volun-notify the IRS. See Change of Ad-
be blank. You can help bring theseto authorize the IRS to discuss your tary, required to obtain a benefit, ordress, under What Happens After I
children home by looking at thereturn with a friend, family member, mandatory under the law. A com-File, in chapter 1.
photographs and callingor any other person you choose. plete statement on this subject can
Private delivery services. YouThis allows the IRS to call the per- 1-800-THE-LOSTbe found in your tax form instruc-
may be able to use a designatedson you identified as your designee (1-800-843-5678) if you recognizetion booklet.
private delivery service to mail yourto answer any questions that may a child.
Customer service for taxpayers.tax returns and payments. Seearise during the processing of your
return. It also allows your designee chapter 1. The Internal Revenue Service has ■
Publication 17 (2007) Page 3

Introduction
This publication covers the general whether the income you receive is If you operate your own business daytime phone number, including
taxable. The publication goes on to or have other self-employment in- the area code, in your correspond-rules for filing a federal income tax
explain the standard deduction, the come, such as from babysitting or ence.return. It supplements the informa-
kinds of expenses you may be able selling crafts, see the followingtion contained in your tax form in- You can email us atto deduct, and the various kinds of publications for more information.struction booklet. It explains the tax *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asteriskcredits you may be able to take tolaw to make sure you pay only the • Publication 334, Tax Guide must be included in the address.)reduce your tax.tax you owe and no more. for Small Business (For Indi- Please put ªPublications Com-
viduals Who Use Schedule CThroughout the publication are mentº on the subject line. Although
or C-EZ).examples showing how the tax law we cannot respond individually toHow this publication is ar-
applies in typical situations. Sam- each email, we do appreciate yourranged. This publication closely • Publication 535, Business Ex-ple forms and schedules show you feedback and will consider yourfollows Form 1040, U.S. Individual penses.how to report certain items on your comments as we revise our taxIncome Tax Return. It is divided
• Publication 587, Businessreturn. Also throughout the publica- products.into six parts which cover different
Use of Your Home (Includingtion are flowcharts and tables thatsections of Form 1040. Each part is Ordering forms and publica-Use by Daycare Providers).present tax information in anfurther divided into chapters which tions. Visiteasy-to-understand manner.generally discuss one line of the www.irs.gov/formspubs to
form. Do not worry if you file Form Help from the IRS. There are download forms and publications,Many of the subjects discussed
1040A or Form 1040EZ. Anything many ways you can get help from call 1-800-829-3676, or write to thein this publication are discussed in
included on a line of either of these the IRS. These are explained address below and receive a re-greater detail in other IRS publica-
forms is also included on Form under How To Get Tax Help in the sponse within 10 days after yourtions. References to those other
1040. back of this publication. request is received.publications are provided for your
information.The table of contents inside the
front cover and the index in the National Distribution CenterIcons. Small graphic symbols, Comments and suggestions.
back of the publication are useful P.O. Box 8903or icons, are used to draw your We welcome your comments about
tools to help you find the informa- Bloomington, IL 61702-8903attention to special information. this publication and your sugges-
tion you need. See Table 1, Legend of Icons, be- tions for future editions.
low, for an explanation of each icon You can write to us at the fol- Tax questions. If you have aused in this publication. lowing address:What is in this publication. The tax question, check the information
publication begins with the rules for available on www.irs.gov or call
filing a tax return. It explains: 1-800-829-1040. We cannot an-Internal Revenue ServiceWhat is not covered in this publi-
swer tax questions sent to either ofIndividual Forms andcation. Some material that you1. Who must file a return, the above addresses.Publications Branchmay find helpful is not included in
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I2. Which tax form to use, this publication but can be found in
1111 Constitution Ave. NW,your tax form instruction booklet.3. When the return is due, IRS mission. Provide America'sIR-6526This includes lists of: taxpayers top quality service byWashington, DC 202244. How to e-file your return, and helping them understand and meet• Where to report certain items
5. Other general information. their tax responsibilities and by ap-shown on information docu-
plying the tax law with integrity andments, andIt will help you identify which filing We respond to many letters by fairness to all.status you qualify for, whether you • Recorded tax information top- telephone. Therefore, it would be
can claim any dependents, and ics (TeleTax). helpful if you would include your
Table 1. Legend of Icons
Icon Explanation
Items that may cause you particular problems, or an alert about pending legislation that may be enacted after
CAUTION
!
this publication goes to print.
An Internet site or an email address.
An address you may need.
Items you should keep in your personal records.
RECORDS
Items you may need to figure or a worksheet you may need to complete.
An important phone number.
Helpful information you may need.
TIP
■
Page 4 Publication 17 (2007)

Part One.
The four chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system.The Income Tax They take you through the first steps of filling out a tax returnÐ such as
deciding what your filing status is, how many exemptions you can take, andReturn what form to file. They also discuss recordkeeping requirements, IRS e-file
(electronic filing), certain penalties, and the two methods used to pay tax
during the year: withholding and estimated tax.
Direct deposit of refund. Instead of getting a zone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi-
viduals Serving in Combat Zone, later, underpaper check, you may be able to have your
When Do I Have To File.refund deposited directly into your account at a1. bank or other financial institution. See Direct Adoption taxpayer identification number. IfDeposit under Refunds, later. If you choose di- a child has been placed in your home for pur-rect deposit of your refund, you may be able to poses of legal adoption and you will not be ablesplit the refund among two or three accounts.Filing to get a social security number for the child in
time to file your return, you may be able to get anAlternative payment methods. If you owe
adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN).Information additional tax, you may be able to pay electroni-
For more information, see Social Security Num-cally. See How To Pay, later.
ber, later.
Installment agreement. If you cannot pay the
Taxpayer identification number for aliens.What's New full amount due with your return, you may ask to
If you or your dependent is a nonresident ormake monthly installment payments. See In-
resident alien who does not have and is notWho must file. Generally, the amount of in- stallment Agreement, later, under Amount You
eligible to get a social security number, file Formcome you can receive before you must file a Owe. You may be able to apply online for a
W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayerreturn has been increased. See Table 1-1, Table payment agreement if you owe federal tax, inter-
Identification Number, with the IRS. For more1-2, and Table 1-3 for the specific amounts. est, and penalties. information, see Social Security Number, later.
New penalty for filing erroneous claim for Automatic 6-month extension. You can get
refund or credit. You may have to pay a pen- an automatic 6-month extension to file your tax
alty if you file an erroneous claim for refund or return if, no later than the date your return is due,
credit. See Civil Penalties, near the end of this you file Form 4868, Application for Automatic Introductionchapter. Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual In-
This chapter discusses the following topics.come Tax Return. See Automatic Extension,Frivolous tax submissions. The IRS has
later.published a list of positions that are identified as • Whether you have to file a return.
frivolous. The penalty for filing a frivolous tax Service in combat zone. You are allowed ex- • Which form to use.return is $5,000. Also, the $5,000 penalty will tra time to take care of your tax matters if you areapply to other specified frivolous submissions. • How to file electronically.a member of the Armed Forces who served in aFor more information, see Civil Penalties, later. combat zone, or if you served in the combat • When, how, and where to file your return.
Mailing your return. You may be mailing your
Table 1-1. 2007 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayersreturn to a different address this year because
the IRS has changed the filing location for sev- THEN file a return if eral areas. If you received an envelope with your AND at the end of 2007 you your gross incometax package, please use it. Otherwise, see IF your filing status is... were...* was at least...**
Where Do I File, later in this chapter.
single under 65 $ 8,750
65 or older $10,050
married filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $17,500Reminders
65 or older (one spouse) $18,550
Alternative filing methods. Rather than filing 65 or older (both spouses) $19,600a return on paper, you may be able to file elec-
tronically using IRS e-file. Create your own per- married filing separately any age $ 3,400
sonal identification number (PIN) and file a
head of household under 65 $11,250completely paperless tax return. For more infor-
mation, see Does My Return Have To Be on 65 or older $12,550Paper, later.
qualifying widow(er) with under 65 $14,100
Change of address. If you change your ad-
dependent child 65 or older $15,150dress, you should notify the IRS. See Change of
Address, later, under What Happens After I File. * If you were born on January 1, 1943, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2007.
** Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and services that is not
Enter your social security number. You exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United States (even if you may exclude part
must enter your social security number (SSN) in or all of it). Do not include social security benefits unless you are married filing a separate return and you
lived with your spouse at any time during 2007.the spaces provided on your tax return. If you file
*** If you did not live with your spouse at the end of 2007 (or on the date your spouse died) and your grossa joint return, enter the SSNs in the same order income was at least $3,400, you must file a return regardless of your age.as the names.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 5

File only one federal income tax returnTable 1-2. 2007 Filing Requirements for Dependents
for the year regardless of how manySee chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim you as a dependent. jobs you had, how many Forms W-2
CAUTION
!
you received, or how many states you lived inIf your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, and any of the situations during the year.below apply to you, you must file a return. (See Table 1-3 for other situations when you must
file.)
In this table, earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, and professional fees. It also IndividualsÐIn Generalincludes taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See Scholarships and fellowships in
chapter 12.) Unearned income includes investment-type income such as taxable interest, If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether youordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation, must file a return depends on three factors:taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned income from
a trust. Gross income is the total of your earned and unearned income. 1. Your gross income,
2. Your filing status, and
Single dependentsÐWere you either age 65 or older or blind? 3. Your age.
M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. To find out whether you must file, see Table• Your unearned income was more than $850. 1-1, Table 1-2, and Table 1-3. Even if no table• Your earned income was more than $5,350. shows that you must file, you may need to file to• Your gross income was more than the larger of: get money back. (See Who Should File, later.)• $850, or
• Your earned income (up to $5,050) plus $300. Gross income. This includes all income you
receive in the form of money, goods, property,M Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. and services that is not exempt from tax. It also• Your unearned income was more than $2,150 ($3,450 if 65 or older and blind). includes income from sources outside the• Your earned income was more than $6,650 ($7,950 if 65 or older and blind). United States (even if you can exclude all or part• Your gross income was more than $1,300 ($2,600 if 65 or older and blind) of it). Common types of income are discussed inplus the larger of: Part Two of this publication.• $850, or
Community income. If you are married and• Your earned income (up to $5,050) plus $300.
your permanent home is in a community prop-
Married dependentsÐWere you either age 65 or older or blind? erty state, half of any income described by state
law as community income may be consideredM No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
yours. This affects your federal taxes, including• Your unearned income was more than $850.
whether you must file if you do not file a joint• Your earned income was more than $5,350.
return with your spouse. See Publication 555,• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and
Community Property, for more information.itemizes deductions.
• Your gross income was more than the larger of: Self-employed individuals. If you are
• $850, or self-employed, your gross income includes the
• Your earned income (up to $5,050) plus $300. amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040),
Profit or Loss From Business; line 1 of ScheduleM Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Business;• Your unearned income was more than $1,900 ($2,950 if 65 or older and blind). and line 11 of Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or• Your earned income was more than $6,400 ($7,450 if 65 or older and blind). Loss From Farming. See Self-Employed Per-• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and sons, later, for more information about your filingitemizes deductions. requirements.• Your gross income was more than $1,050 ($2,100 if 65 or older and blind)
plus the larger of: If you do not report all of your
• $850, or self-employment income, your social
• Your earned income (up to $5,050) plus $300. security benefits may be lower when
CAUTION
!
you retire.
Filing status. Your filing status depends on• What happens if you pay too little or too 1. Individuals in general. (There are special
whether you are single or married and on yourmuch tax. rules for surviving spouses, executors, ad-
family situation. Your filing status is determinedministrators, legal representatives, U.S. cit-• What records you should keep and how on the last day of your tax year, which is Decem-izens and residents living outside thelong you should keep them. ber 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 for anUnited States, residents of Puerto Rico,
explanation of each filing status.• How you can change a return you have and individuals with income from U.S. pos-
already filed. sessions.) Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of the
year, you generally can have a higher amount of2. Dependents.
gross income than other taxpayers before you3. Children under age 18. must file. See Table 1-1. You are considered 65
on the day before your 65th birthday. For exam-4. Self-employed persons.Do I Have To ple, if your 65th birthday is on January 1, 2008,5. Aliens. you are considered 65 for 2007.File a Return? The filing requirements for each category are
explained in this chapter.You must file a federal income tax return if you The filing requirements apply even if you do Surviving Spouses,are a citizen or resident of the United States or a not owe tax. Executors, Administrators,resident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filing
and Legal Representativesrequirements for any of the following categories Even if you do not have to file a return,
that apply to you. it may be to your advantage to do so. You must file a final return for a decedent (aSee Who Should File, later.
TIP person who died) if both of the following are true.
• You are the surviving spouse, executor,
administrator, or legal representative.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing Information

• The decedent met the filing requirements words ªBy (your signature), parent for minor religious order who have not taken a vow of
child.º poverty. For more information, see Publicationat the date of death.
517, Social Security and Other Information forChild's earnings. Amounts a child earns by Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers.For more information on rules for filing a dece- performing services are his or her gross income.dent's final return, see Publication 559, Survi- This is true even if under local law the child'svors, Executors, and Administrators. Aliensparents have the right to the earnings and may
actually have received them. If the child does not
Your status as an alienÐresident, nonresident,pay the tax due on this income, the parent isU.S. Citizens and Residents Living or dual-statusÐdetermines whether and howliable for the tax.
Outside the United States you must file an income tax return.
The rules used to determine your alien statusChildren Under Age 18If you are a U.S. citizen or resident living outside are discussed in Publication 519, U.S. Tax
the United States, you must file a return if you Guide for Aliens.If a child's only income is interest and dividendsmeet the filing requirements. For information on
(including capital gain distributions and Alaskaspecial tax rules that may apply to you, see Resident alien. If you are a resident alien forPermanent Fund dividends) and certain otherPublication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and the entire year, you must file a tax return follow-conditions are met, a parent can elect to includeResident Aliens Abroad. It is available at most ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens.the child's income on the parent's return. If thisU.S. embassies and consulates. Also see How Use the forms discussed in this publication.election is made, the child does not have to file aTo Get Tax Help in the back of this publication. return. See Parent's Election To Report Child's Nonresident alien. If you are a nonresidentInterest and Dividends in chapter 31. alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to you
are different from those that apply to U.S. citi-Residents of Puerto Rico
zens and resident aliens. See Publication 519 toSelf-Employed Persons
Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi- find out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you and
dent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. income You are self-employed if you: which forms you should file.
tax return if you meet the filing requirements. • Carry on a trade or business as a soleThis is in addition to any legal requirement you Dual-status taxpayer. If you are a residentproprietor,may have to file an income tax return for Puerto alien for part of the tax year and a nonresident
Rico. alien for the rest of the year, you are a• Are an independent contractor,
dual-status taxpayer. Different rules apply forIf you are a resident of Puerto Rico for the • Are a member of a partnership, or each part of the year. For information onentire year, gross income does not include in-
dual-status taxpayers, see Publication 519.• Are in business for yourself in any othercome from sources within Puerto Rico, except
way.for amounts received as an employee of the
United States or a U.S. agency. If you receive Who Should FileSelf-employment can include work in additionincome from Puerto Rican sources that is not
to your regular full-time business activities, suchsubject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your stan- Even if you do not have to file, you should file aas certain part-time work you do at home or indard deduction. As a result, the amount of in- federal income tax return to get money back ifaddition to your regular job.come you must have before you are required to any of the following conditions apply.
file a U.S. income tax return is lower than the  You must file a return if your gross income is
1. You had federal income tax withheld fromat least as much as the filing requirementapplicable amount in Table 1-1 or Table 1-2. For
your pay or made estimated tax payments.amount for your filing status and age (shown inmore information, see Publication 570, Tax
Table 1-1). Also, you must file Form 1040 andGuide for Individuals With Income From U.S. 2. You qualify for the earned income credit.Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-EmploymentPossessions. See chapter 36 for more information. Tax, if:
3. You qualify for the additional child tax
1. Your net earnings from self-employment credit. See chapter 34 for more informa-Individuals With Income From (excluding church employee income) were tion.U.S. Possessions $400 or more, or 4. You qualify for the health coverage tax
If you had income from Guam, the Common- 2. You had church employee income of credit. See chapter 37 for more informa-
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri- $108.28 or more. (See Table 1-3.) tion.
can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure your 5. You qualify for the refundable credit forrules may apply when determining whether you self-employment tax. Self-employment tax is prior year minimum tax.must file a U.S. federal income tax return. In comparable to the social security and Medicareaddition, you may have to file a return with the tax withheld from an employee's wages. Forindividual island government. See Publication more information about this tax, see Publication570 for more information. 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.
Which FormEmployees of foreign governments or in-Dependents ternational organizations. If you are a U.S. Should I Use?citizen who works in the United States for anIf you are a dependent (one who meets the
international organization, a foreign govern-dependency tests in chapter 3), see Table 1-2 to You must use one of three forms to file yourment, or a wholly owned instrumentality of afind whether you must file a return. You also return: Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Formforeign government, and your employer is notmust file if your situation is described in Table 1040. (But also see Does My Return Have To Berequired to withhold social security and Medi-1-3. on Paper, later.)care taxes from your wages, you must include
your earnings from services performed in theResponsibility of parent. Generally, a child Form 1040EZUnited States when figuring your net earningsis responsible for filing his or her own tax return from self-employment.and for paying any tax on the return. But if a Form 1040EZ is the simplest form to use.dependent child who must file an income tax Ministers. You must include income from
return cannot file it for any reason, such as age, services you performed as a minister when fig- You can use Form 1040EZ if all of the follow-
then a parent, guardian, or other legally respon- uring your net earnings from self-employment, ing apply.
sible person must file it for the child. If the child unless you have an exemption from
cannot sign the return, the parent or guardian self-employment tax. This also applies to Chris- 1. Your filing status is single or married filing
must sign the child's name followed by the tian Science practitioners and members of a jointly. If you were a nonresident alien at
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 7

Table 1-3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2007 Return
If any of the four conditions listed below apply, you must file a return, even if your income is less than the amount shown in Table 1-1 or Table 1-2.
1. You owe any special taxes, such as:
• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Social security or Medicare tax on wages you received from an employer who did not withhold these taxes.
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you reported to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on your group-term life insurance. This amount should be shown in
box 12 of your Form W-2.
• Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter 30.)
• Additional tax on a qualified retirement plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA). (See chapter 17.)
• Additional tax on an Archer MSA or health savings account. (See Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans.)
• Additional tax on a Coverdell ESA or qualified tuition program. (See Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education.)
• Recapture of an investment credit or a low-income housing credit. (See the Instructions for Form 4255, Recapture of Investment
Credit, or Form 8611, Recapture of Low-Income Housing Credit.)
• Recapture tax on the disposition of a home purchased with a federally subsidized mortgage. (See chapter 15.)
• Recapture of the qualified electric vehicle credit. (See chapter 37.)
• Recapture of an education credit. (See chapter 35.)
• Recapture of the Indian employment credit. (See the Instructions for Form 8845, Indian Employment Credit.)
• Recapture of the new markets credit. (See Form 8874, New Markets Credit.)
2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your employer. This amount should be shown in box 9 of your Form
W-2. (See chapter 36.)
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Self-Employed Persons earlier in this chapter.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer social security and
Medicare taxes. (See Publication 334.)
any time in 2007, your filing status must be 1. Your income is only from wages, salaries, b. The credit for the elderly or the dis-
married filing jointly. tips, IRA distributions, pensions and annui- abled. (See chapter 33.) 
ties, taxable social security and railroad re-2. You (and your spouse if married filing a c. The child tax credit. (See chapter 34.) tirement benefits, taxable scholarship andjoint return) were under age 65 and not fellowship grants, interest, ordinary divi- d. The additional child tax credit. (Seeblind at the end of 2007. If you were born dends (including Alaska Permanent Fund chapter 34.)on January 1, 1943, you are considered to dividends), capital gain distributions, andbe age 65 at the end of 2007. e. The education credits. (See chapterunemployment compensation. 35.) 3. You do not claim any dependents. 2. Your taxable income is less than f. The retirement savings contributions4. Your taxable income is less than $100,000. credit. (See chapter 37.)$100,000. 3. Your adjustments to income are for only g. The earned income credit. (See chapter5. Your income is only from wages, salaries, the following items. 36.) tips, unemployment compensation, Alaska
a. Educator expenses. Permanent Fund dividends, taxable schol- 7. You did not have an alternative minimumarship and fellowship grants, and taxable b. IRA deduction. tax adjustment on stock you acquired frominterest of $1,500 or less. the exercise of an incentive stock option.c. Student loan interest deduction. 
6. You did not receive any advance earned (See Publication 525, Taxable and Nontax-d. Tuition and fees deduction.income credit (EIC) payments. able Income.) 
7. You do not claim any adjustments to in- You must meet all of the above requirements4. You do not itemize your deductions. 
come, such as a deduction for IRA contri- to use Form 1040A. If you do not, you must use5. Your taxes are from only the followingbutions or student loan interest. Form 1040.items. If you meet the above requirements, you can8. You do not claim any credits other than the
use Form 1040A even if you received em-a. Tax Table.earned income credit.
ployer-provided dependent care benefits.b. Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter9. You do not owe any household employ-
If you receive a capital gain distribution30.) ment taxes on wages you paid to a house-
that includes unrecaptured sectionhold employee. c. Advance earned income credit (EIC) 1250 gain, section 1202 gain, or col-
CAUTION
!payments, if you received any. (SeeYou must meet all of these requirements to lectibles (28%) gain, you cannot use Formchapter 36.) use Form 1040EZ. If you do not, you must use 1040A. You must use Form 1040.Form 1040A or Form 1040. d. Recapture of an education credit. (See
chapter 35.) Figuring tax. On Form 1040EZ, you can use Form 1040
only the tax table to figure your tax. You cannot e. Form 8615, Tax for Children Under Age
use Form 1040EZ to report any other tax. If you cannot use Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A,18 With Investment Income of More
you must use Form 1040. You can use FormThan $1,700. 
1040 to report all types of income, deductions,Form 1040A f. Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain and credits.Tax Worksheet. 
You may have received Form 1040A or FormIf you do not qualify to use Form 1040EZ, you
1040EZ in the mail because of the return youmay be able to use Form 1040A. 6. You claim only the following tax credits.
filed last year. If your situation has changed this
year, it may be to your advantage to file FormYou can use Form 1040A if all of the follow- a. The credit for child and dependent care
ing apply. expenses. (See chapter 32.) 1040 instead. You may pay less tax by filing
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Form 1040 because you can take itemized de- returns. However, as with a paper return, you completing Section B), 8332 (or certain pages
ductions, some adjustments to income, and are responsible for making sure your return con- from a post-1984 decree or agreement), 8858,
credits you cannot take on Form 1040A or Form tains accurate information and is filed on time. 8864 (if certification or statement required),
1040EZ. 8885, Schedule D-1 (Form 1040) (if you electUsing e-file does not affect your chances of an
not to include your transactions on the electronicIRS examination of your return.
You must use Form 1040 if any of the follow- STCGL or LTCGL records), or Worksheets 1
ing apply. Electronic signatures. Create your own per- through 4 from Publication 517 (or other state-
sonal identification number (PIN) and use a tax ment showing the required information and com-1. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more. professional or file your own paperless return putations).
electronically. If you are married filing jointly, you2. You itemize your deductions. If you are using a tax professional, sign your
and your spouse will each need to create a PIN return electronically, and are required to attach3. You had income that cannot be reported and enter these PINs as your electronic signa- or file any of the forms or worksheets mentionedon Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, including tures. in this caution, you need to use Form 8453, U.S.tax-exempt interest from private activity A PIN is any combination of five numbers, Individual Income Tax Transmittal for an IRSbonds issued after August 7, 1986. except five zeros. If you use a PIN, there is e-file Return, to send a paper copy of the form or
nothing to sign and nothing to mailÐnot even worksheet to the IRS.4. You claim any adjustments to gross in-
your Forms W-2.come other than the adjustments listed For more details, visit www.irs.gov/efile and
The Self-Select PIN method requires you toearlier under Form 1040A. click on ªIndividual Taxpayers.º
verify your identity. You will be asked to enter5. Your Form W-2, box 12, shows uncol- A tax professional can, with your au-your adjusted gross income (AGI) from yourlected employee tax (social security and thorization, generate a PIN for you.originally filed 2006 income tax return, if applica-Medicare tax) on tips (see chapter 6) or ble. Do not use your AGI from an amended
TIPgroup-term life insurance (see chapter 5). return (Form 1040X), math error notice, or other
changed amount from the IRS. AGI is the6. You received $20 or more in tips in any 1
amount shown on your 2006 Form 1040, line 38;month and did not report all of them to Form 8453-OL. Your return is not complete
Form 1040A, line 21; and Form 1040EZ, line 4. Ifyour employer. (See chapter 6.) without your signature. If you are not filing
you do not have your 2006 income tax return, through a tax professional and you are not eligi-7. You were a bona fide resident of Puerto call the IRS at 1-800-829-1040 to get a free ble or choose not to sign your return electroni-Rico and exclude income from sources in transcript of your account. You will also be cally, you must complete, sign, and file FormPuerto Rico. asked to enter your date of birth (DOB). Make 8453-OL, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declara-
sure your DOB is accurate and matches the8. You claim any credits other than the cred- tion for an IRS e-file Online Return.
information on record with the Social Securityits listed earlier under Form 1040A.
Administration by checking your annual Social Power of attorney. If an agent is signing your9. You owe the excise tax on insider stock Security Statement. return for you, a power of attorney (POA) mustcompensation from an expatriated corpo- be filed. Attach the POA to Form 8453 orIf you filed your 2006 tax return elec-ration. 8453-OL and file it using that form's instructions.tronically, you may use your 2006 PIN See Signatures, later for more information on10. Your Form W-2 shows an amount in box to verify your identity instead of your
TIP POAs.12 with a code Z. 2006 AGI. Your 2006 PIN is the PIN you used to
electronically sign your 2006 tax return.11. You had a qualified health savings account State returns. In most states, you can file anfunding distribution from your IRA. If you are filing your return electronically us- electronic state return simultaneously with your
ing a tax professional, you are required to sign federal return. For more information, check with12. You are an employee and your employer the return electronically. The tax professional your local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro-did not withhold social security and Medi- will tell you how. fessional, or the IRS website atcare tax.
www.irs.gov/efile.You cannot sign your return electroni-13. You have to file other forms with your re- cally (but can still file electronically) ifturn to report certain exclusions, taxes, or Refunds. You can have a refund check mailedyou are not using a tax professional
CAUTION
!transactions. to you, or you can have your refund depositedand you are a first-time filer under age 16 at the directly to your checking or savings account or14. You are a debtor in a bankruptcy case filed end of 2007, or if you are attaching or filing split among two or three accounts. With e-file,after October 16, 2005. certain forms, such as Form 1098-C, 2848 (only your refund will be issued faster than if you filedfor an electronic return signed by an agent), on paper.3115, 3468 (if attachments are required), 4136
(if certificate or statement required), 5713, 8283 As with a paper return, you may not get all of
(if a statement is required for Section A or if your refund if you owe certain past-due
Does My Return Have
Table 1-4. Benefits of IRS e-fileTo Be on Paper?
• Free File allows qualified taxpayers to prepare and e-file their own tax returns for free.
You may be able to file a paperless return using
• Free File is available in English and Spanish.IRS e-file (electronic filing). If your 2007 ad-
justed gross income (AGI) is $54,000 or less, • Free File is available online 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
you are eligible for Free File. If you do not qualify
• Get your refund faster than paper filers do, in as little as 10 days with direct deposit.for Free File, then you should check out the
Partners Page on www.irs.gov for low-cost e-file • Sign electronically and file a completely paperless return.options.
• Receive an e-mailed proof of receipt within 48 hours after the IRS receives your return.
• If you owe, you can e-file and authorize an electronic funds withdrawal or pay by credit card.IRS e-file
If you e-file before April 15, 2008, you can schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from
your checking or savings account as late as April 15, 2008.Table 1-4 lists the benefits
• Prepare and file your federal and state returns together and save time.
of IRS e-file. IRS e-file
uses automation to replace most of the manual • IRS computers quickly and automatically check for errors or other missing information.steps needed to process paper returns. As a
• The chance of being audited does not differ whether you e-file or file a paper tax return.result, the processing of e-file returns is faster
and more accurate than the processing of paper
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 9

amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a stu- Note. Tax professionals may charge a fee Private delivery services cannot deliver
items to P.O. boxes. You must use thefor IRS e-file. Fees can vary depending on thedent loan, or child support. See Offset against
U.S. Postal Service to mail any item toprofessional and the specific services rendered.debts under Refunds, later.
CAUTION
!
an IRS P.O. box address.
Refund inquiries. If you do not receive your Electronically filed returns. If you use IRS
refund within 3 weeks after your electronically e-file, your return is considered filed on time if
When Do Ifiled return was accepted by IRS, see Past-Due the authorized electronic return transmitter post-
Refund, later. marks the transmission by the due date. An
Have To File? authorized electronic return transmitter is a par-
ticipant in the IRS e-file program that transmitsAmount you owe. To avoid late-payment April 15, 2008, is the due date for filing your electronic tax return information directly to thepenalties and interest, pay your taxes in full by 2007 income tax return if you use the calendar IRS.April 15, 2008. You can make your payment year. For a quick view of due dates for filing a The electronic postmark is a record of whenelectronically by credit card or by scheduling an return with or without an extension of time to file the authorized electronic return transmitter re-electronic funds withdrawal from your checking (discussed later), see Table 1-5. ceived the transmission of your electronicallyor savings account. filed return on its host system. The date and timeIf you use a fiscal year (a year ending on the
See How To Pay, later, for information on in your time zone controls whether your elec-last day of any month except December, or a
how to pay the amount you owe. tronically filed return is timely.52-53-week year), your income tax return is due
by the 15th day of the 4th month after the close Filing late. If you do not file your return by theof your fiscal year. due date, you may have to pay a failure-to-fileUsing Your Personal Computer When the due date for doing any act for tax penalty and interest. For more information, see
purposesÐfiling a return, paying taxes, etc.Ð Penalties, later. Also see Interest under Amount
You can file your tax return in a fast, falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the You Owe.
easy, and convenient way using your due date is delayed until the next business day. If you were due a refund but you did not file a
personal computer. A computer with return, you generally must file within 3 years
Internet access and tax preparation software are Filing on time. Your paper return is filed on from the date the return was due (including ex-
all you need. Best of all, you can e-file from the time if it is mailed in an envelope that is properly tensions) to get that refund.
comfort of your home 24 hours a day, 7 days a addressed, has enough postage, and is post- Nonresident alien.  If you are a nonresidentweek. marked by the due date. If you send your return alien and earn wages subject to U.S. income taxby registered mail, the date of the registration isIRS approved tax preparation software is withholding, your 2007 U.S. income tax returnthe postmark date. The registration is evidenceavailable for online use on the Internet, for (Form 1040NR or Form 1040NR-EZ) is due by:that the return was delivered. If you send adownload from the Internet, and in retail stores.
• April 15, 2008, if you use a calendar year,return by certified mail and have your receiptFor information, visit our website at orpostmarked by a postal employee, the date onwww.irs.gov/efile. the receipt is the postmark date. The post- • The 15th day of the 4th month after themarked certified mail receipt is evidence that the end of your fiscal year if you use a fiscalreturn was delivered. year.Through Employers and Financial
Private delivery services. If you use a pri-Institutions
If you do not earn wages subject to U.S. in-vate delivery service designated by the IRS to
come tax withholding, your return is due by:Some businesses offer free e-file to their em- send your return, the postmark date generally is
ployees, members, or customers. Others offer it the date the private delivery service records in • June 16, 2008, if you use a calendar year,for a fee. Ask your employer or financial institu- its database or marks on the mailing label. The orprivate delivery service can tell you how to gettion if they offer IRS e-file as an employee,
• The 15th day of the 6th month after thewritten proof of this date.member, or customer benefit.
end of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscalThe following are designated private delivery
year.services.
Free Help With Your Return See Publication 519 for more filing information.• DHL Express (DHL): DHL Same Day
Service, DHL Next Day 10:30 am, DHLFree help in preparing your return is available Filing for a decedent. If you must file a finalNext Day 12:00 pm, DHL Next Day 3:00nationwide from IRS-trained volunteers. The income tax return for a taxpayer who died duringpm, and DHL 2nd Day Service.Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) pro- the year (a decedent), the return is due by thegram is designed to help low-income taxpayers • Federal Express (FedEx): FedEx Priority 15th day of the 4th month after the end of theand the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) Overnight, FedEx Standard Overnight, decedent's normal tax year. See Publicationprogram is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 FedEx 2Day, FedEx International Priority, 559.or older with their tax returns. Many VITA sites and FedEx International First.
offer free electronic filing and all volunteers will • United Parcel Service (UPS): UPS Next Extensions of Time To Filelet you know about the credits and deductions Day Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPSyou may be entitled to claim. To find a site near 2nd Day Air, UPS 2nd Day Air A.M., UPS You may be able to get an extension of time toyou, call 1-800-829-1040. Or to find the nearest Worldwide Express Plus, and UPS World- file your return. Special rules apply for those whoAARP TaxAide site, visit AARP's website at wide Express. were:www.aarp.org/taxaide or call 1-888-227-7669.
For more information on these programs, go to
Table 1-5.  When To File Your 2007 Returnwww.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the
upper right-hand corner. For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns on a calendar year.
For Certain Taxpayers
For Most Taxpayers Outside the U.S.Using a Tax Professional
No extension requested April 15, 2008 June 16, 2008Many tax professionals electronically file tax re-
turns for their clients. You may personally enter Automatic extension October 15, 2008 October 15, 2008
your PIN or complete Form 8879, IRS e-file Form 4868 filed, or credit
card payment madeSignature Authorization, to authorize the tax
professional to enter your PIN on your return.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing Information

• Outside the United States, or and civilians under the direction of the Armed
Forces in support of the Armed Forces.• Serving in a combat zone.
Combat zone. For purposes of the automaticIndividuals Outside the extension, the term ªcombat zoneº includes theAutomatic Extension United States following areas.
If you cannot file your 2007 return by the due You are allowed an automatic 2-month exten- 1. The Persian Gulf area, effective Januarydate, you may be able to get an automatic sion (until June 16, 2008, if you use the calendar 17, 1991.6-month extension of time to file. year) to file your 2007 return and pay any federal
2. The qualified hazardous duty area of Bos-income tax due if:
nia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Mace-Example. If your return is due on April 15,
1. You are a U.S. citizen or resident, and donia, effective November 21, 1995, and2008, you will have until October 15, 2008, to
ending on November 30, 2007.file. 2. On the due date of your return:
3. The qualified hazardous duty area of theIf you do not pay the tax due by the a. You are living outside the United States Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia/regular due date (generally, April 15), and Puerto Rico, and your main place Montenegro), Albania, the Adriatic Sea,you will owe interest. You may also be
CAUTION
! of business or post of duty is outside and the Ionian Sea north of the 39th paral-charged penalties, discussed later. the United States and Puerto Rico, or lel, effective March 24, 1999.
b. You are in military or naval service onHow to get the automatic extension. You 4. Afghanistan, effective September 19,duty outside the United States andcan get the automatic extension by: 2001.Puerto Rico.
See Publication 3, Armed Forces' Tax1. Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), or
Guide, for information about other tax benefitsHowever, if you pay the tax due after the2. Filing a paper form. available to military personnel serving in a com-regular due date (generally, April 15), interest
bat zone.will be charged from that date until the date the
tax is paid.E-file options. There are two ways you can Extension period. The deadline for filing yourIf you served in a combat zone or qualifieduse e-file to get an extension of time to file. return, paying any tax due, and filing a claim forhazardous duty area, you may be eligible for aComplete Form 4868, Application for Automatic refund is extended for at least 180 days after thelonger extension of time to file. See IndividualsExtension of Time To File U.S. Individual In- later of:Serving in Combat Zone, later, for special rulescome Tax Return, to use as a worksheet. If you
that apply to you.think you may owe tax when you file your return, 1. The last day you are in a combat zone or
use Part II of the form to estimate your balance the last day the area qualifies as a combatMarried taxpayers. If you file a joint return,due. If you e-file Form 4868 to the IRS, do not zone, oronly one spouse has to qualify for this automaticalso send a paper Form 4868. 2. The last day of any continuous qualifiedextension. If you and your spouse file separate
E-file using your personal computer or a hospitalization for injury from service in thereturns, this automatic extension applies only to
tax professional.  You can use a tax software combat zone.the spouse who qualifies.
package with your personal computer or a tax In addition to the 180 days, your deadline isprofessional to file Form 4868 electronically. How to get the extension. To use this auto- also extended by the number of days you hadYou will need to provide certain information from matic extension, you must attach a statement to left to take action with the IRS when you enteredyour tax return for 2006. If you wish to make a your return explaining what situation qualified the combat zone. For example, you have 3 1/2
payment by electronic funds withdrawal, see you for the extension. (See the situations listed months (January 1 ± April 15) to file your taxElectronic payment options, under How To Pay, under (2), earlier.) return. Any days left in this period when youlater in this chapter. entered the combat zone (or the entire 3 1/2
Extensions beyond 2 months. If you cannotE-file and pay by credit card. You can get months if you entered it before the beginning offile your return within the automatic 2-monthan extension by paying part or all of your esti- the year) are added to the 180 days. See Exten-extension period, you may be able to get anmate of tax due by using a credit card. You can sion of Deadlines in Publication 3 for more infor-additional 4-month extension, for a total of 6do this by phone or over the Internet. You do not mation.months. File Form 4868 and check the box onfile Form 4868. See Credit card, under How To The above rules on the extension for filingline 8.Pay, later in this chapter. your return also apply when you are deployedThis additional 4-month extension of time to outside the United States (away from your per-file is not a further extension of time to pay. You manent duty station) while participating in a des-Filing a paper Form 4868. You can get an can use a credit card to pay your estimate of tax ignated contingency operation.extension of time to file by filing a paper Form due. See How To Pay, later in this chapter.4868. Mail it to the address shown in the form
instructions. No further extension. An extension of more
If you want to make a payment with the form, than 6 months will generally not be granted.
make your check or money order payable to the However, if you are outside the United States How Do I Prepare
ªUnited States Treasury.º Write your SSN, day- and meet certain tests, you may be granted a
time phone number, and ª2007 Form 4868º on longer extension. For more information, see Fur- My Return?
your check or money order. ther extensions under When To File and Pay in
This section explains how to get ready to fill inPublication 54.
When to file. You must request the automatic your tax return and when to report your income
extension by the due date for your return. You and expenses. It also explains how to complete
can file your return any time before the 6-month certain sections of the form. You may find TableIndividuals Serving in
extension period ends. 1-6 helpful when you prepare your return.Combat Zone
In most cases, based on the paper return you
When you file your return. Enter any pay- The deadline for filing your tax return, paying filed last year, the IRS will mail you Form 1040,
ment you made related to the extension of time any tax you may owe, and filing a claim for Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ with related in-
to file on Form 1040, line 69. If you file Form refund is automatically extended if you serve in a structions. Before you fill in the form, look at the
1040EZ or Form 1040A, include that payment in combat zone. This applies to members of the form instructions to see if you need, or would
your total payments on Form 1040EZ, line 9, or Armed Forces, as well as merchant marines benefit from filing, a different form this year. Also
Form 1040A, line 42. Also enter ªForm 4868º serving aboard vessels under the operational see if you need any additional forms or sched-
and the amount paid in the space to the left of control of the Department of Defense, Red ules. You may also want to read Does My Re-
line 9 or line 42. Cross personnel, accredited correspondents, turn Have To Be on Paper, earlier.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 11

If you do not receive a tax return package in the tax year is constructively received by you inAccounting Periods
that year. A check that was ªmade available tothe mail, or if you need other forms, you can
Most individual tax returns cover a calendar youº includes a check you have already re-order them or print them from the Internet. See
yearÐthe 12 months from January 1 through ceived, but not cashed or deposited. It also in-How To Get Tax Help in the back of this publica-
December 31. If you do not use a calendar year, cludes, for example, your last paycheck of thetion.
your accounting period is a fiscal year. A regular year that your employer made available for you
Table 1-6. Six Steps for Preparing fiscal year is a 12-month period that ends on the to pick up at the office before the end of the year.
Your Return last day of any month except December. A It is constructively received by you in that year
52-53-week fiscal year varies from 52 to 53 whether or not you pick it up before the end of
1 Ð Get your records together for income weeks and always ends on the same day of the the year or wait to receive it by mail after the end
and expenses. week. of the year.
You choose your accounting period (tax2 Ð Get the forms, schedules, and No constructive receipt. There may beyear) when you file your first income tax return. Itpublications you need. facts to show that you did not constructivelycannot be longer than 12 months. receive income.3 Ð Fill in your return.
More information. For more information on
4 Ð Check your return to make sure it is Example. Alice Johnson, a teacher, agreedaccounting periods, including how to changecorrect. to her school board's condition that, in her ab-your accounting period, see Publication 538,
sence, she would receive only the differenceAccounting Periods and Methods.5 Ð Sign and date your return.
between her regular salary and the salary of a
6 Ð Attach all required forms and substitute teacher hired by the school board.
schedules. Therefore, Alice did not constructively receiveAccounting Methods
the amount by which her salary was reduced to
Your accounting method is the way you account pay the substitute teacher.
for your income and expenses. Most taxpayersSubstitute tax forms. You cannot use your Accrual method. If you use an accrualuse either the cash method or an accrualown version of a tax form unless it meets the method, you generally report income when youmethod. You choose a method when you filerequirements explained in Publication 1167, earn it, rather than when you receive it. Youyour first income tax return. If you want toGeneral Rules and Specifications for Substitute generally deduct your expenses when you incurchange your accounting method after that, youForms and Schedules. them, rather than when you pay them.generally must get IRS approval.
Income paid in advance. An advance pay-Form W-2. If you are an employee, you should Cash method. If you use this method, report ment of income is generally included in grossreceive Form W-2 from your employer. You will all items of income in the year in which you income in the year you receive it. Your methodneed the information from this form to prepare actually or constructively receive them. Gener- of accounting does not matter as long as theyour return. See Form W-2 under Credit for ally, you deduct all expenses in the year you income is available to you. An advance paymentWithholding and Estimated Tax in chapter 4. actually pay them. This is the method most indi- may include rent or interest you receive in ad-Your employer is required to provide or send vidual taxpayers use. vance and pay for services you will performForm W-2 to you no later than January 31, 2008.
later.Constructive receipt. Generally, you con-If it is mailed, you should allow adequate time to
A limited deferral until the next tax year maystructively receive income when it is credited toreceive it before contacting your employer. If
be allowed for certain advance payments. Seeyour account or set apart in any way that makesyou still do not get the form by February 15, the
Publication 538 for specific information.it available to you. You do not need to haveIRS can help you by requesting the form from
physical possession of it. For example, interestyour employer. When you request IRS help, be Additional information. For more informationcredited to your bank account on December 31,prepared to provide the following information. on accounting methods, including how to2007, is taxable income to you in 2007 if you change your accounting method, see Publica-• Your name, address (including ZIP code), could have withdrawn it in 2007 (even if the tion 538.and phone number. amount is not entered in your passbook or with-
drawn until 2008).• Your SSN.
Social Security NumberGarnisheed wages. If your employer uses• Your dates of employment.
your wages to pay your debts, or if your wages You must enter your social security number• Your employer's name, address (including are attached or garnisheed, the full amount is (SSN) in the space provided on your return. BeZIP code), and phone number. constructively received by you. You must in- sure the SSN on your return is the same as theclude these wages in income for the year you SSN on your social security card. If you arewould have received them.Form 1099. If you received certain types of married, enter the SSNs for both you and your
income, you may receive a Form 1099. For spouse, whether you file jointly or separately.Debts paid for you. If another personexample, if you received taxable interest of $10 If you are filing a joint return, write the SSNscancels or pays your debts (but not as a gift oror more, the payer is required to provide or send in the same order as the names. Use this sameloan), you have constructively received theForm 1099 to you no later than January 31, order in submitting other forms and documentsamount and generally must include it in your2008. If it is mailed, you should allow adequate to the IRS.gross income for the year. See Canceled Debtstime to receive it before contacting the payer. If in chapter 12 for more information. Name change. If you changed your name be-you still do not get the form by February 15, call
cause of marriage, divorce, etc., be sure to re-Payment to third party. If a third party isthe IRS for help.
port the change to your local Social Securitypaid income from property you own, you have
Administration (SSA) office before filing yourconstructively received the income. It is theWhen Do I Report My return. This prevents delays in processing yoursame as if you had actually received the income
return and issuing refunds. It also safeguardsand paid it to the third party.Income and Expenses?
your future social security benefits.Payment to an agent. Income an agent re-You must figure your taxable income on the ceives for you is income you constructively re- Dependent's social security number. Youbasis of a tax year. A ªtax yearº is an annual ceived in the year the agent receives it. If you must provide the SSN of each dependent youaccounting period used for keeping records and indicate in a contract that your income is to be claim, regardless of the dependent's age. Thisreporting income and expenses. You must ac- paid to another person, you must include the requirement applies to all dependents (not justcount for your income and expenses in a way amount in your gross income when the other your children) claimed on your tax return.that clearly shows your taxable income. The way person receives it.you do this is called an accounting method. This Exception. If your child was born and died
section explains which accounting periods and Check received or available. A valid check in 2007 and you do not have an SSN for the
methods you can use. that was made available to you before the end of child, you may attach a copy of the child's birth
Page 12 Chapter 1 Filing Information

certificate instead. If you do, enter ªDIEDº in a nonresident or resident alien and you do not Example. Line 1 is $500. Line 3 is $500.
column (2) of line 6c (Form 1040 or 1040A). have and are not eligible to get an SSN. This Line 5 asks you to enter the smaller of line 1 or 3.
also applies to an alien spouse or dependent. To Enter $500 on line 5.No social security number. File Form SS-5, apply for an ITIN, file Form W-7 with the IRS. ItApplication for a Social Security Card, with your Negative amounts. If you need to enter ausually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to get an ITIN.local SSA office to get an SSN for yourself or negative amount, put the amount in parenthesesEnter the ITIN on your tax return wherever anyour dependent. It usually takes about 2 weeks rather than using a minus sign. To combineSSN is requested.to get an SSN. If you or your dependent is not positive and negative amounts, add all the posi-
If you are applying for an ITIN for your-eligible for an SSN, see Individual taxpayer tive amounts together and then subtract the
self, your spouse, or a dependent inidentification number (ITIN), later. negative amounts.
order to file your tax return, attach yourIf you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, you
TIP
completed tax return to your Form W-7. See themust show proof of age, identity, and citizenship AttachmentsForm W-7 instructions for how and where to file.or alien status with your Form SS-5. If you are 12
or older and have never been assigned an SSN, Depending on the form you file and the itemsAn ITIN is for tax use only. It does notyou must appear in person with this proof at an reported on your return, you may have to com-entitle you or your dependent to socialSSA office. plete additional schedules and forms and attachsecurity benefits or change the em-
CAUTION
!Form SS-5 is available at any SSA office, on them to your return.ployment or immigration status of either of youthe Internet at www.socialsecurity.gov, or by
under U.S. law. You may be able to file a paperlesscalling 1-800-772-1213. If you have any ques-
return using IRS e-file. There's nothingtions about which documents you can use as
to sign, attach, or mail, not even yourproof of age, identity, or citizenship, contact your Penalty for not providing social security
TIP
Forms W-2.SSA office. number. If you do not include your SSN or the
If your dependent does not have an SSN by SSN of your spouse or dependent as required,
Form W-2. Form W-2 is a statement from yourthe time your return is due, you may want to ask you may have to pay a penalty. See the discus-
employer of wages and other compensationfor an extension of time to file, as explained sion onPenalties , later, for more information.
paid to you and taxes withheld from your pay.earlier under When Do I Have To File.
You should have a Form W-2 from each em-If you do not provide a required SSN or if you SSN on correspondence. If you write to the ployer. Be sure to attach a copy of Form W-2 inprovide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in- IRS about your tax account, be sure to include the place indicated on the front page of yourcreased and any refund may be reduced. your SSN (and the name and SSN of your return. Attach it only to the front page of yourspouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre-Adoption taxpayer identification number return, not to any attachments. For more infor-spondence. Because your SSN is used to iden-(ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting a mation, see Form W-2 in chapter 4.tify your account, this helps the IRS respond tochild who is a U.S. citizen or resident and cannot If you received a Form 1099-R, Distributionsyour correspondence promptly.get an SSN for the child until the adoption is From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or
final, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead of Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-
an SSN. Presidential Election tracts, etc., showing federal income tax with-
File Form W-7A, Application for Taxpayer held, attach a copy of that form in the placeCampaign FundIdentification Number for Pending U.S. Adop- indicated on the front page of your return.
tions, with the IRS to get an ATIN if all of the This fund helps pay for Presidential election Form 1040EZ. There are no additional sched-following are true. campaigns. The fund reduces candidates' de- ules to file with Form 1040EZ.pendence on large contributions from individu-• You have a child living with you who was
als and groups and places candidates on anplaced in your home for legal adoption. Form 1040A. Attach the additional schedules
equal financial footing in the general election. If and forms that you had to complete behind the• You cannot get the child's existing SSN you want $3 to go to this fund, check the box. If Form 1040A in order by number. If you are filingeven though you have made a reasonable you are filing a joint return, your spouse can also Schedule EIC, put it last. Do not attach itemsattempt to get it from the birth parents, the have $3 go to the fund. If you check a box, your unless required to do so.placement agency, and other persons. tax or refund will not change.
Form 1040. Attach any forms and schedules• You cannot get an SSN for the child from
behind Form 1040 in order of the ªAttachmentthe SSA because, for example, the adop- Computations Sequence Numberº shown in the upper righttion is not final.
corner of the form or schedule. Then arrange allThe following information on entering numbers• You cannot get an individual taxpayer other statements or attachments in the sameon your tax return may be useful in making theidentification number (ITIN) (discussed order as the forms and schedules they relate toreturn easier to complete.later) for the child. and attach them last. Do not attach items unless
required to do so.• You are eligible to claim the child as a Rounding off dollars. You may round offdependent on your tax return. cents to whole dollars on your return and sched-
Third Party Designeeules. If you do round to whole dollars, you mustAfter the adoption is final, you must apply for an
round all amounts. To round, drop amountsSSN for the child. You cannot continue using the You can authorize the IRS to discuss your returnunder 50 cents and increase amounts from 50 toATIN. with a friend, family member, or any other per-99 cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39See Form W-7A for more information. son you choose. If you check the ªYesº box inbecomes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3. the Third party designee area of your 2007 taxIf you have to add two or more amounts toNonresident alien spouse. If your spouse is return and provide the information required, youfigure the amount to enter on a line, includea nonresident alien, your spouse must have are authorizing:cents when adding the amounts and round offeither an SSN or an ITIN if:
only the total. 1. The IRS to call the designee to answer any• You file a joint return,
questions that arise during the processingExample. You receive two Forms W-2: one• You file a separate return and claim an of your return, andshowing wages of $5,000.55 and one showingexemption for your spouse, or
2. The designee towages of $18,500.73. On Form 1040, line 7, you• Your spouse is filing a separate return. would enter $23,501 ($5,000.55 + $18,500.73 = a. Give information that is missing from$23,501.28), not $23,502 ($5,001 + $18,501).If your spouse is not eligible for an SSN, see the your return to the IRS,next discussion.
Equal amounts. If you are asked to enter the b. Call the IRS for information about the
Individual taxpayer identification number smaller or larger of two equal amounts, enter processing of your return or the status
(ITIN). The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are that amount. of your refund or payments,
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 13

c. Receive copies of notices or transcripts might be considered a valid signature under a Split refunds. If you choose direct deposit,
related to your return, upon request, state's law. you may be able to split the refund and have it
and deposited among two or three accounts. If you
want to split your refund, check the box on theSpouse unable to sign. If your spouse is una-d. Respond to certain IRS notices about line for the amount you want refunded to you.ble to sign for any reason, see Signing a jointmath errors, offsets (see Refunds, Then, complete Form 8888, Direct Deposit ofreturn in chapter 2.later), and return preparation. Refund to More Than One Account, and attach it
to your return.Child's return. If a child has to file a tax returnThe authorization will automatically end no but cannot sign the return, the child's parent,later than the due date (without any extensions) Overpayment less than one dollar. If yourguardian, or another legally responsible personfor filing your 2008 tax return. This is April 15, overpayment is less than one dollar, you will notmust sign the child's name, followed by the2009, for most people. get a refund unless you ask for it in writing.words ªBy (your signature), parent for minor
See your form instructions for more informa- child.º
tion. Cashing your refund check. Cash your tax
refund check soon after you receive it. ChecksIf you want to allow the paid preparer Paid Preparer not cashed within 12 months of the date they arewho signed your return to discuss it
issued will be canceled and the proceeds re-with the IRS, just enter ªPreparerº in Generally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist in
TIP turned to the IRS.the space for the designee's name. preparing, or review your tax return must sign it If your check has been canceled, you canand fill in the other blanks in the paid preparer's apply to the IRS to have it reissued.area of your return.Signatures A paid preparer can sign the return manually Refund more or less than expected. If you
or use a rubber stamp, mechanical device, orYou must sign and date your return. If you file a receive a check for a refund you are not entitled
computer software program. The preparer isjoint return, both you and your spouse must sign to, or for an overpayment that should have been
personally responsible for affixing his or her sig-the return, even if only one of you had income. credited to estimated tax, do not cash the check.
nature to the return. Call the IRS.If you file a joint return, both spouses If the preparer is self-employed (that is, not If you receive a check for more than theare generally liable for the tax, and the employed by any person or business to prepare refund you claimed, do not cash the check untilentire tax liability may be assessed
CAUTION
! the return), he or she should check the you receive a notice explaining the difference.against either spouse. See chapter 2. self-employed box in the Paid Preparer's Use If your refund check is for less than you
Only space on the return. claimed, it should be accompanied by a noticeIf you e-file your return, you can use an
explaining the difference. Cashing the checkelectronic signature to sign your return. The preparer must give you a copy of your
does not stop you from claiming an additionalSee Does My Return Have To Be on return in addition to the copy filed with the IRS.
TIP
amount of refund.Paper, earlier. If you prepare your own return, leave this If you did not receive a notice and you havearea blank. If another person prepares your re-If you are due a refund, it cannot be issued any questions about the amount of your refund,turn and does not charge you, that personunless you have signed your return. you should wait 2 weeks. If you still have notshould not sign your return.Enter your occupation in the space provided received a notice, call the IRS.If you have questions about whether ain the signature section. If you file a joint return,
preparer must sign your return, contact any IRSenter both your occupation and your spouse's Offset against debts. If you are due a refundoffice.occupation. Entering your daytime phone num- but have not paid certain amounts you owe, all
ber may help speed the processing of your re- or part of your refund may be used to pay all or
turn. part of the past-due amount. This includesRefunds
past-due federal income tax, other federal debts
When someone can sign for you. You can When you complete your return, you will deter- (such as student loans), state income tax, and
appoint an agent to sign your return if you are: mine if you paid more income tax than you child and spousal support payments. You will be
owed. If so, you can get a refund of the amount notified if the refund you claimed has been offset1. Unable to sign the return because of dis- you overpaid or, if you file Form 1040 or Form against your debts.ease or injury, 1040A, you can choose to apply all or part of the Joint return and injured spouse. When a2. Absent from the United States for a contin- overpayment to your next year's (2008) esti- joint return is filed and only one spouse owes auous period of at least 60 days before the mated tax. You cannot have your overpayment past-due amount, the other spouse can be con-due date for filing your return, or applied to your 2008 estimated tax if you file sidered an injured spouse. An injured spouseForm 1040EZ.3. Given permission to do so by the IRS of- should file Form 8379, Injured Spouse Alloca-
fice in your area. If you choose to have a 2007 overpay- tion, if both of the following apply and the spouse
ment applied to your 2008 estimated wants a refund of his or her share of the over-
Power of attorney. A return signed by an tax, you cannot change your mind and payment shown on the joint return.
CAUTION
!
agent in any of these cases must have a power have any of it refunded to you after the due date
1. You are not be legally obligated to pay theof attorney (POA) attached that authorizes the (without extensions) of your 2007 return.
past-due amount.agent to sign for you. You can use a POA that Follow the form instructions to complete the
states that the agent is granted authority to sign 2. You made and reported tax paymentsentries to claim your refund and/or to apply your
the return, or you can use Form 2848, Power of (such as federal income tax withheld fromoverpayment to your 2008 estimated tax.
Attorney and Declaration of Representative. your wages or estimated tax payments), orIf your refund for 2007 is large, youPart I of Form 2848 must state that the agent is claimed a refundable tax credit (such asmay want to decrease the amount ofgranted authority to sign the return. the earned income credit or additional childincome tax withheld from your pay in
TIP tax credit).Unable to sign. If the taxpayer is mentally 2008. See chapter 4 for more information.
incompetent and cannot sign the return, it must
be signed by a court-appointed representative Instead of getting a pa- Note. If the injured spouse's residence was
Simple. Safe. Secure.
DIRECT DEPOSIT
who can act for the taxpayer. per check, you may be in a community property state at any time during
able to have your refund deposited directly intoIf the taxpayer is mentally competent but the tax year, then the injured spouse must only
your checking or savings account, including anphysically unable to sign the return or POA, a meet (1) above.
individual retirement arrangement. Follow thevalid ªsignatureº is defined under state law. It If you have not filed your joint return and you
form instructions to request direct deposit.can be anything that clearly indicates the tax- know that your joint refund will be offset, file
If the direct deposit cannot be done, the IRSpayer's intent to sign. For example, the tax- Form 8379 with your return. You should receive
will send a check instead.payer's ªXº with the signatures of two witnesses your refund within 14 weeks from the date the
Page 14 Chapter 1 Filing Information

paper return is filed or within 11 weeks from the ª2007 Form 1040º on the front of your check or available through some tax software packages
date the return is filed electronically. money order. If you file an amended return and tax professionals. You can also pay by
If you filed your joint return and your joint (Form 1040X) for 2006 and you owe tax, show credit card using the telephone or the Internet.
refund was offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When your name, address, SSN, daytime phone num- Electronic funds withdrawal. You canfiled after offset, it can take up to 8 weeks to ber, and ª2006 Form 1040Xº on the front of your e-file and pay in a single step by authorizing anreceive your refund. Do not attach the previously check or money order. electronic funds withdrawal from your checkingfiled tax return, but do include copies of all Enclose your payment with your return, but or savings account. If you select this paymentForms W-2 and W-2G for both spouses and any do not attach it to the form. If you filed Form option, you will need to have your account num-Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld. The 1040, complete Form 1040-V, Payment ber, your financial institution's routing transitprocessing of Form 8379 may be delayed if Voucher, and enclose it with your payment and number, and account type (checking or sav-these forms are not attached, or if the form is return. Form 1040-V will help us process your ings). You can schedule the payment for anyincomplete when filed. payment more accurately and efficiently. Follow future date up to and including the return dueA separate Form 8379 must be filed for each the instructions that come with the form. date.tax year to be considered. Do not mail cash with your return. If you pay
Be sure to check with your financialcash at an IRS office, keep the receipt as part ofAn injured spouse claim is different institution to make sure that an elec-your records.from an innocent spouse relief request. tronic funds withdrawal is allowed and
CAUTION
!An injured spouse uses Form 8379 to Payment not honored. If your check or
CAUTION
! to get the correct routing and account numbers.request the division of the tax overpayment at- money order is not honored by your bank (or
tributed to each spouse. An innocent spouse other financial institution) and the IRS does not Electronic Federal Tax Payment System
uses Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse receive the funds, you still owe the tax. In addi- (EFTPS). EFTPS is a free tax payment system
Relief, to request relief from joint liability for tax, tion, you may be subject to a dishonored check that all individual and business taxpayers can
interest, and penalties on a joint return for items penalty. use. You can make payments online or by
of the other spouse (or former spouse) that were phone.
incorrectly reported on the joint return. For infor- Electronic payment options. Electronic pay- Here are just a few of the benefits of this
mation on innocent spouses, see Relief from ment options are convenient, safe, and secure easy-to-use system.
joint liability under Filing a Joint Return in chap- methods for paying individual income taxes.
• Convenient and flexible. You can use it toter 2. There's no check to write, money order to buy,
schedule payments in advance. For exam-or voucher to mail. Payments can be made 24
ple, you can schedule estimated tax pay-hours a day, 7 days a week.
Amount You Owe ments (Form 1040-ES) or installment
Credit card. You can use your American agreement payments weekly, monthly, or
Express Card, Discover Card, MasterCardWhen you complete your return, you will deter- quarterly.
card, or Visa card.mine if you have paid the full amount of tax that • Fast and accurate. You can make a taxTo pay by credit card, call a service provideryou owe. If you owe additional tax, you should payment in minutes. Because there areand follow the recorded instructions. You canpay it with your return. verification steps along the way, you canalso pay by credit card over the Internet using aIf the IRS figures your tax for you, you will check and review your information beforeservice provider's website.receive a bill for any tax that is due. You should sending it.The service providers charge a conveniencepay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date of
fee based on the amount you are paying. Feesyour return, if later). See Tax Figured by IRS in • Safe and secure. It offers the highest
may vary between the providers. You will be toldchapter 30. available levels of security. Every transac-
what the fee is during the transaction and will tion receives an immediate confirmation.If you do not pay your tax when due, have the option to continue or end the transac-you may have to pay a failure-to-pay tion. You may also obtain the convenience fee For more information or details on enrolling,penalty. See Penalties, later. For more
CAUTION
! by calling the service provider's automated cus- visit www.eftps.gov or call EFTPS Customerinformation about your balance due, see Publi- tomer service telephone number or visiting the Service at 1-800-316-6541 (individual) orcation 594, The IRS Collection Process. provider's website. 1-800-555-4477 (business). TTY/TDD help is
available by calling 1-800-733-4829.If the amount you owe for 2007 is large, Do not add the convenience fee to your
you may want to increase the amount tax payment. Estimated tax payments. Do not include anyof income tax withheld from your pay or
TIP
CAUTION
! 2008 estimated tax payment in the payment formake estimated tax payments for 2008. See your 2007 income tax return. See chapter 4 forchapter 4 for more information. information on how to pay estimated tax.
Service Providers
How To Pay InterestLink2Gov Corporation
If you have an amount due on your tax return, Interest is charged on tax you do not pay by theTo make ayou can pay by check, money order, or credit due date of your return. Interest is charged evenpayment, call .... 1-888-PAY-1040 SM
card. If you filed electronically, you also may be if you get an extension of time for filing.or ........... 1-888-729-1040
able to make your payment electronically.
For Customer If the IRS figures your tax for you, inter-
You do not have to pay if the amount Service ........ 1-888-658-5465 est cannot start earlier than the 31st
you owe is less than $1. day after the IRS sends you a bill. ForWeb Address .... www.PAY1040.com
TIP
TIP
information, see Tax Figured by IRS in chapter
30.
Official Payments Corporation
Check or money order. If you pay by check or Interest on penalties. Interest is charged onTo make a
money order, make it out to the ªUnited States the failure-to-file penalty, the accuracy-relatedpayment, call .... 1-800-2PAY-TAX SM
Treasury.º Show your correct name, address, penalty, and the fraud penalty from the due dateor ........... 1-800-272-9829
SSN, daytime phone number, and the tax year of the return (including extensions) to the date ofFor Customerand form number on the front of your check or payment. Interest on other penalties starts onService ........ 1-877-754-4413money order. If you are filing a joint return, enter the date of notice and demand, but is not
Web Address .... www.officialpayments.comthe SSN shown first on your tax return. charged on penalties paid within 21 calendar
For example, if you file Form 1040 for 2007 days from the date of the notice (or within 10
and you owe additional tax, show your name, You can e-file and pay in a single step by business days if the notice is for $100,000 or
address, SSN, daytime phone number, and authorizing a credit card payment. This option is more).
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 15

Interest due to IRS error or delay. All or part c. Entered into an installment agreement that form. (More information on electronic filing
of any interest you were charged can be forgiven for the payment of any income tax, is found earlier in this chapter.)
if the interest is due to an unreasonable error or The label helps the IRS to correctly identify
3. You show you cannot pay your income taxdelay by an officer or employee of the IRS in your account. It also saves processing costs and
in full when due,performing a ministerial or managerial act. speeds up processing so that refunds can be
issued sooner.A ministerial act is a procedural or mechani- 4. The tax will be paid in full in 3 years orcal act that occurs during the processing of your less, and You must write your SSN in the spacescase. A managerial act includes personnel provided on your tax return.5. You agree to comply with the tax lawstransfers and extended personnel training. A
CAUTION
!
while your agreement is in effect.decision concerning the proper application of
federal tax law is not a ministerial or managerial
act. Online payment agreement (OPA) applica- Correcting the label. Make necessary nameThe interest can be forgiven only if you are tion. You may be able to apply online for a and address changes on the label. If you havenot responsible in any important way for the payment agreement if you owe federal tax, inter- an apartment number that is not shown on theerror or delay and the IRS has notified you in est, and penalties. If you have received a bal- label, please write it in. If you changed yourwriting of the deficiency or payment. For more ance due notice from the IRS and you cannot name, see the discussion under Social Securityinformation, see Publication 556, Examination pay in full, you may request a payment agree- Number, earlier.of Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Re- ment. The OPA application allows you, or your
fund. No label. If you did not receive a tax returnauthorized representative, to self-qualify for and
Interest and certain penalties may also be package with a label, print or type your nameapply for a payment agreement, receive notifica-
suspended for a limited period if you filed your and address in the spaces provided at the top oftion of approval, and arrange a payment sched-
return by the due date (including extensions) Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you are marriedule.
and the IRS does not provide you with a notice filing a separate return, do not enter yourTo use the OPA application, you must have
specifically stating your liability and the basis for spouse's name in the space at the top. Instead,filed all required tax returns. You should also
it before the close of the 36-month period begin- enter his or her name in the space provided onhave the following information available:
ning on the later of: line 3.• Balance due notice from the IRS. If you file Form 1040EZ and you do not have• The date the return is filed, or a label, print or type this information in the• Social security number or individual tax-
• The due date of the return without regard spaces provided.payer identification number.
to extensions.
• Personal identification number, which can P.O. box. If your post office does not deliver
For more information, see Publication 556. be established online using the caller iden- mail to your street address and you have a P.O.
tification number from the balance due no- box, print your P.O. box number on the line for
Installment Agreement tice. your present home address instead of your
street address.If you cannot pay the full amount due with your  For more information and to access the OPA
Foreign address. If your address is outsidereturn, you can ask to make monthly installment application, go to www.irs.gov, use the
the United States or its possessions or territo-payments for the full or a partial amount. How- pull-down menu under ªI need to...º and select
ries, enter the information on the line for ªCity,ever, you will be charged interest and may be ªSet Up a Payment Plan.º
town or post office, state, and ZIP codeº in thecharged a late payment penalty on the tax not
following order:paid by the date your return is due, even if your
Gift To Reduce Debtrequest to pay in installments is granted. If your
1. City,request is granted, you must also pay a fee. To Held by the Public
limit the interest and penalty charges, pay as 2. Province or state, and
much of the tax as possible with your return. But You can make a contribution (gift) to 3. Name of foreign country. (Do not abbrevi-before requesting an installment agreement, reduce debt held by the public. If you ate the name of the country.)you should consider other less costly alterna- wish to do so, make a separate check
tives, such as a bank loan. Follow the country's practice for entering thepayable to ªBureau of the Public Debt.ºTo ask for an installment agreement, use postal code.Send your check to:Form 9465, Installment Agreement Request.
You should receive a response to your request
within 30 days. But if you file your return after Bureau of the Public DebtMarch 31, it may take longer for a reply. Where Do I File?Department GIn addition to paying by check or money P.O. Box 2188order, you can use a credit card or EFTPS to After you complete your return, you must send itParkersburg, WV 26106-2188.make installment agreement payments. See to the IRS. You can mail it or you may be able toCredit card and Electronic Federal Tax Payment file it electronically. See Does My Return HaveOr, enclose your separate check in theSystem (EFTPS), under How To Pay, earlier. To Be on Paper, earlier.envelope with your income tax return. Do not
add this gift to any tax you owe.Guaranteed availability of installment agree- Mailing your return. If an addressed envel-
ment. The IRS must agree to accept the full ope came with your tax forms package, youYou can deduct this gift as a charitable con-
payment of your tax liability in installments if, as should mail your return in that envelope.tribution on next year's tax return if you itemize
of the date you offer to enter into the agreement: If you do not have an addressed envelope oryour deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
if you moved during the year, mail your return to1. Your total taxes (not counting interest, the address shown at the end of this publicationPeel-Off Address Labelpenalties, additions to the tax, or additional for the area where you now live.amounts) do not exceed $10,000,
After you have completed your return, peel off
2. In the last 5 years, you (and your spouse if the label with your name and address from the
the liability relates to a joint return) have back of your tax return package and place it in
not: the appropriate area of the Form 1040, Form What Happens After
1040A, or Form 1040EZ you send to the IRS. Ifa. Failed to file any required income tax you have someone prepare your return, give I File?return, that person your label to use on your tax return.
b. Failed to pay any tax shown on any If you file electronically and you have to file After you send your return to the IRS, you may
such return, or Form 8453 or Form 8453-OL, use the label on have some questions. This section discusses
Page 16 Chapter 1 Filing Information

concerns you may have about recordkeeping, Transcript of tax return. If you just need in- filed your return (3 weeks if you filed electroni-
your refund, and what to do if you move. formation from your return, you can order a cally). Be sure to have a copy of your 2007 tax
transcript by calling 1-800-829-1040, or using return available because you will need to know
Form 4506-T, Request for Transcript of Tax Re- the filing status, the first SSN shown on theWhat Records Should turn. There is no fee for a transcript. return, and the exact whole-dollar amount of the
I Keep? refund. To check on your refund, do one of theYou can request the following items.
following.Return transcript. This includes most of
You must keep records so that you can • Go to www.irs.gov, and click on ªWhere'sthe line items of a tax return as filed with the IRS.
prepare a complete and accurate in- My Refund.ºReturn transcripts are available for the current
come tax return. The law does not re-
RECORDS year and returns processed during the prior 3 • Call 1-800-829-4477 24 hours a day, 7quire any special form of records. However, you processing years. Most requests will be days a week for automated refund infor-should keep all receipts, canceled checks or processed within 10 business days. mation.other proof of payment, and any other records to
Account transcript. This contains informa-support any deductions or credits you claim. • Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hourstion on the financial status of the account, such shown in your form instructions.If you file a claim for refund, you must be able as payments made on the account, penalty as-to prove by your records that you have overpaid sessments, and adjustments made by you or theyour tax. IRS after the return was filed. Return information Change of Addressis limited to items such as tax liability and esti-How long to keep records. You must keep mated tax payments. Account transcripts are If you have moved, file your return using youryour records for as long as they are important for available for most returns. Most requests will be new address.the federal tax law. processed within 20 business days. If you move after you filed your return, youKeep records that support an item of income
should give the IRS clear and concise writtenor a deduction appearing on a return until the Record of account. This is a combination
notification of your change of address. Send theperiod of limitations for the return runs out. (A of line item information and later adjustments to
notification to the Internal Revenue Serviceperiod of limitations is the period of time after the account. This information is available for the
Center serving your old address. You can usewhich no legal action can be brought.) For as- current year and 3 prior tax years. Most requests
Form 8822, Change of Address. If you are ex-sessment of tax you owe, this generally is 3 will be processed within 20 business days.
pecting a refund, also notify the post office serv-years from the date you filed the return. For filing
ing your old address. This will help in forwardingMore information. For more information ona claim for credit or refund, this generally is 3
your check to your new address (unless yourecordkeeping, see Publication 552, Record-years from the date you filed the original return,
chose direct deposit of your refund). If you arekeeping for Individuals.or 2 years from the date you paid the tax, which-
affected by a Presidentially declared disaster,ever is later. Returns filed before the due date
you may be able to change your address withare treated as filed on the due date. Interest on Refunds the IRS orally.If you did not report income that you should
Be sure to include your SSN (and the namehave reported on your return, and it is more than If you are due a refund, you may get interest on and SSN of your spouse, if you filed a joint25% of the income shown on the return, the it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly. return) in any correspondence with the IRS.period of limitations does not run out until 6 If the refund is made within 45 days after theyears after you filed the return. If a return is false due date of your return, no interest will be paid. Ifor fraudulent with intent to evade tax, or if no you file your return after the due date (includingreturn is filed, an action can generally be brought extensions), no interest will be paid if the refundat any time. What If I Madeis made within 45 days after the date you filed. IfYou may need to keep records relating to the the refund is not made within this 45-day period,basis of property longer than the period of limita- a Mistake?interest will be paid from the due date of thetions. Keep those records as long as they are return or from the date you filed, whichever isimportant in figuring the basis of the original or Errors may delay your refund or result in noticeslater.replacement property. Generally, this means for being sent to you. If you discover an error, youAccepting a refund check does not changeas long as you own the property and, after you can file an amended return or claim for refund.your right to claim an additional refund and inter-dispose of it, for the period of limitations that est. File your claim within the period of time thatapplies to you. See chapter 13 for information on applies. See Amended Returns and Claims for Amended Returns andbasis. Refund, later. If you do not accept a refund Claims for Refundcheck, no more interest will be paid on the over-Note.  If you receive a Form W-2, keep Copy payment included in the check. You should correct your return if, after you haveC until you begin receiving social security bene-
filed it, you find that:fits. This will help protect your benefits in case Interest on erroneous refund. All or part ofthere is a question about your work record or any interest you were charged on an erroneous 1. You did not report some income,earnings in a particular year. Review the infor- refund generally will be forgiven. Any interestmation shown on your annual (for workers over 2. You claimed deductions or credits youcharged for the period before demand for repay-age 25) Social Security Statement. should not have claimed,ment was made will be forgiven unless:
3. You did not claim deductions or credits youCopies of returns. You should keep copies of 1. You, or a person related to you, caused could have claimed, ortax returns you have filed and the tax forms the erroneous refund in any way, or
package as part of your records. They may be 4. You should have claimed a different filing2. The refund is more than $50,000.helpful in amending filed returns or preparing status. (Once you file a joint return, you
future ones. cannot choose to file separate returns forFor example, if you claimed a refund of $100
If you need a copy of a prior year tax return, that year after the due date of the return.on your return, but the IRS made an error and
you can get it from the IRS. Use Form 4506, However, an executor may be able tosent you $1,000, you would not be charged
Request for Copy of Tax Return. There is a make this change for a deceased spouse.)interest for the time you held the $900 differ-
charge for a copy of a return, which you must ence. You must, however, repay the $900 when If you need a copy of your return, see Copies ofpay with Form 4506. It may take up to 60 days to the IRS asks. returns under What Records Should I Keep,process your request. earlier in this chapter.
If your main home, principal place of Past-Due Refund
business, or tax records are located in Form 1040X. Use Form 1040X, Amended
a Presidentially declared disaster area, You can check on the status of your 2007 refund U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to correct a
TIP
the charge will be waived. if it has been at least 6 weeks from the date you return you have already filed. An amended tax
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 17

return cannot be filed electronically under the • Identify the specific year(s) for which a re- are unable to manage your financial affairs be-
e-file system. fund is sought. cause of a medically determinable physical or
mental impairment which can be expected toCompleting Form 1040X. On Form 1040X, Mail your protective claim for refund to the ad- result in death or which has lasted or can bewrite your income, deductions, and credits as dress listed in the instructions for Form 1040X, expected to last for a continuous period of notyou originally reported them on your return, the under Where To File. less than 12 months. However, you are notchanges you are making, and the corrected Generally, the IRS will delay action on the treated as financially disabled during any periodamounts. Then figure the tax on the corrected protective claim until the contingency is re- your spouse or any other person is authorized toamount of taxable income and the amount you solved. act on your behalf in financial matters.owe or your refund. To claim that you are financially disabled,If you owe tax, pay the full amount with Form Limit on amount of refund. If you file your you must send in the following written state-1040X. The tax owed will not be subtracted from claim within 3 years after the date you filed your ments with your claim for refund.any amount you had credited to your estimated return, the credit or refund cannot be more than
tax. 1. A statement from your qualified physicianthe part of the tax paid within the 3-year period
If you cannot pay the full amount due with that includes:(plus any extension of time for filing your return)
your return, you can ask to make monthly install- immediately before you filed the claim. This time
a. The name and a description of yourment payments. See Installment Agreement, period is suspended while you are financially
physical or mental impairment,earlier. disabled, discussed later.
If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part of b. The physician's medical opinion that theTax paid. Payments, including estimatedthe overpayment refunded to you, or you can impairment prevented you from manag-tax payments, made before the due date (with-apply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If you ing your financial affairs,out regard to extensions) of the original returnchoose to get a refund, it will be sent separately
are considered paid on the due date. For exam- c. The physician's medical opinion that thefrom any refund shown on your original return.
ple, income tax withheld during the year is con- impairment was or can be expected toFiling Form 1040X. After you finish your sidered paid on the due date of the return, April result in death, or that its duration hasForm 1040X, check it to be sure that it is com- 15 for most taxpayers. lasted, or can be expected to last, atplete. Do not forget to show the year of your least 12 months,original return and explain all changes you Example 1. You made estimated tax pay-
d. The specific time period (to the best ofmade. Be sure to attach any forms or schedules ments of $500 and got an automatic extension of
the physician's knowledge), andneeded to explain your changes. Mail your Form time to August 16, 2005, to file your 2004 in-
1040X to the Internal Revenue Service Center come tax return. When you filed your return on e. The following certification signed by theserving the area where you now live (as shown that date, you paid an additional $200 tax. On physician: ªI hereby certify that, to thein the instructions to the form). However, if you August 15, 2008, you filed an amended return best of my knowledge and belief, theare filing Form 1040X in response to a notice and claimed a refund of $700. Because you filed above representations are true, correct,you received from the IRS, mail it to the address your claim within 3 years after you filed your and complete.ºshown on the notice. Do not use the addresses original return, you can get a refund of up to
listed at the end of this publication. $700, the tax paid within the 3 years plus the 2. A statement made by the person signingFile a separate form for each tax year in- 4-month extension period immediately before the claim for credit or refund that no per-volved. you filed the claim. son, including your spouse, was author-
ized to act on your behalf in financialTime for filing a claim for refund. Generally,
Example 2. The situation is the same as in matters during the period of disability (oryou must file your claim for a credit or refund
Example 1, except you filed your return on Octo- the exact dates that a person was author-within 3 years after the date you filed your origi-
ber 27, 2005, 2 1/2 months after the extension ized to act for you).nal return or within 2 years after the date you
period ended. You paid an additional $200 onpaid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filed
that date. On October 29, 2008, you filed anbefore the due date (without regard to exten- Exceptions for special types of refunds. Ifamended return and claimed a refund of $700.sions) are considered filed on the due date you file a claim for one of the items listed below,Although you filed your claim within 3 years from(even if the due date was a Saturday, Sunday, or the dates and limits discussed earlier may notthe date you filed your original return, the refundlegal holiday). These time periods are sus- apply. These items, and where to get more infor-was limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3pended while you are financially disabled, dis- mation, are as follows.years plus the 4-month extension period imme-cussed later. • Bad debt. (See Nonbusiness Bad Debts indiately before you filed the claim. The estimatedIf the last day for claiming a credit or refund is chapter 14.)tax of $500 paid before that period cannot bea Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you can
refunded or credited.file the claim on the next business day. • Worthless security. (See Worthless securi-
If you do not file a claim within this period, ties in chapter 14.)
If you file a claim more than 3 years afteryou may not be entitled to a credit or a refund. • Foreign tax paid or accrued. (See Publica-you file your return, the credit or refund cannot
Protective claim for refund. Generally, a tion 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Individu-be more than the tax you paid within the 2 years
protective claim is a formal claim or amended als.)immediately before you file the claim.
return for credit or refund normally based on • Net operating loss carryback. (See Publi-current litigation or expected changes in tax law Example. You filed your 2004 tax return on cation 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs)or other legislation. You file a protective claim April 15, 2005. You paid taxes of $500. On for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.)when your right to a refund is contingent on November 3, 2006, after an examination of your
• Carryback of certain business tax credits.future events and may not be determinable until 2004 return, you had to pay an additional tax of
(See Form 3800, General Businessafter the statute of limitations expires. A valid $200. On May 12, 2008, you file a claim for a
Credit.)protective claim does not have to list a particular refund of $300. However, because you filed your
dollar amount or demand an immediate refund. claim more than 3 years after you filed your • Claim based on an agreement with theHowever, a valid protective claim must: return, your refund will be limited to the $200 you IRS extending the period for assessment
paid during the 2 years immediately before you of tax.• Be in writing and signed,
filed your claim.
• Include your name, address, SSN or ITIN,
Financially disabled. The time periods for Processing claims for refund. Claims areand other contact information,
claiming a refund are suspended for the period usually processed shortly after they are filed.• Identify and describe the contingencies af- in which you are financially disabled. For a joint Your claim may be accepted as filed, disal-fecting the claim, income tax return, only one spouse has to be lowed, or subject to examination. If a claim is
• Clearly alert the IRS to the essential na- financially disabled for the time period to be examined, the procedures are the same as in
ture of the claim, and suspended. You are financially disabled if you the examination of a tax return.
Page 18 Chapter 1 Filing Information

If your claim is disallowed, you will receive an Filing late. If you do not file your return by the 1. You show negligence or disregard of the
explanation of why it was disallowed. due date (including extensions), you may have rules or regulations, or
to pay a failure-to-file penalty. The penalty is 2. You substantially understate your incomeTaking your claim to court. You can sue for a usually 5% for each month or part of a month tax.refund in court, but you must first file a timely that a return is late, but not more than 25%. The
claim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows your penalty is based on the tax not paid by the due The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay-
claim or does not act on your claim within 6 date (without regard to extensions). ment. The penalty will not be figured on any part
months after you file it, you can then take your of an underpayment on which the fraud penaltyFraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud,claim to court. For information on the burden of (discussed later) is charged.the penalty is 15% for each month or part of aproof in a court proceeding, see Publication 556. month that your return is late, up to a maximum Negligence or disregard. The term ªnegli-The IRS provides a fast method to move your of 75%. genceº includes a failure to make a reasonableclaim to court if:
attempt to comply with the tax law or to exerciseReturn over 60 days late. If you file your• You are filing a claim for a credit or refund ordinary and reasonable care in preparing areturn more than 60 days after the due date orbased solely on contested income tax or return. Negligence also includes failure to keepextended due date, the minimum penalty is theon estate tax or gift tax issues considered adequate books and records. You will not havesmaller of $100 or 100% of the unpaid tax.in your previously examined returns, and to pay a negligence penalty if you have a rea-At the time this publication went to• You want to take your case to court in- sonable basis for a position you took.print, Congress was considering legis-stead of appealing it within the IRS. The term ªdisregardº includes any careless,lation that would increase the minimum
CAUTION
!
reckless, or intentional disregard.penalty. To find out if this legislation was en-When you file your claim with the IRS, you get acted, and for more details, go to www.irs.gov, Adequate disclosure. You can avoid thethe fast method by requesting in writing that your click on ªMore Forms and Publications,º and penalty for disregard of rules or regulations ifclaim be immediately rejected. A notice of claim then on ªWhat's Hot in forms and publications,º you adequately disclose on your return a posi-disallowance will then be promptly sent to you. or see Publication 553. tion that has at least a reasonable basis. SeeYou have 2 years from the date of mailing of
Disclosure statement, later.the notice of claim disallowance to file a refund Exception. You will not have to pay the
This exception will not apply to an item that issuit in the United States District Court having penalty if you show that you failed to file on time
jurisdiction or in the United States Court of Fed- attributable to a tax shelter. In addition, it will notbecause of reasonable cause and not because
eral Claims. apply if you fail to keep adequate books andof willful neglect.
records, or substantiate items properly.
Interest on refund. If you receive a refund Paying tax late. You will have to pay a fail- Substantial understatement of income tax.because of your amended return, interest will be ure-to-pay penalty of 1/2 of 1% (.50%) of your You understate your tax if the tax shown on yourpaid on it from the due date of your original unpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month, return is less than the correct tax. The under-return or the date you filed your original return, after the due date that the tax is not paid. This statement is substantial if it is more than thewhichever is later, to the date you filed the penalty does not apply during the automatic larger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. How-amended return. However, if the refund is not 6-month extension of time to file period if you
ever, the amount of the understatement may bemade within 45 days after you file the amended paid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on or
reduced to the extent the understatement is duereturn, interest will be paid up to the date the before the due date of your return and pay the
to:refund is paid. balance when you file the return.
The monthly rate of the failure-to-pay penalty 1. Substantial authority, orReduced refund. Your refund may be re- is half the usual rate (.25% instead of .50%) if an
duced by an additional tax liability that has been 2. Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba-installment agreement is in effect for that month.
assessed against you. You must have filed your return by the due date sis.
Also, your refund may be reduced by (including extensions) to qualify for this reduced If an item on your return is attributable to a taxamounts you owe for past-due child support, penalty. shelter, there is no reduction for an adequatedebts to another federal agency, or for state If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the rate disclosure. However, there is a reduction for aincome tax. If your spouse owes these debts, will increase to 1% at the start of the first month position with substantial authority, but only if yousee Offset against debts, under Refunds, ear- beginning at least 10 days after the day that the reasonably believed that your tax treatment waslier, for the correct refund procedures to follow. notice is issued. If a notice and demand for
more likely than not the proper treatment.immediate payment is issued, the rate will in-Effect on state tax liability. If your return is crease to 1% at the start of the first month Substantial authority. Whether there is orchanged for any reason, it may affect your state beginning after the day that the notice and de- was substantial authority for the tax treatment ofincome tax liability. This includes changes made mand is issued. an item depends on the facts and circum-as a result of an examination of your return by This penalty cannot be more than 25% of stances. Some of the items that may be consid-the IRS. Contact your state tax agency for more your unpaid tax. You will not have to pay the ered are court opinions, Treasury regulations,information. penalty if you can show that you had a good revenue rulings, revenue procedures, and no-reason for not paying your tax on time. tices and announcements issued by the IRS and
Penalties published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin thatCombined penalties. If both the failure-to-file involve the same or similar circumstances aspenalty and the failure-to-pay penalty (dis-The law provides penalties for failure to file re- yours.cussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (orturns or pay taxes as required.
15%) failure-to-file penalty is reduced by the Disclosure statement. To adequately dis-
failure-to-pay penalty. However, if you file your close the relevant facts about your tax treatment
return more than 60 days after the due date orCivil Penalties of an item, use Form 8275, Disclosure State-
extended due date, the minimum penalty is the ment. You must also have a reasonable basis
If you do not file your return and pay your tax by smaller of $100 or 100% of the unpaid tax. for treating the item the way you did.
the due date, you may have to pay a penalty. In cases of substantial understatement only,See CAUTION under Returns over 60You may also have to pay a penalty if you items that meet the requirements of Revenuedays late, earlier.substantially understate your tax, understate a Procedure 2006-48 (or later update) are consid-
CAUTION
!reportable transaction, file an erroneous claim ered adequately disclosed on your return with-for refund or credit, file a frivolous tax submis- out filing Form 8275.sion, or fail to supply your SSN or individual
Use Form 8275-R, Regulation Disclosuretaxpayer identification number. If you provide Accuracy-related penalty. You may have to
Statement, to disclose items or positions con-fraudulent information on your return, you may pay an accuracy-related penalty if you underpay
trary to regulations.have to pay a civil fraud penalty. your tax because:
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 19

Reasonable cause. You will not have to 2. Willful failure to file a return, supply infor- you are considered unmarried for the whole
pay a penalty if you show a good reason (rea- mation, or pay any tax due, year.
sonable cause) for the way you treated an item. Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a3. Fraud and false statements, orYou must also show that you acted in good faith. divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing4. Preparing and filing a fraudulent return. tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at theFiling erroneous claim for refund or credit.
time of divorce you intended to and did remarryYou may have to pay a penalty if, after May 25,
each other in the next tax year, you and your2007, you file an erroneous claim for refund or
spouse must file as married individuals.credit. The penalty is equal to 20% of the disal-
lowed amount of the claim, unless you can show Annulled marriages. If you obtain a court
a reasonable basis for the way you treated an decree of annulment, which holds that no valid
item. The penalty will not be figured on any part marriage ever existed, you are considered un-2.of the disallowed amount of the claim that re- married even if you filed joint returns for earlier
lates to the earned income credit or on which the years. You must file Form 1040X, Amended
accuracy-related or fraud penalties are charged. U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, claiming sin-
gle or head of household status for each tax yearFiling StatusFrivolous tax submission. You may have to affected by the annulment that is not closed bypay a penalty of $5,000 if you file a frivolous tax the statute of limitations for filing a tax return.return or other frivolous submissions. A frivolous The statute of limitations generally does not ex-tax return is one that does not include enough pire until 3 years after your original return wasIntroductioninformation to figure the correct tax or that con- filed.tains information clearly showing that the tax This chapter helps you determine which filing
Head of household or qualifying widow(er)you reported is substantially incorrect. For more status to use. There are five filing statuses.
with dependent child. If you are consideredinformation on frivolous returns, frivolous sub- • Single. unmarried, you may be able to file as a head ofmissions, and a list of positions that are identi-
household or as a qualifying widow(er) with afied as frivolous, see Notice 2007-30, which is • Married Filing Jointly.
dependent child. See Head of Household andon page 883 of Internal Revenue Bulletin • Married Filing Separately. Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child to2007-14 at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb07-14.
• Head of Household. see if you qualify.pdf.
You will have to pay the penalty if you filed • Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Married persons. If you are considered mar-this kind of return or submission based on a Child. ried for the whole year, you and your spouse canfrivolous position or a desire to delay or interfere
file a joint return, or you can file separate re-with the administration of federal tax laws. This
turns.If more than one filing status applies toincludes altering or striking out the preprinted
you, choose the one that will give youlanguage above the space provided for your Considered married. You are consideredthe lowest tax.signature.
TIP married for the whole year if on the last day ofThis penalty is added to any other penalty your tax year you and your spouse meet any oneYou must determine your filing status beforeprovided by law. of the following tests.you can determine your filing requirements
(chapter 1), standard deduction (chapter 20),Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax on 1. You are married and living together asand correct tax (chapter 30). You also use youryour return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of the husband and wife.filing status in determining whether you are eligi-underpayment due to fraud will be added to your
ble to claim certain deductions and credits. 2. You are living together in a common lawtax.
marriage that is recognized in the stateJoint return. The fraud penalty on a joint where you now live or in the state whereUseful Itemsreturn does not apply to a spouse unless some the common law marriage began.You may want to see:part of the underpayment is due to the fraud of
that spouse. 3. You are married and living apart, but notPublication legally separated under a decree of di-
Failure to supply social security number. If ❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, vorce or separate maintenance.
you do not include your SSN or the SSN of and Filing Information 4. You are separated under an interlocutoryanother person where required on a return,
❏ 519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens (not final) decree of divorce. For purposesstatement, or other document, you will be sub-
of filing a joint return, you are not consid-ject to a penalty of $50 for each failure. You will ❏ 555 Community Property ered divorced.also be subject to a penalty of $50 if you do not
give your SSN to another person when it is
Spouse died. If your spouse died during therequired on a return, statement, or other docu-
year, you are considered married for the wholement.
year for filing status purposes.For example, if you have a bank account that Marital Status
If you did not remarry before the end of theearns interest, you must give your SSN to the
tax year, you can file a joint return for yourselfbank. The number must be shown on the Form In general, your filing status depends on
and your deceased spouse. For the next 21099-INT or other statement the bank sends whether you are considered unmarried or mar-
years, you may be entitled to the special benefitsyou. If you do not give the bank your SSN, you ried. For federal tax purposes, a marriage
described later under Qualifying Widow(er) Withwill be subject to the $50 penalty. (You also may means only a legal union between a man and a
Dependent Child.be subject to ªbackupº withholding of income woman as husband and wife.
tax. See chapter 4.) If you remarried before the end of the tax
You will not have to pay the penalty if you are Unmarried persons. You are considered un- year, you can file a joint return with your new
able to show that the failure was due to reasona- married for the whole year if, on the last day of spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status is
ble cause and not willful neglect. your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa- married filing separately for that year.
rated from your spouse under a divorce or sepa- Married persons living apart. If you liverate maintenance decree. State law governs apart from your spouse and meet certain tests,Criminal Penalties whether you are married or legally separated you may be considered unmarried. If this appliesunder a divorce or separate maintenance de- to you, you can file as head of household evenYou may be subject to criminal prosecution cree. though you are not divorced or legally sepa-(brought to trial) for actions such as:
Divorced persons. If you are divorced rated. If you qualify to file as head of household
1. Tax evasion, under a final decree by the last day of the year, instead of as married filing separately, your
Page 20 Chapter 2 Filing Status

standard deduction will be higher. Also, your tax considered unmarried for the whole year and Wife).º Be sure to also sign in the space pro-
may be lower, and you may be able to claim the you cannot choose married filing jointly as your vided for your signature. Attach a dated state-
earned income credit. See Head of Household, filing status. ment, signed by you, to the return. The
later. statement should include the form number of the
return you are filing, the tax year, the reasonFiling a Joint Return your spouse cannot sign, and that your spouse
has agreed to your signing for him or her.Both you and your spouse must include all of
your income, exemptions, and deductions onSingle Signing as guardian of spouse. If you are
your joint return. the guardian of your spouse who is mentally
Your filing status is single if, on the last day of incompetent, you can sign the return for yourAccounting period. Both of you must use thethe year, you are unmarried or legally separated spouse as guardian.same accounting period, but you can use differ-from your spouse under a divorce or separate
Spouse in combat zone. If your spouse isent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri-maintenance decree, and you do not qualify for
unable to sign the return because he or she isods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1.another filing status. To determine your marital
serving in a combat zone (such as the Persianstatus on the last day of the year, see Marital Joint responsibility. Both of you may be held Gulf Area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), or aStatus, earlier. responsible, jointly and individually, for the tax qualified hazardous duty area (Bosnia and Her-
Widow(er). Your filing status may be single if and any interest or penalty due on your joint zegovina, Croatia, and Macedonia), and you do
you were widowed before January 1, 2007, and return. One spouse may be held responsible for not have a power of attorney or other statement,
did not remarry before the end of 2007. How- all the tax due even if all the income was earned you can sign for your spouse. Attach a signed
ever, you might be able to use another filing by the other spouse. statement to your return that explains that your
status that will give you a lower tax. See Head of spouse is serving in a combat zone. For moreDivorced taxpayer. You may be held jointlyHousehold and Qualifying Widow(er) With De- information on special tax rules for persons whoand individually responsible for any tax, interest,pendent Child, later, to see if you qualify.       are serving in a combat zone, or who are inand penalties due on a joint return filed before
missing status as a result of serving in a combatHow to file. You can file Form 1040EZ (if you your divorce. This responsibility may apply even
zone, see Publication 3, Armed Forces' Taxhave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind, if your divorce decree states that your former
Guide.and meet other requirements), Form 1040A, or spouse will be responsible for any amounts due
Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form on previously filed joint returns. Other reasons spouse cannot sign.  If
1040, show your filing status as single by check- your spouse cannot sign the joint return for anyRelief from joint liability. In some cases,ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of other reason, you can sign for your spouse onlyone spouse may be relieved of joint liability forthe Tax Table or Section A of the Tax Computa- if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legaltax, interest, and penalties on a joint return fortion Worksheet to figure your tax. document giving you permission to act for youritems of the other spouse that were incorrectly
spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copyreported on the joint return. You can ask for
of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848,relief no matter how small the liability.
Power of Attorney and Declaration of Represen-There are four types of relief available.
Married Filing Jointly tative.
1. Innocent spouse relief.
You can choose married filing jointly as your Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. A2. Separation of liability, which applies to jointfiling status if you are married and both you and joint return generally cannot be filed if eitherfilers who are divorced, widowed, legallyyour spouse agree to file a joint return. On a joint spouse is a nonresident alien at any time duringseparated, or have not lived together forreturn, you report your combined income and the tax year. However, if one spouse was athe 12 months ending on the date electiondeduct your combined allowable expenses. You nonresident alien or dual-status alien who wasof this relief is filed.can file a joint return even if one of you had no married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the
3. Equitable relief.income or deductions. end of the year, the spouses can choose to file a
If you and your spouse decide to file a joint joint return. If you do file a joint return, you and4. Relief from liability arising from communityreturn, your tax may be lower than your com- your spouse are both treated as U.S. residentsproperty law.bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your for the entire tax year. For information on this
 You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-standard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc- choice, see chapter 1 of Publication 519.cent Spouse Relief, to request any of thesetions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax
kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spousebenefits that do not apply to other filing statuses.
Relief, explains these kinds of relief and whoIf you and your spouse each have in- may qualify for them.come, you may want to figure your tax Married Filing
both on a joint return and on separate
TIP Signing a joint return. For a return to be
returns (using the filing status of married filing considered a joint return, both husband and wife Separatelyseparately). Choose the method that gives the generally must sign the return.
two of you the lower combined tax.    You can choose married filing separately asSpouse died before signing. If your your filing status if you are married. This filingHow to file. If you file as married filing jointly, spouse died before signing the return, the exec- status may benefit you if you want to be respon-you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you utor or administrator must sign the return for sible only for your own tax or if it results in lesshave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind, your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has tax than filing a joint return.and meet other requirements, you can file Form yet been appointed as executor or administrator,
If you and your spouse do not agree to file a1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A, you can sign the return for your spouse and
joint return, you may have to use this filing statusshow this filing status by checking the box on enter ªFiling as surviving spouseº in the area
unless you qualify for head of household status,line 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of the where you sign the return.
discussed next.Tax Table or Section B of the Tax Computation Spouse away from home. If your spouse is You may be able to choose head of house-Worksheet to figure your tax. away from home, you should prepare the return, hold filing status if you live apart from yourSpouse died during the year. If your spouse sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so that spouse, meet certain tests, and are considereddied during the year, you are considered mar- it can be filed on time. unmarried (explained later, under Head ofried for the whole year and can choose married Household). This can apply to you even if youInjury or disease prevents signing. If yourfiling jointly as your filing status. See Spouse are not divorced or legally separated. If youspouse cannot sign because of disease or injurydied, earlier, for more information. qualify to file as head of household, instead of asand tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse's
married filing separately, your tax may be lower,Divorced persons. If you are divorced under name in the proper space on the return followed
a final decree by the last day of the year, you are by the words ªBy (your name), Husband (or you may be able to claim the earned income
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 21

credit and certain other credits, and your stan- 8. If you lived with your spouse at any time date of the separate return or returns. This does
dard deduction will be higher. The head of during the tax year: not include any extensions. A separate return
household filing status allows you to choose the includes a return filed by you or your spouse
a. You cannot claim the credit for the eld-standard deduction even if your spouse chooses claiming married filing separately, single, or
erly or the disabled,to itemize deductions. See Head of Household, head of household filing status.
later, for more information. b. You will have to include in income more
(up to 85%) of any social security orUnless you are required to file sepa- Separate Returns Afterequivalent railroad retirement benefitsrately, you should figure your tax both
Joint Returnyou received, andways (on a joint return and on separate
TIP
returns). This way you can make sure you are c. You cannot roll over amounts from a Once you file a joint return, you cannot chooseusing the filing status that results in the lowest traditional IRA into a Roth IRA. to file separate returns for that year after the duecombined tax. However, you will generally pay date of the return.more combined tax on separate returns than 9. The following deductions and credits are
you would on a joint return for the reasons listed reduced at income levels that are half Exception. A personal representative for aunder Special Rules, later. those for a joint return: decedent can change from a joint return elected
by the surviving spouse to a separate return fora. The child tax credit,How to file. If you file a separate return, you the decedent. The personal representative hasgenerally report only your own income, exemp- b. The retirement savings contributions 1 year from the due date of the return (includingtions, credits, and deductions on your individual credit, extensions) to make the change. See Publica-return. You can claim an exemption for your tion 559, Survivors, Executors, and Administra-c. Itemized deductions, andspouse if your spouse had no gross income and tors, for more information on filing a return for awas not the dependent of another person. How- d. The deduction for personal exemptions. decedent.ever, if your spouse had any gross income or
was the dependent of someone else, you cannot 10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500
claim an exemption for him or her on your sepa- (instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-
rate return. turn).
Head of Household If you file as married filing separately, you 11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, youcan use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select this cannot claim the standard deduction. If you You may be able to file as head of household iffiling status by checking the box on line 3 of can claim the standard deduction, your ba- you meet all the following requirements.either form. You also must enter your spouse's sic standard deduction is half the amountfull name in the space provided and must enter 1. You are unmarried or ªconsidered unmar-allowed on a joint return.your spouse's SSN or ITIN in the space provided riedº on the last day of the year.unless your spouse does not have and is not
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).required to have an SSN or ITIN. Use the Mar- 2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-
You may not be able to deduct all or part of yourried filing separately column of the Tax Table or ing up a home for the year.
contributions to a traditional IRA if you or yourSection C of the Tax Computation Worksheet to 3. A ªqualifying personº lived with you in thespouse were covered by an employee retire-figure your tax. home for more than half the year (exceptment plan at work during the year. Your deduc-
for temporary absences, such as school).tion is reduced or eliminated if your income is
Special Rules However, if the ªqualifying personº is yourmore than a certain amount. This amount is
dependent parent, he or she does notmuch lower for married individuals who file sep-If you choose married filing separately as your have to live with you. See Special rule forarately and lived together at any time during thefiling status, the following special rules apply. parent, later, under Qualifying Person.year. For more information, see How Much CanBecause of these special rules, you will usually You Deduct in chapter 17.pay more tax on a separate return than if you If you qualify to file as head of house-
used another filing status that you qualify for. Rental activity losses. If you actively partici- hold, your tax rate usually will be lower
pated in a passive rental real estate activity that than the rates for single or married fil-
TIP
produced a loss, you generally can deduct the ing separately. You will also receive a higher1. Your tax rate generally will be higher than loss from your nonpassive income, up to standard deduction than if you file as single orit would be on a joint return. $25,000. This is called a special allowance. married filing separately.
However, married persons filing separate re-2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al-
turns who lived together at any time during theternative minimum tax will be half that al- Kidnapped child. A child may qualify you toyear cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-lowed to a joint return filer. file as head of household even if the child hasried persons filing separate returns who lived been kidnapped. For more information, see3. You cannot take the credit for child and apart at all times during the year are each al- Publication 501.dependent care expenses in most cases, lowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance
and the amount that you can exclude from for losses from passive real estate activities. How to file. If you file as head of household,income under an employer's dependent See Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 9. you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040.care assistance program is limited to
Indicate your choice of this filing status byCommunity property states. If you live in Ari-$2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed a joint
checking the box on line 4 of either form. Use thezona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,return). For more information about these
Head of household column of the Tax Table orNew Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsinexpenses, the credit, and the exclusion,
Section D of the Tax Computation Worksheet toand file separately, your income may be consid-see chapter 32.
figure your tax.ered separate income or community income for4. You cannot take the earned income credit. income tax purposes. See Publication 555.
5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit for Considered Unmarriedadoption expenses in most cases.
Joint Return After To qualify for head of household status, you6. You cannot take the education credits (the
Separate Returns must be either unmarried or considered unmar-Hope credit and the lifetime learning
ried on the last day of the year. You are consid-credit), the deduction for student loan inter- You can change your filing status by filing an ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year ifest, or the tuition and fees deduction. amended return using Form 1040X. you meet all the following tests.
7. You cannot exclude any interest income If you or your spouse (or both of you) file a
from qualified U.S. savings bonds that you separate return, you generally can change to a 1. You file a separate return, defined earlier
used for higher education expenses. joint return any time within 3 years from the due under Joint Return After Separate Returns.
Page 22 Chapter 2 Filing Status

2. You paid more than half the cost of keep- the child using the rules described in Chil- time during the year and you do not choose to
dren of divorced or separated parents treat your nonresident spouse as a residenting up your home for the tax year.
under Qualifying Child in chapter 3, or in alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifying3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur- Support Test for Children of Divorced or person for head of household purposes. Youing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your Separated Parents under Qualifying Rela- must have another qualifying person and meet
spouse is considered to live in your home tive in chapter 3. The general rules for the other tests to be eligible to file as a head of
even if he or she is temporarily absent due claiming an exemption for a dependent are household.
to special circumstances. See Temporary explained under Exemptions for Depen-
absences, under Qualifying Person, later. Earned income credit. Even if you are con-dents in chapter 3.
sidered unmarried for head of household pur-4. Your home was the main home of your poses because you are married to a nonresidentIf you were considered married for partchild, stepchild, or foster child for more alien, you are still considered married for pur-of the year and lived in a communitythan half the year. (See Home of qualifying poses of the earned income credit (unless youproperty state (listed earlier under Mar-
CAUTION
!person, under Qualifying Person, later, for meet the five tests listed earlier). You are notried Filing Separately), special rules may apply
rules applying to a child's birth, death, or entitled to the credit unless you file a joint returnin determining your income and expenses. See
temporary absence during the year.) with your spouse and meet other qualifications.Publication 555 for more information.
See chapter 36 for more information.5. You must be able to claim an exemption
for the child. However, you meet this test if Nonresident alien spouse. You are consid- Choice to treat spouse as resident. You
you cannot claim the exemption only be- ered unmarried for head of household purposes are considered married if you choose to treat
cause the noncustodial parent can claim if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any your spouse as a resident alien.
Table 2-1. Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this chapter for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing
status. 
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not youqualifying child (such as a son,
can claim an exemption for the person.daughter, or grandchild who lived
with you more than half the year and he or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.meets certain other tests)2
exemption for him or her
he or she is married and you cannot claim not a qualifying person. 3
an exemption for him or her
you can claim an exemption for him or her5 a qualifying person.6qualifying relative 4 who is your
father or mother you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
he or she lived with you more than half the a qualifying person.qualifying relative 4 other than your
year, and he or she is related to you in onefather or mother (such as a
of the ways listed under Relatives who dograndparent, brother, or sister who
not have to live with you in chapter 3 andmeets certain tests)
you can claim an exemption for him or her 5
he or she did not live with you more than not a qualifying person.
half the year
he or she is not related to you in one of the not a qualifying person.
ways listed under Relatives who do not
have to live with you in chapter 3 and is your
qualifying relative only because he or she
lived with you all year as a member of your
household
you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term ªqualifying childº is defined in chapter 3. Note. If you are a noncustodial parent, the term ªqualifying childº for head of household filing
status does not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described under Children of divorced
or separated parents under Qualifying Child in chapter 3. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child generally is your qualifying
child for head of household filing status even though the child is not a qualifying child for whom you can claim an exemption.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you cannot claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone
else's return.
4The term ªqualifying relativeº is defined in chapter 3.
5If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See Multiple
Support Agreement in chapter 3.
6See Special rule for parent for an additional requirement.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 23

your father or mother. Also, you must pay more Eligibility rules. You are eligible to file yourKeeping Up a Home 2007 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-than half the cost of keeping up a home that was
pendent child if you meet all of the followingthe main home for the entire year for your fatherTo qualify for head of household status, you tests.or mother. You are keeping up a main home formust pay more than half of the cost of keeping
your father or mother if you pay more than halfup a home for the year. You can determine • You were entitled to file a joint return with
the cost of keeping your parent in a rest home orwhether you paid more than half of the cost of your spouse for the year your spouse
home for the elderly.keeping up a home by using the worksheet died. It does not matter whether you actu-
shown on this page. ally filed a joint return.Temporary absences. You and your quali-
fying person are considered to live togetherCost of Keeping Up a Home • Your spouse died in 2005 or 2006 and you
even if one or both of you are temporarily absent did not remarry before the end of 2007.
from your home due to special circumstances • You have a child or stepchild for whomKeep for Your Records
 such as illness, education, business, vacation, you can claim an exemption. This doesor military service. It must be reasonable to not include a foster child.assume that the absent person will return to theAmount • This child lived in your home all year, ex-home after the temporary absence. You mustYou Total cept for temporary absences. See Tempo-continue to keep up the home during the ab-Paid Cost rary absences, earlier, under Head ofsence.
Property taxes $ $ Household. There are also exceptions, de-Death or birth. You may be eligible to file asMortgage interest expense scribed later, for a child who was born or
head of household if the individual who qualifiesRent died during the year, and for a kidnapped
you for this filing status is born or dies during theUtility charges child.
year. You must have provided more than half ofUpkeep and repairs • You paid more than half the cost of keep-the cost of keeping up a home that was theProperty insurance ing up a home for the year. See Keepingindividual's main home for more than half theFood consumed Up a Home, earlier, under Head of House-year or, if less, the period during which theon the premises hold.individual lived.Other household expenses
Totals $ $
Example. You are unmarried. Your mother, As mentioned earlier, this filing status
for whom you can claim an exemption, lived in is available for only 2 years followingMinus total amount you ( )
an apartment by herself. She died on Septem- the year your spouse died.paid
CAUTION
!
ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartment
for the year until her death was $6,000. You paidAmount others paid $ Example.  John Reed's wife died in 2005.$4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your John has not remarried. During 2006 and 2007,brother made no other payments toward your he continued to keep up a home for himself andIf the total amount you paid is more than the amount mother's support. Your mother had no income. his child, who lives with him and for whom heothers paid, you meet the requirement of paying more Because you paid more than half the cost of can claim an exemption. For 2005 he was enti-than half the cost of keeping up the home. keeping up your mother's apartment from Janu- tled to file a joint return for himself and his
ary 1 until her death, and you can claim an deceased wife. For 2006 and 2007, he can file
exemption for her, you can file as a head of as qualifying widower with a dependent child.Costs you include. Include in the cost of up- household. After 2007 he can file as head of household if hekeep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest,
qualifies.real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re-
pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home.
Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as aIf you used payments you received under
qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if theTemporary Assistance for Needy Families Qualifying Widow(er) child who qualifies you for this filing status is(TANF) or other public assistance programs to
born or dies during the year. You must havepay part of the cost of keeping up your home, With Dependent Child provided more than half of the cost of keeping upyou cannot count them as money you paid.
a home that was the child's main home duringHowever, you must include them in the total cost If your spouse died in 2007, you can use married the entire part of the year he or she was alive.of keeping up your home to figure if you paid filing jointly as your filing status for 2007 if youover half the cost. otherwise qualify to use that status. The year of
death is the last year for which you can file jointlyCosts you do not include. Do not include in with your deceased spouse. See Married Filingthe cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,
Jointly, earlier.education, medical treatment, vacations, life in-
You may be eligible to use qualifyingsurance, or transportation. Also, do not include
widow(er) with dependent child as your filingthe rental value of a home you own or the value 3.
status for 2 years following the year your spouseof your services or those of a member of your
died. For example, if your spouse died in 2006,household.
and you have not remarried, you may be able to
use this filing status for 2007 and 2008. PersonalQualifying Person
This filing status entitles you to use joint
return tax rates and the highest standard deduc-See Table 2-1 to see who is a qualifying person. Exemptions andtion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).Any person not described in Table 2-1 is not
This status does not entitle you to file a jointa qualifying person.
return. Dependents
Home of qualifying person. Generally, the
qualifying person must live with you for more How to file. If you file as qualifying widow(er)
than half of the year. with dependent child, you can use either Form
What's New1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing statusSpecial rule for parent. If your qualifying
by checking the box on line 5 of either form. Useperson is your father or mother, you may be
the Married filing jointly column of the Tax Tableeligible to file as head of household even if your Exemption amount. The amount you can de-
or Section B of the Tax Computation Worksheetfather or mother does not live with you. How- duct for each exemption has increased from
to figure your tax.ever, you must be able to claim an exemption for $3,300 in 2006 to $3,400 in 2007.
Page 24 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Exemption phaseout. You lose part of the
benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted gross Exemptions forExemptionsincome is above a certain amount. For 2007, this
phaseout begins at $117,300 for married per- DependentsThere are two types of exemptions: personalsons filing separately; $156,400 for single indi- exemptions and exemptions for dependents.viduals; $195,500 for heads of household; and You are allowed one exemption for each personWhile each is worth the same amount ($3,400$234,600 for married persons filing jointly or you can claim as a dependent. You can claim anfor 2007), different rules apply to each type.qualifying widow(er)s. However, in 2007, you exemption for a dependent even if your depen-
can lose no more than 2/3 of the amount of your dent files a return.
exemptions. In other words, each exemption The term ªdependentº means:Personal Exemptions
cannot be reduced to less than $1,133. • A qualifying child, orYou are generally allowed one exemption for
• A qualifying relative.yourself and, if you are married, one exemption
for your spouse. These are called personal ex-
The terms ªqualifying childº and ªqualifyingemptions.Introduction relativeº are defined later.
This chapter discusses exemptions. The follow- You can claim an exemption for a qualifying
child or qualifying relative only if these threeing topics will be explained. Your Own Exemption
tests are met.• Personal exemptions Ð You generally You can take one exemption for yourself unlesscan take one for yourself and, if you are 1. Dependent taxpayer test.you can be claimed as a dependent by anothermarried, one for your spouse. 2. Joint return test.taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claim
• Exemptions for dependents Ð You gener- you as a dependent, you cannot take an exemp- 3. Citizen or resident test.ally can take an exemption for each of tion for yourself even if the other taxpayer does
your dependents. A dependent is your These three tests are explained in detailnot actually claim you as a dependent.qualifying child or qualifying relative. If you later.
are entitled to claim an exemption for a All the requirements for claiming an exemp-
tion for a dependent are summarized in Tabledependent, that dependent cannot claim a Your Spouse's Exemption 3-1.personal exemption on his or her own tax
return. Your spouse is never considered your depen- Dependent not allowed a personal
dent. exemption. If you can claim an ex-• Phaseout of exemptions Ð You get less
emption for your dependent, the de-of a deduction when your adjusted gross
CAUTION
!
pendent cannot claim his or her own exemptionincome goes above a certain amount. Joint return. On a joint return you can claim
on his or her own tax return. This is true even ifone exemption for yourself and one for your• Social security number (SSN) requirement you do not claim the dependent's exemption onspouse.for dependents Ð You must list the social your return or if the exemption will be reducedsecurity number of any dependent for under the phaseout rule described under
whom you claim an exemption. Phaseout of Exemptions, later.Separate return. If you file a separate return,
you can claim the exemption for your spouse
Housekeepers, maids, or servants. If theseonly if your spouse had no gross income, is notDeduction. Exemptions reduce your taxable people work for you, you cannot claim exemp-income. Generally, you can deduct $3,400 for filing a return, and was not the dependent of tions for them.each exemption you claim in 2007. But, you may another taxpayer. This is true even if the other
lose part of the dollar amount of your exemp- Child tax credit. You may be entitled to a childtaxpayer does not actually claim your spouse as
tions if your adjusted gross income is above a tax credit for each qualifying child who wasa dependent. This is also true if your spouse is a
certain amount. See Phaseout of Exemptions, under age 17 at the end of the year. For morenonresident alien.
later. information, see chapter 34.
Death of spouse. If your spouse died duringHow to claim exemptions.  How you claim an
the year, you generally can claim your spouse'sexemption on your tax return depends on which
exemption under the rules just explained underform you file.
Joint return. If you file a separate return for the Dependent Taxpayer TestIf you file Form 1040EZ, the exemption
year, you may be able to claim your spouse'samount is combined with the standard deduction If you could be claimed as a dependent by an-exemption under the rules just described in Sep-amount and entered on line 5. other person, you cannot claim anyone else as aarate return. If you file Form 1040A or Form 1040, follow dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child or
the instructions for the form. The total number of If you remarried during the year, you cannot qualifying relative, you cannot claim that person
exemptions you can claim is the total in the box take an exemption for your deceased spouse. as a dependent.
on line 6d. Also complete line 26 (Form 1040A) If you are filing a joint return and your spouseIf you are a surviving spouse without grossor line 42 (Form 1040). could be claimed as a dependent by someoneincome and you remarry in the year your spouse
else, you and your spouse cannot claim anydied, you can be claimed as an exemption on dependents on your joint return.Useful Items both the final separate return of your deceased
You may want to see: spouse and the separate return of your new
spouse for that year. If you file a joint return with Joint Return TestPublication your new spouse, you can be claimed as an
❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, exemption only on that return. You generally cannot claim a married person as
and Filing Information a dependent if he or she files a joint return.
Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-Form (and Instructions) Example. You supported your 18-year-oldtained a final decree of divorce or separate daughter, and she lived with you all year while❏ 2120 Multiple Support Declaration maintenance by the end of the year, you cannot her husband was in the Armed Forces. The
take your former spouse's exemption. This rule❏ 8332 Release of Claim to Exemption for couple files a joint return. Even though your
applies even if you provided all of your formerChild of Divorced or Separated daughter is your qualifying child, you cannot
spouse's support.Parents take an exemption for her.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 25

Table 3-1. Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this chapter.
• You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
• You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is only a claim for refund
and there would be no tax liability for either spouse on separate returns.
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a
resident of Canada or Mexico, for some part of the year.1
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 1. The person cannot be your qualifying child or the
child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, qualifying child of any other taxpayer.
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year, ways listed under Relatives who do not have to live with
(b) under age 24 at the end of the year and a full-time you, or (b) must live with you all year as a member of your
student, or (c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. household 2 (and your relationship must not violate local
law).
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of
the year.2 3. The person's gross income for the year must be less than
$3,400.3
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or
her own support for the year. 4. You must provide more than half of the person's total
support for the year.4
5. If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more
than one person, you must be the person entitled to claim
the child as a qualifying child.
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents, and
 kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents, and kidnapped children.
Exception. The joint return test does not apply with you as a member of your household all Qualifying Childif a joint return is filed by the dependent and his year. This also applies if the child was lawfully
or her spouse merely as a claim for refund and placed with you for legal adoption. There are five tests that must be met for a childno tax liability would exist for either spouse on to be your qualifying child. The five tests are:Child's place of residence. Children usuallyseparate returns.
are citizens or residents of the country of their 1. Relationship,
parents.Example. Your son and his wife each had 2. Age,If you were a U.S. citizen when your childless than $3,000 of wages and no unearned
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen even ifincome. Neither is required to file a tax return. 3. Residency,
the other parent was a nonresident alien and theTaxes were taken out of their pay, so they filed a 4. Support, andchild was born in a foreign country. If so, this testjoint return to get a refund. The exception to the
is met.joint return test applies, so you are not disquali- 5. Special test for qualifying child of more
fied from claiming their exemptions just because than one person.Foreign students' place of residence. For-they filed a joint return. You can claim their These tests are explained next.eign students brought to this country under aexemptions if you meet all the other require- qualified international education exchange pro-ments to do so. gram and placed in American homes for a tem-
porary period generally are not U.S. residents Relationship Test
and do not meet this test. You cannot claim anCitizen or Resident Test To meet this test, a child must be:exemption for them. However, if you provided a
home for a foreign student, you may be able toYou cannot claim a person as a dependent un- • Your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child,
take a charitable contribution deduction. Seeless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident or a descendant (for example, your
Expenses Paid for Student Living With You inalien, U.S. national, or a resident of Canada or grandchild) of any of them, or
chapter 24.Mexico, for some part of the year. However, • Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-there is an exception for certain adopted chil- U.S. national. A U.S. national is an individual ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descen-dren, as explained next. who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or her dant (for example, your niece or nephew)
Adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen or allegiance to the United States. U.S. nationals of any of them.
U.S. national who has legally adopted a child include American Samoans and Northern Mari-
who is not a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, or ana Islanders who chose to become U.S. na-
U.S. national, this test is met if the child lived tionals instead of U.S. citizens.
Page 26 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Adopted child. An adopted child is always who were born or died during the year, kid- c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6
treated as your own child. The term ªadopted napped children, and children of divorced or months of the year.
childº includes a child who was lawfully placed separated parents.
2. The child received over half of his or herwith you for legal adoption. Temporary absences. Your child is consid- support for the year from the parents.Foster child. A foster child is an individual ered to have lived with you during periods of
3. The child is in the custody of one or bothwho is placed with you by an authorized place- time when one of you, or both, are temporarily
parents for more than half of the year.ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other absent due to special circumstances such as:
order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 4. Either of the following statements is true.• Illness,
• Education,Age Test a. The custodial parent signs a written
declaration, discussed later, that he or• Business,To meet this test, a child must be: she will not claim the child as a depen-
• Vacation, or dent for the year, and the noncustodial• Under age 19 at the end of the year,
parent attaches this written declaration• Military service.• A full-time student under age 24 at the end to his or her return. (If the decree or
of the year, or agreement went into effect after 1984,
Death or birth of child. A child who was born see Divorce decree or separation• Permanently and totally disabled at any or died during the year is treated as having lived agreement made after 1984, later.)time during the year, regardless of age. with you all year if your home was the child's
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-home the entire time he or she was alive during
rate maintenance or written separationExample. Your son turned 19 on December the year. The same is true if the child lived with
agreement that applies to 2007 states10. Unless he was disabled or a full-time stu- you all year except for any required hospital stay
that the noncustodial parent can claimdent, he does not meet the age test because, at following birth.
the child as a dependent, the decree orthe end of the year, he was not under age 19. Child born alive. You may be able to claim agreement was not changed after 1984
Full-time student. A full-time student is a stu- an exemption for a child who was born alive to say the noncustodial parent cannot
dent who is enrolled for the number of hours or during the year, even if the child lived only for a claim the child as a dependent, and the
courses the school considers to be full-time at- moment. State or local law must treat the child noncustodial parent provides at least
tendance. as having been born alive. There must be proof $600 for the child's support during the
of a live birth shown by an official document, year.Student defined. To qualify as a student, such as a birth certificate. The child must beyour child must be, during some part of each of your qualifying child or qualifying relative, and allany 5 calendar months of the year: Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.the other tests to claim an exemption for a de- The custodial parent is the parent with whom thependent must be met.1. A full-time student at a school that has a child lived for the greater part of the year. Theregular teaching staff, course of study, and Stillborn child. You cannot claim an ex- other parent is the noncustodial parent.a regularly enrolled student body at the emption for a stillborn child. If the parents divorced or separated duringschool, or the year and the child lived with both parentsKidnapped child. You can treat your child as2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train- before the separation, the custodial parent is themeeting the residency test even if the child hasing course given by a school described in one with whom the child lived for the greater partbeen kidnapped, but both of the following state-(1), or by a state, county, or local govern- of the rest of the year.ments must be true.ment agency.
Example. Your child lived with you for 101. The child is presumed by law enforcementThe 5 calendar months do not have to be con- months of the year. The child lived with yourauthorities to have been kidnapped bysecutive. former spouse for the other 2 months. You aresomeone who is not a member of your
School defined. A school can be an ele- considered the custodial parent.family or the child's family.
mentary school, junior and senior high school, Written declaration.  The custodial parent2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, thecollege, university, or technical, trade, or may use either Form 8332 or a similar statementchild lived with you for more than half ofmechanical school. However, an on-the-job (containing the same information required by thethe part of the year before the date of thetraining course, correspondence school, or form) to make the written declaration to releasekidnapping.school offering courses only through the Internet the exemption to the noncustodial parent. Thedoes not count as a school. This treatment applies for all years until the noncustodial parent must attach the form orchild is returned. However, the last year thisVocational high school students. Stu- statement to his or her tax return.treatment can apply is the earlier of:dents who work on ªco-opº jobs in private indus- The exemption can be released for 1 year,
try as a part of a school's regular course of for a number of specified years (for example,1. The year there is a determination that theclassroom and practical training are considered alternate years), or for all future years, as speci-child is dead, orfull-time students. fied in the declaration. If the exemption is re-
2. The year the child would have reached leased for more than 1 year, the original releasePermanently and totally disabled. Your age 18. must be attached to the return of the noncus-child is permanently and totally disabled if both
todial parent for the first year, and a copy mustof the following apply. Children of divorced or separated parents. be attached for each later year.
In most cases, because of the residency test, a• He or she cannot engage in any substan-
Divorce decree or separation agreementchild of divorced or separated parents is thetial gainful activity because of a physical or
made after 1984. If the divorce decree or sep-qualifying child of the custodial parent. However,mental condition.
aration agreement went into effect after 1984,the child will be treated as the qualifying child of• A doctor determines the condition has the noncustodial parent can attach certainthe noncustodial parent if all four of the followinglasted or can be expected to last continu- pages from the decree or agreement instead ofstatements are true.ously for at least a year or can lead to Form 8332. To be able to do this, the decree or
death. 1. The parents: agreement must state all three of the following.
a. Are divorced or legally separated under 1. The noncustodial parent can claim the
Residency Test a decree of divorce or separate mainte- child as a dependent without regard to any
nance, condition, such as payment of support.To meet this test, your child must have lived with
you for more than half of the year. There are b. Are separated under a written separa- 2. The custodial parent will not claim the child
exceptions for temporary absences, children tion agreement, or as a dependent for the year.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 27

3. The years for which the noncustodial par- If you and another person have the same as a dependent and claim her as a qualifying
ent, rather than the custodial parent, can qualifying child, you and the other person(s) can child for the child tax credit and earned income
claim the child as a dependent. decide which of you will treat the child as a credit. In this case, you as the child's parent will
qualifying child. That person can take all of the be the only one allowed to claim Jane as aThe noncustodial parent must attach all of following tax benefits (provided the person is dependent and claim her as a qualifying child forthe following pages of the decree or agreement eligible for each benefit) based on the qualifying the child tax credit and earned income credit.to his or her tax return. child. The IRS will disallow your mother's claim to
• The cover page (write the other parent's these tax benefits unless she has another quali-• The exemption for the child.social security number on this page). fying child.
• The child tax credit.• The pages that include all of the informa- Example 3Ðqualifying children split be-tion identified in items (1) through (3) • Head of household filing status. tween two persons. The facts are the sameabove. • The credit for child and dependent care as in Example 1 except that you also have two
• The signature page with the other parent's expenses. other young children who are qualifying children
signature and the date of the agreement. of both you and your mother. Only one of you• The exclusion from income for dependent can claim each child as a dependent. However,care benefits. you and your mother can split the three qualify-The noncustodial parent must attach • The earned income credit. ing children between you. For example, you canthe required information even if it was claim one child as a dependent and your motherfiled with a return in an earlier year.
CAUTION
! The other person cannot take any of these can claim the other two.
benefits based on this qualifying child. In otherRemarried parent. If you remarry, the sup- words, you and the other person cannot agree to Example 4Ðtaxpayer who is a qualifyingport provided by your new spouse is treated as divide these tax benefits between you. child. The facts are the same as in Example 1provided by you. except that you are only 18 years old and did notIf you and the other person(s) cannot agreeParents who never married. This special provide more than half of your own support foron who will claim the child and more than onerule for divorced or separated parents also ap- the year. This means you are your mother'sperson files a return claiming the same child, theplies to parents who never married. qualifying child and she could claim you as aIRS will disallow all but one of the claims using dependent. Because of the Dependent Tax-the tie-breaker rule in Table 3-2. payer Test explained earlier, you cannot treat
your daughter as a qualifying child and cannotSupport Test (To Be a Qualifying Example 1Ðchild lived with parent and claim her as a dependent. Only your mother canChild) grandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh- treat your daughter as a qualifying child.ter, Jane, lived with your mother all year. YouTo meet this test, the child cannot have provided
are 25 years old and earned $9,000 for the year.more than half of his or her own support for the Example 5Ðseparated parents. You,Your mother is not your dependent. Jane is ayear. your husband, and your 10-year-old son livedqualifying child of both you and your mother together until August 1, 2007, when your hus-This test is different from the support test to because she meets the relationship, age, resi- band moved out of the household. In August andbe a qualifying relative, which is described later. dency, and support tests for both you and your September, your son lived with you. For the restHowever, to see what is or is not support, see mother. However, only one of you can claim her. of the year, your son lived with your husband.Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative), You agree to let your mother claim Jane. This Your son is a qualifying child of both you andlater. If you are not sure whether a child provided means your mother can claim Jane as a depen- your husband because your son lived with eachmore than half of his or her own support, you dent and can claim her as a qualifying child for of you for more than half the year and becausemay find Worksheet 3-1 helpful. the child tax credit, head of household filing he met the relationship, age, and support testsstatus, credit for child and dependent care ex- for both of you. At the end of the year, you andScholarships. A scholarship received by a penses, exclusion for dependent care benefits, your husband still were not divorced, legallychild who is a full-time student is not taken into and the earned income credit, if she qualifies for separated, or separated under a written separa-account in determining whether the child pro- each of those tax benefits (and if you do not tion agreement, so the special rule for divorcedvided more than half of his or her own support. claim Jane as a dependent or as a qualifying or separated parents does not apply.child for any of those tax benefits).
You and your husband will file separate re-
Example 2Ðtwo persons claim same turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat yourSpecial Test for Qualifying Child of
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 son as a qualifying child. This means, if yourMore Than One Person
except that you and your mother both claim Jane husband does not claim your son as a qualifying
If your qualifying child is not a qualify-
Table 3-2. When More Than One Person Files a Return Claiming theing child for anyone else, this test does
Same Qualifying Child (Tie-Breaker Rule)not apply to you and you do not need to
TIP
read about it. This is also true if your qualifying Caution. If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parentchild is not a qualifying child for anyone else under the rules for children of divorced or separated parents, see Applying thisexcept your spouse with whom you file a joint special test to divorced or separated parents.return.
IF more than one person files a return claiming THEN the child will be treated asIf a child is treated as the qualifying the same qualifying child and . . . the qualifying child of the. . .child of the noncustodial parent under
the rules for children of divorced or only one of the persons is the child's parent, parent.
CAUTION
!
separated parents described earlier, see Apply-
parent with whom the child liveding this special test to divorced or separated
two of the persons are parents of the child and they for the longer period of timeparents, later.
do not file a joint return together, during the year.Sometimes, a child meets the relationship,
age, residency, and support tests to be a qualify- two of the persons are parents of the child, they do
ing child of more than one person. Although the not file a joint return together, and the child lived parent with the higher adjusted
child is a qualifying child of each of these per- with each parent the same amount of time during gross income (AGI).
sons, only one person can actually treat the child the year,
as a qualifying child. To meet this special test,
none of the persons are the child's parent, person with the highest AGI.you must be the person who can treat the child
as a qualifying child.
Page 28 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

child, you can claim your son as a dependent However, only one of you can treat her as a only one allowed to claim your son as a qualify-
and treat him as a qualifying child for the child qualifying child. Your mother agrees to let you ing child for the earned income credit. The IRS
tax credit and exclusion for dependent care ben- treat the child as a qualifying child. will disallow your mother's claim to the earned
efits, if you qualify for each of those tax benefits. income credit and head of household filing sta-
However, you cannot claim head of household Example 10Ðchild did not live with a par- tus unless she has another qualifying child.
filing status because you and your husband did ent. The facts are the same as in Example 9
not live apart the last 6 months of the year. As a except that you and your mother both claim your Qualifying Relativeresult, your filing status is married filing sepa- niece as a qualifying child. In this case, only your
rately, so you cannot claim the earned income mother will be allowed to treat your niece as a There are four tests that must be met for acredit or the credit for child and dependent care qualifying child. This is because your mother's person to be your qualifying relative. The fourexpenses. AGI, $15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300. If tests are:you claimed an exemption, the child tax credit,
Example 6Ðseparated parents claim head of household filing status, credit for child 1. Not a qualifying child test,
same child. The facts are the same as in and dependent care expenses, exclusion for 2. Member of household or relationship test,Example 5 except that you and your husband dependent care benefits, or the earned income
both claim your son as a qualifying child. In this credit for your niece, the IRS will disallow your 3. Gross income test, and
case, only your husband will be allowed to treat claim to all these tax benefits. 4. Support test.your son as a qualifying child. This is because,
Applying this special test to divorced or sep-during 2007, the boy lived with him longer than
arated parents. If a child is treated as thewith you. If you claimed an exemption, the child Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rel-
qualifying child of the noncustodial parent undertax credit, head of household filing status, credit ative can be any age. There is no age test for a
the rules for children of divorced or separatedfor child and dependent care expenses, exclu- qualifying relative.
parents described earlier, only the noncustodialsion for dependent care benefits, or the earned
parent can claim an exemption and the child taxincome credit for your son, the IRS will disallow Kidnapped child. You can treat a child ascredit for the child. However, the noncustodialyour claim to all these tax benefits. In addition, your qualifying relative even if the child has beenparent cannot claim the child as a qualifyingbecause you and your husband did not live apart kidnapped, but both of the following statementschild for head of household filing status, thethe last 6 months of the year, your husband must be true.credit for child and dependent care expenses,cannot claim head of household filing status. As
the exclusion for dependent care benefits, anda result, his filing status is married filing sepa- 1. The child is presumed by law enforcement
the earned income credit. Only the custodialrately, so he cannot claim the earned income authorities to have been kidnapped by
parent or other eligible parent can claim the childcredit or the credit for child and dependent care someone who is not a member of your
as a qualifying child for these four tax benefits. Ifexpenses family or the child's family.
you and another eligible taxpayer both claim the
2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, thechild as a qualifying child for purposes of theseExample 7Ðunmarried parents. You,
child met the tests to be your qualifyingfour benefits, the IRS will disallow all but one ofyour 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived
relative for the part of the year before thethe claims using the tie-breaker rule in Tabletogether all year. You and your son's father are
date of the kidnapping.3-2.not married. Your son is a qualifying child of both
you and his father because he meets the rela- This treatment applies for all years until the
Example 1. You and your 5-year-old sontionship, age, residency, and support tests for child is returned. However, the last year this
lived all year with your mother, who paid theboth you and his father. Your adjusted gross treatment can apply is the earlier of:
entire cost of keeping up the home. Under theincome (AGI) is $12,000 and your son's father's
rules for children of divorced or separated par-AGI is $14,000. Your son's father agrees to let 1. The year there is a determination that the
ents, your son is the qualifying child of youryou treat the child as a qualifying child. This child is dead, or
ex-husband, who can claim an exemption andmeans you can claim him as a dependent and 2. The year the child would have reachedthe child tax credit for the child if he meets all thetreat him as a qualifying child for the child tax age 18.requirements to do so. Because of this, youcredit, head of household filing status, credit for
cannot claim an exemption or the child tax creditchild and dependent care expenses, exclusion
for your son. However, your ex-husband cannotfor dependent care benefits, and the earned
claim the boy as a qualifying child for head ofincome credit, if you qualify for each of those tax Not a Qualifying Child Test
household filing status, the credit for child andbenefits (and if your son's father does not claim
A child is not your qualifying relative if the child isdependent care expenses, the exclusion for de-your son as a dependent or as a qualifying child
your qualifying child or the qualifying child of anypendent care benefits, and the earned incomefor any of those tax benefits).
other taxpayer.credit. You and your mother did not have any
child care expenses or dependent care benefits,Example 8Ðunmarried parents claim
Example 1. Your 22-year-old daughter, whobut the boy is a qualifying child of both you andsame child. The facts are the same as in
is a full-time student, lives with you and meets allyour mother for head of household filing statusExample 7 except that you and your son's father
the tests to be your qualifying child. She is notand the earned income credit because he meetsboth claim your son as a qualifying child. In this
your qualifying relative.the relationship, age, residency, and supportcase, only your son's father will be allowed to
tests for both you and your mother. (Note: Thetreat your son as a qualifying child. This is be-
Example 2. Your 2-year-old son lives withsupport test does not apply for the earned in-cause his AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI,
your parents and meets all the tests to be theircome credit.) However, you agree to let your$12,000. If you claimed an exemption, the child
qualifying child. He is not your qualifying rela-mother claim your son. This means she cantax credit, head of household filing status, credit
tive.claim him for head of household filing status andfor child and dependent care expenses, exclu-
the earned income credit if she qualifies for eachsion for dependent care benefits, or the earned
Example 3. Your son lives with you but isand if you do not claim him as a child for theincome credit for your son, the IRS will disallow
not your qualifying child because he is 30 yearsearned income credit. (You cannot claim head ofyour claim to all these tax benefits.
old and does not meet the age test. He may behousehold filing status because your mother
your qualifying relative if the gross income testExample 9Ðchild did not live with a par- paid the entire cost of keeping up the home.)
and the support test are met.ent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your sis-
Example 2. The facts are the same as inter's child, lived with your mother all year. You
Example 4. Your 13-year-old grandsonExample 1 except that you and your mother bothare 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Your
lived with his mother for 3 months, with his uncleclaim your son as a qualifying child for themother's AGI is $15,000. Your niece is a qualify-
for 4 months, and with you for 5 months duringearned income credit. Your mother also claimsing child of both you and your mother because
him as a qualifying child for head of household the year. He is not your qualifying child becauseshe meets the relationship, age, residency, and
filing status. You as the child's parent will be thesupport tests for both you and your mother. he does not meet the residency test. He may be
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 29

your qualifying relative if the gross income test • A brother or sister of your father or Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a
mother. member of your household all year. However,and the support test are met.
your relationship with her violated the laws of the• Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa- state where you live, because she was marriedChild in Canada or Mexico. A child who lives ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, to someone else. Therefore, she does not meetin Canada or Mexico may be your qualifying or sister-in-law. this test and you cannot claim her as a depen-relative, and you may be able to claim the child
Any of these relationships that were established dent.as a dependent. If the child does not live with
by marriage are not ended by death or divorce.you, the child does not meet the residency test
Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaysto be your qualifying child. If the persons the
Example. You and your wife began sup- treated as your own child. The term ªadoptedchild does live with are not U.S. citizens and
porting your wife's father, a widower, in 2001. childº includes a child who was lawfully placedhave no U.S. gross income, those persons are
Your wife died in 2006. In spite of your wife's with you for legal adoption.not ªtaxpayers,º so the child is not the qualifying
death, your father-in-law continues to meet thischild of any other taxpayer. If the child is not your
test, and you can claim him as a dependent if allqualifying child or the qualifying child of any Cousin. Your cousin meets this test only if he
other tests are met, including the gross incomeother taxpayer, the child is your qualifying rela- or she lives with you all year as a member of
test and support test. your household. A cousin is a descendant of ative if the gross income test and the support test
brother or sister of your father or mother.are met. Foster child. A foster child is an individual
You cannot claim as a dependent a child who who is placed with you by an authorized place-
lives in a foreign country other than Canada or ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other
Gross Income TestMexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S. order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
resident alien, or U.S. national for some part of Joint return. If you file a joint return, the per- To meet this test, a person's gross income forthe year. There is an exception for certain son can be related to either you or your spouse. the year must be less than $3,400.adopted children who lived with you all year. See Also, the person does not need to be related toCitizen or Resident Test, earlier. Gross income defined. Gross income is allthe spouse who provides support. income in the form of money, property, andFor example, your spouse's uncle who re-Example. You provide all the support of services that is not exempt from tax.ceives more than half of his support from youyour children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-may be your qualifying relative, even though heMexico with your mother and have no income. ing business, gross income is the total net salesdoes not live with you. However, if you and yourYou are single and live in the United States. minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-spouse file separate returns, your spouse's un-Your mother is not a U.S. citizen and has no neous income from the business.cle can be your qualifying relative only if he livesU.S. income, so she is not a ªtaxpayer.º Your Gross receipts from rental property are grosswith you all year as a member of your house-children are not your qualifying children because income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., tohold.they do not meet the residency test. Also, they determine the gross income from rental prop-Temporary absences. A person is consid-are not the qualifying children of any other tax- erty.ered to live with you as a member of your house-payer, so they are your qualifying relatives and Gross income includes a partner's share ofhold during periods of time when one of you, oryou can claim them as dependents if all the tests the gross (not a share of the net) partnershipboth, are temporarily absent due to special cir-are met. You may also be able to claim your income.cumstances such as:mother as a dependent if all the tests are met, Gross income also includes all unemploy-including the gross income test and the support • Illness, ment compensation and certain scholarship andtest. fellowship grants. Scholarships received by de-• Education,
gree candidates that are used for tuition, fees,
• Business, supplies, books, and equipment required forMember of Household or particular courses may not be included in gross• Vacation, orRelationship Test income. For more information about scholar-
• Military service. ships, see chapter 12.To meet this test, a person must either:
Tax-exempt income, such as certain socialIf the person is placed in a nursing home for1. Live with you all year as a member of your security benefits, is not included in gross in-an indefinite period of time to receive constanthousehold, or come.medical care, the absence may be considered
2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed Disabled dependent working at shelteredtemporary.
under Relatives who do not have to live workshop. For purposes of this test (the grossDeath or birth. A person who died during thewith you. income test), the gross income of an individualyear, but lived with you as a member of your who is permanently and totally disabled at anyIf at any time during the year the person was household until death, will meet this test. The time during the year does not include income foryour spouse, that person cannot be your qualify- same is true for a child who was born during the services the individual performs at a sheltereding relative. However, see Personal Exemp- year and lived with you as a member of your workshop. The availability of medical care at thetions, earlier. household for the rest of the year. The test is workshop must be the main reason for the indi-also met if a child lived with you as a member of vidual's presence there. Also, the income mustyour household except for any required hospitalRelatives who do not have to live with you. come solely from activities at the workshop thatstay following birth.A person related to you in any of the following are incident to this medical care.If your dependent died during the year andways does not have to live with you all year as a A ªsheltered workshopº is a school that:you otherwise qualified to claim an exemptionmember of your household to meet this test.
for the dependent, you can still claim the exemp- • Provides special instruction or training de-• Your child, stepchild, foster child, or a de- tion. signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-scendant of any of them (for example, vidual, andyour grandchild). (A legally adopted child Example. Your dependent mother died onis considered your child.) • Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-January 15. She met the tests to be your qualify- zations, or by a state, a U.S. possession,ing relative. The other tests to claim an exemp-• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis- a political subdivision of a state or posses-tion for a dependent were also met. You canter, stepbrother, or stepsister. sion, the United States, or the District ofclaim an exemption for her on your return.• Your father, mother, grandparent, or other Columbia.
direct ancestor, but not foster parent. Local law violated. A person does not meet
ªPermanently and totally disabledº has thethis test if at any time during the year the rela-• Your stepfather or stepmother. same meaning here as under Qualifying child,tionship between you and that person violates
• A son or daughter of your brother or sister. earlier.local law.
Page 30 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's Smiths' unreimbursed expenses are not deduct-Support Test (To Be a Qualifying
ible as charitable contributions but are consid-total support, include tax-exempt income, sav-Relative)
ered support they provided for Lauren.ings, and borrowed amounts used to support
To meet this test, you generally must provide that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer-
Home for the aged. If you make a lump-summore than half of a person's total support during tain social security benefits, welfare benefits,
advance payment to a home for the aged to takethe calendar year. nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed
care of your relative for life and the payment isHowever, if two or more persons provide Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions,
based on that person's life expectancy, thesupport, but no one person provides more than and tax-exempt interest.
amount of support you provide each year is thehalf of a person's total support, see Multiple
lump-sum payment divided by the relative's lifeSupport Agreement, later. Example 1. You provide $4,000 toward
expectancy. The amount of support you provideyour mother's support during the year. She hasHow to determine if support test is met. also includes any other amounts you providedearned income of $600, nontaxable social se-You figure whether you have provided more during the year.curity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter-than half of a person's total support by compar- est of $200. She uses all these for her support.ing the amount you contributed to that person's You cannot claim an exemption for your mothersupport with the entire amount of support that Total Supportbecause the $4,000 you provide is not moreperson received from all sources. This includes than half of her total support of $9,600. To figure if you provided more than half of asupport the person provided from his or her own
person's support, you must first determine thefunds. Example 2. Your brother's daughter takes total support provided for that person. Total sup-You may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful in figur- out a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay port includes amounts spent to provide food,ing whether you provided more than half of a
her college tuition. She is personally responsible lodging, clothing, education, medical and dentalperson's support.
for the loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-
Person's own funds not used for support. support. You cannot claim an exemption for her cessities.
A person's own funds are not support unless because you provide less than half of her sup- Generally, the amount of an item of supportthey are actually spent for support. port. is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-
ing that item. For lodging, the amount of supportSocial security benefits. If a husband andExample. Your mother received $2,400 in is the fair rental value of the lodging.wife each receive benefits that are paid by onesocial security benefits and $300 in interest. She Expenses that are not directly related to anycheck made out to both of them, half of the totalpaid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation. one member of a household, such as the cost ofpaid is considered to be for the support of eachShe put $300 in a savings account. food for the household, must be divided amongspouse, unless they can show otherwise.Even though your mother received a total of the members of the household.If a child receives social security benefits and$2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400
uses them toward his or her own support, the($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If you Example 1. Grace Brown, mother of Marybenefits are considered as provided by the child.spent more than $2,400 for her support and no Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and theirother support was received, you have provided Support provided by the state (welfare, two children. Grace gets social security benefitsmore than half of her support. food stamps, housing, etc.). Benefits pro- of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-
vided by the state to a needy person generally portation, and recreation. Grace has no otherChild's wages used for own support. You
are considered support provided by the state. income. Frank and Mary's total food expense forcannot include in your contribution to your
However, payments based on the needs of the the household is $5,200. They pay Grace'schild's support any support that is paid for by the
recipient will not be considered as used entirely medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fairchild with the child's own wages, even if you paid
for that person's support if it is shown that part of rental value of the lodging provided for Grace isthe wages.
$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similarthe payments were not used for that purpose.
Year support is provided. The year you pro- rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total support
vide the support is the year you pay for it, even if as follows:Foster care payments and expenses. Pay-
you do so with borrowed money that you repay ments you receive for the support of a fosterin a later year. child from a child placement agency are consid- Fair rental value of lodging ...... $ 1,800If you use a fiscal year to report your income, ered support provided by the agency. Similarly, Clothing, transportation, andyou must provide more than half of the depen- payments you receive for the support of a foster recreation .................. 2,400dent's support for the calendar year in which child from a state or county are considered sup-your fiscal year begins. Medical expenses ............ 1,200port provided by the state or county.
If you are not in the trade or business ofArmed Forces dependency allotments. The Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) ..... 1,040
providing foster care and your unreimbursedpart of the allotment contributed by the govern- Total support ............... $6,440out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a fosterment and the part taken out of your military pay
child were mainly to benefit an organizationare both considered provided by you in figuring
whether you provide more than half of the sup- qualified to receive deductible charitable contri- The support Frank and Mary provide ($1,800port. If your allotment is used to support persons butions, the expenses are deductible as charita- lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + $1,040other than those you name, you can take the ble contributions but are not considered support food = $4,040) is more than half of Grace'sexemptions for them if they otherwise qualify. you provided. For more information about the $6,440 total support.
deduction for charitable contributions, see chap-
Example. You are in the Armed Forces. ter 24. If your unreimbursed expenses are not Example 2. Your parents live with you, yourYou authorize an allotment for your widowed deductible as charitable contributions, they are spouse, and your two children in a house youmother that she uses to support herself and her considered support you provided. own. The fair rental value of your parents' sharesister. If the allotment provides more than half of If you are in the trade or business of provid- of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each),each person's support, you can take an exemp- ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa-tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify, are not considered support provided by you. ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200,even though you authorize the allotment only for which he spends equally between your motheryour mother. Example.  Lauren, a foster child, lived with and himself for items of support such as cloth-
Mr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 months of theTax-exempt military quarters allowances. ing, transportation, and recreation. Your total
year. The Smiths cared for Lauren because theyThese allowances are treated the same way as food expense for the household is $6,000. Your
wanted to adopt her (although she had not beendependency allotments in figuring support. The heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Your
placed with them for adoption). They did notallotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow- mother has hospital and medical expenses of
care for her as a trade or business or to benefitance for quarters are both considered as pro- $600, which you pay during the year. Figure
the agency that placed her in their home. Thevided by you for support. your parents' total support as follows:
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 31

Worksheet 3-1. Worksheet for Determining Support Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year .......................................... . 1.
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support ..................... . 2.
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ......................... . 3.
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ...... 4.
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ............................ . 5.
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
 6a. Enter the total rent paid ................................................ . 6a.
 6b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home,
also include this amount in line 21. .......................................... . 6b.
7. Enter the total food expenses ............................................... . 7.
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b) ......... 8.
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ........................ . 9.
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance. ............................... . 10.
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses ..................... . 11.
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ........................... . 12.
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............. 13.
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses ...................................... . 14.
15. Enter the person's total education expenses ..................................... . 15.
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance .. 16.
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ............................. . 17.
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses .................................... . 18.
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year ........... 19.
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50) ................................................ . 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support ............... 21.
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
 No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a
qualifying child, stop here; do not complete lines 23±26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to
determine if this person is your qualifying relative.
 Yes. You do not meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state,
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. .. 23.
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ...................................................... . 24.
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ........ 25.
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
 Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 No. You do not meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You cannot claim an exemption for
this person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or
separated parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support Test for Children
of Divorced or Separated Parents, or Kidnapped Child under Qualifying Relative.
Page 32 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

of that person by the fair rental value of lodging $2,000). You have not provided more than halfSupport provided Father Mother he or she provides you. of his support.
Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000
Property. Property provided as support is Child care expenses. If you pay someone toPension spent for their
measured by its fair market value. Fair market provide child or dependent care, you can includesupport ............. 2,100 2,100
value is the price that property would sell for on these payments in the amount you provided forShare of food (1/6 of the open market. It is the price that would be the support of your child or disabled dependent,$6,000) ............. 1,000 1,000 agreed upon between a willing buyer and a even if you claim a credit for the payments. For
willing seller, with neither being required to act,Medical expenses for information on the credit, see chapter 32.
mother .............. 600 and both having reasonable knowledge of the
relevant facts. Other support items. Other items may beParents' total support ... $4,100 $4,700
considered as support depending on the facts inCapital expenses. Capital items, such asYou must apply the support test separately each case.furniture, appliances, and cars, that are boughtto each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000 for a person during the year can be included inlodging, $1,000 food) of your father's total sup- total support under certain circumstances.port of $4,100 ± less than half. You provide Do Not IncludeThe following examples show when a capital$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000 item is or is not support. in Total Supportfood, $600 medical) ± more than half of her total
support of $4,700. You meet the support test for The following items are not included in totalExample 1. You buy a $200 power lawnyour mother, but not your father. Heat and utility support.mower for your 13-year-old child. The child iscosts are included in the fair rental value of the given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. 1. Federal, state, and local income taxes paidlodging, so these are not considered separately. Because the lawn mower benefits all members by persons from their own income. of the household, you cannot include the cost of
Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, the lawn mower in the support of your child. 2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid by
you are considered to provide support equal to persons from their own income. 
the fair rental value of the room, apartment, Example 2. You buy a $150 television set 3. Life insurance premiums. house, or other shelter in which the person lives. as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.
Fair rental value includes a reasonable allow- The television set is placed in your child's bed- 4. Funeral expenses. 
ance for the use of furniture and appliances, and room. You can include the cost of the television 5. Scholarships received by your child if yourfor heat and other utilities that are provided. set in the support of your child. child is a full-time student. 
Fair rental value defined. This is the Example 3. You pay $5,000 for a car and 6. Survivors' and Dependents' Educationalamount you could reasonably expect to receive register it in your name. You and your Assistance payments used for the supportfrom a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It is 17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be- of the child who receives them.used instead of actual expenses such as taxes, cause you own the car and do not give it to yourinterest, depreciation, paint, insurance, utilities, daughter but merely let her use it, you cannotcost of furniture and appliances, etc. In some include the cost of the car in your daughter'scases, fair rental value may be equal to the rent Multiple Support Agreementtotal support. However, you can include in yourpaid. daughter's support your out-of-pocket expenses Sometimes no one provides more than half ofIf you provide the total lodging, the amount of of operating the car for her benefit. the support of a person. Instead, two or moresupport you provide is the fair rental value of the
persons, each of whom would be able to takeroom the person uses, or a share of the fair Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, using the exemption but for the support test, togetherrental value of the entire dwelling if the person personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro- provide more than half of the person's support.has use of your entire home. If you do not pro- vide all the rest of your son's support ± $4,000. When this happens, you can agree that anyvide the total lodging, the total fair rental value Since the car is bought and owned by your son, one of you who individually provides more thanmust be divided depending on how much of the the car's fair market value ($4,500) must be 10% of the person's support, but only one, cantotal lodging you provide. If you provide only a included in his support. Your son has provided claim an exemption for that person as a qualify-part and the person supplies the rest, the fair more than half of his own total support of $8,500 ing relative. Each of the others must sign arental value must be divided between both of ($4,500 + $4,000), so he is not your qualifying statement agreeing not to claim the exemptionyou according to the amount each provides. child. You did not provide more than half of his for that year. The person who claims the exemp-total support, so he is not your qualifying rela- tion must keep these signed statements for hisExample. Your parents live rent free in a tive. You cannot claim an exemption for your or her records. A multiple support declarationhouse you own. It has a fair rental value of son. identifying each of the others who agreed not to$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair
claim the exemption must be attached to therental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur- return of the person claiming the exemption.for the furniture. This does not include heat and ance premiums you pay, including premiums for Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, canutilities. The house is completely furnished with supplementary Medicare coverage, are in- be used for this purpose.furniture belonging to your parents. You pay cluded in the support you provide. You can claim an exemption under a multiple$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usually
support agreement for someone related to youMedical insurance benefits. Medical in-included in rent for houses in the area where
or for someone who lived with you all year as asurance benefits, including basic and supple-your parents live. Therefore, you consider the
member of your household.mentary Medicare benefits, are not part oftotal fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000
support.($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished
Example 1. You, your sister, and your twohouse, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro-
brothers provide the entire support of yourvided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities) Tuition payments and allowances under the
mother for the year. You provide 45%, yourof which you are considered to provide $4,200 GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the
sister 35%, and your two brothers each provide($3,600 + $600). GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances while
10%. Either you or your sister can claim anthey attend school are included in total support.Person living in his or her own home. The exemption for your mother. The other must signtotal fair rental value of a person's home that he Example. During the year, your son re- a statement agreeing not to take an exemptionor she owns is considered support contributed ceives $2,200 from the government under the GI for your mother. The one who claims the exemp-by that person. Bill. He uses this amount for his education. You tion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara-
Living with someone rent free. If you live provide the rest of his support ± $2,000. Be- tion, to his or her return and must keep the
with a person rent free in his or her home, you cause GI benefits are included in total support, statement signed by the other for his or her
must reduce the amount you provide for support your son's total support is $4,200 ($2,200 + records. Because neither brother provides more
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 33

than 10% of the support, neither can take the agreement was not changed after 1984 Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-
exemption and neither has to sign a statement. to say the noncustodial parent cannot port provided by your new spouse is treated as
claim the child as a dependent, and the provided by you.
Example 2. You and your brother each pro- noncustodial parent provides at least
vide 20% of your mother's support for the year. $600 for the child's support during the Child support under pre-1985 agreement.
The remaining 60% of her support is provided year. All child support payments actually received
equally by two persons who are not related to from the noncustodial parent under a pre-1985
her. She does not live with them. Because more agreement are considered used for the supportCustodial parent and noncustodial parent.than half of her support is provided by persons of the child.The custodial parent is the parent with whom thewho cannot claim an exemption for her, no one child lived for the greater part of the year. Thecan take the exemption. Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, theother parent is the noncustodial parent.
noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for theIf the parents divorced or separated duringExample 3. Your father lives with you and child's support. This amount is considered sup-the year and the child lived with both parentsreceives 25% of his support from social security, port provided by the noncustodial parent even ifbefore the separation, the custodial parent is the40% from you, 24% from his brother (your un- the $1,200 was actually spent on things otherone with whom the child lived for the greater partcle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or your than support.of the rest of the year.uncle can take the exemption for your father if
the other signs a statement agreeing not to. The Alimony. Payments to a spouse that are
Example. Your child lived with you for 10one who takes the exemption must attach Form includible in the spouse's gross income as eithermonths of the year. The child lived with your2120, or a similar declaration, to his return and alimony, separate maintenance payments, orformer spouse for the other 2 months. You aremust keep for his records the signed statement similar payments from an estate or trust, are notconsidered the custodial parent.from the one agreeing not to take the exemption. treated as a payment for the support of a depen-
Written declaration.  The custodial parent dent.
may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement
Support Test for Children of (containing the same information required by the Parents who never married. This special rule
Divorced or Separated Parents form) to make the written declaration to release for divorced or separated parents also applies to
the exemption to the noncustodial parent. The parents who never married.In most cases, a child of divorced or separated noncustodial parent must attach the form orparents will be a qualifying child of one of the statement to his or her tax return. Multiple support agreement. If the support ofparents. See Children of divorced or separated The exemption can be released for 1 year, the child is determined under a multiple supportparents under Qualifying Child, earlier. How- for a number of specified years (for example, agreement, this special support test for divorcedever, if the child does not meet the requirements alternate years), or for all future years, as speci- or separated parents does not apply.to be a qualifying child of either parent, the child fied in the declaration. If the exemption is re-may be a qualifying relative of one of the par- leased for more than 1 year, the original releaseents. In that case, the following rules must be must be attached to the return of the noncus-used in applying the support test. todial parent for the first year, and a copy mustA child will be treated as being the qualifying Phaseout ofbe attached for each later year.relative of his or her noncustodial parent if all
four of the following statements are true. Divorce decree or separation agreement Exemptionsmade after 1984. If the divorce decree or sep-1. The parents: aration agreement went into effect after 1984, The amount you can claim as a deduction forthe noncustodial parent can attach certaina. Are divorced or legally separated under exemptions is reduced once your adjusted grosspages from the decree or agreement instead ofa decree of divorce or separate mainte- income (AGI) goes above a certain level for yourForm 8332. To be able to do this, the decree ornance, filing status. These levels are as follows:agreement must state all three of the following.
b. Are separated under a written separa- AGI Level1. The noncustodial parent can claim thetion agreement, or Thatchild as a dependent without regard to any Reducesc. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 condition, such as payment of support. Exemptionmonths of the year.
Filing Status Amount2. The custodial parent will not claim the child
as a dependent for the year.2. The child received over half of his or her
Married filing separately ...... $ 117,300support for the year from the parents. 3. The years for which the noncustodial par- Single ..................  156,400ent, rather than the custodial parent, can3. The child is in the custody of one or both Head of household ..........  195,500claim the child as a dependent.parents for more than half of the year. Married filing jointly .........  234,600
Qualifying widow(er) .........  234,600The noncustodial parent must attach all of4. Either of the following statements is true.
the following pages of the decree or agreement You must reduce the dollar amount of youra. The custodial parent signs a written to his or her tax return. exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part ofdeclaration, discussed later, that he or
• The cover page (write the other parent's $2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-she will not claim the child as a depen-
social security number on this page). rately), that your AGI exceeds the amountdent for the year, and the noncustodial
shown above for your filing status. However, youparent attaches this written declaration • The pages that include all of the informa- can lose no more than 2/3 of the dollar amount ofto his or her return. (If the decree or tion identified in items (1) through (3)
your exemptions. In other words, each exemp-agreement went into effect after 1984, above.
tion cannot be reduced to less than $1,133.see Divorce decree or separation
• The signature page with the other parent'sagreement made after 1984, later.) If your AGI exceeds the level for your filingsignature and the date of the agreement. status, use the Deduction for Exemptions Work-b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Formrate maintenance or written separation
The noncustodial parent must attach 1040A to figure the amount of your deduction foragreement that applies to 2007 states
the required information even if it was exemptions.that the noncustodial parent can claim
filed with a return in an earlier year.  
CAUTION
!the child as a dependent, the decree or
Page 34 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

This chapter explains these methods. In addi-
tion, it also explains the following.Social Security
• Credit for withholding and estimated4.Numbers for tax. When you file your 2007 income tax
return, take credit for all the income tax
Dependents withheld from your salary, wages, pen-
sions, etc., and for the estimated tax youTax WithholdingYou must list the social security number (SSN) paid for 2007.
of any dependent for whom you claim an exemp-
• Underpayment penalty. If you did nottion in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 or and Estimated pay enough tax during the year, eitherForm 1040A.
through withholding or by making esti-If you do not list the dependent's SSN mated tax payments, you may have to payTaxwhen required or if you list an incorrect a penalty. In most cases, the IRS can fig-SSN, the exemption may be disal-
CAUTION
! ure this penalty for you. See Underpay-lowed. ment Penalty at the end of this chapter.
What's New for 2008No SSN. If a person for whom you expect to
claim an exemption on your return does not
Useful Itemshave an SSN, either you or that person should Tax law changes for 2008. When you figure
apply for an SSN as soon as possible by filing You may want to see:how much income tax you want withheld from
Form SS-5, Application for a Social Security your pay and when you figure your estimated
Card, with the Social Security Administration Publicationtax, consider tax law changes effective in 2008.
(SSA). Information about applying for an SSN See What's New for 2008 in the front of this ❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Taxand Form SS-5 is available at your local SSA publication, or get Publication 553, Highlights of
office. 2007 Tax Changes. ❏ 553 Highlights of 2007 Tax Changes It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an
❏ 919 How Do I Adjust My TaxSSN. If you do not have a required SSN by the
Withholding?filing due date, you can file Form 4868 for an
extension of time to file.
Form (and Instructions)RemindersBorn and died in 2007.   If your child was
born and died in 2007, and you do not have an ❏ W-4 Employee's Withholding AllowanceEstimated tax safe harbor for higher incomeSSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the Certificatetaxpayers. If your adjusted gross income waschild's birth certificate instead. If you do, enter ❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pensionmore than $150,000 ($75,000 if you are marriedªDIEDº in column (2) of line 6c of your Form or Annuity Paymentsfiling a separate return), you will have to deposit1040 or Form 1040A.   the smaller of 90% of your expected tax for 2008 ❏ W-4S Request for Federal Income TaxAlien or adoptee with no SSN. If your depen- or 110% of the tax shown on your 2007 return to Withholding From Sick Paydent does not have and cannot get an SSN, you avoid an estimated tax penalty.
must list the individual taxpayer identification ❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request
Payment of estimated tax electronically.number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifica- ❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for IndividualsYou may be able to pay your estimated tax bytion number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.
electronic means. For more information, see ❏ 2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax byTaxpayer identification numbers for How To Pay Estimated Tax in chapter 2 of Publi- Individuals, Estates, and Trustsaliens. If your dependent is a resident or non- cation 505.resident alien who does not have and is not
eligible to get an SSN, your dependent must
apply for an individual taxpayer identification
number (ITIN). Write the number in column (2) of
WithholdingIntroductionline 6c of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. To
apply for an ITIN, use Form W-7, Application for This chapter discusses how to pay your tax as This section discusses income tax withholdingIRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number. you earn or receive income during the year. In on these types of income:
general, the federal income tax is aTaxpayer identification numbers for
• Salaries and wages,pay-as-you-go tax. There are two ways to pay asadoptees. If you have a child who was placed
you go.with you by an authorized placement agency, • Tips,
you may be able to claim an exemption for the • Withholding. If you are an employee, • Taxable fringe benefits,child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or an your employer probably withholds incomeITIN for the child, you must get an adoption • Sick pay,tax from your pay. Tax also may be with-taxpayer identification number (ATIN) for the held from certain other income, including • Pensions and annuities,child from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Application pensions, bonuses, commissions, andfor Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending • Gambling winnings,gambling winnings. In each case, theU.S. Adoptions, for details. amount withheld is paid to the IRS in your • Unemployment compensation, and
name.
• Certain federal payments, such as social
security.• Estimated tax. If you do not pay your tax
through withholding, or do not pay enough This section explains in detail the rules for with-tax that way, you might have to pay esti- holding tax from each of these types of income.mated tax. People who are in business for
This section also covers backup withholdingthemselves generally will have to pay their
on interest, dividends, and other payments.tax this way. You may have to pay esti-
mated tax if you receive income such as
dividends, interest, capital gains, rent, and Salaries and Wagesroyalties. Estimated tax is used to pay not
only income tax, but self-employment tax Income tax is withheld from the pay of most
and alternative minimum tax as well. employees. Your pay includes your regular pay,
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 35

bonuses, commissions, and vacation al- claim. The worksheets are for your own records.New Job
Do not give them to your employer.lowances. It also includes reimbursements and
When you start a new job, you must fill out Formother expense allowances paid under a nonac-
Multiple jobs. If you have income from moreW-4 and give it to your employer. Your employercountable plan. See Supplemental Wages,
should have copies of the form. If you need to than one job at the same time, complete onlylater, for more information about reimburse-
change the information later, you must fill out a one set of Form W-4 worksheets. Then split yourments and allowances paid under a nonac- new form. allowances between the Forms W-4 for eachcountable plan. If you work only part of the year (for example, job. You cannot claim the same allowances withIf your income is low enough that you will not you start working after the beginning of the more than one employer at the same time. Youhave to pay income tax for the year, you may be year), too much tax may be withheld. You may can claim all your allowances with one employerexempt from withholding. This is explained be able to avoid overwithholding if your em- and none with the other(s), or divide them anyunder Exemption From Withholding, later. ployer agrees to use the part-year method. See other way.
Part-Year Method in chapter 1 of Publication
Military retirees. Military retirement pay is Married individuals. If both you and your505 for more information.
treated in the same manner as regular pay for spouse are employed and expect to file a joint
Employee also receiving pension income.income tax withholding purposes, even though it return, figure your withholding allowances using
If you receive pension or annuity income andis treated as a pension or annuity for other tax your combined income, adjustments, deduc-
begin a new job, you will need to file Form W-4purposes. tions, exemptions, and credits. Use only one set
with your new employer. However, you can of worksheets. You can divide your total al-
choose to split your withholding allowances be- lowances any way, but you cannot claim anHousehold workers. If you are a household tween your pension and job in any manner. See allowance that your spouse also claims.worker, you can ask your employer to withhold Publication 919 for more information. If you and your spouse expect to file sepa-income tax from your pay.
rate returns, figure your allowances using sepa-Tax is withheld only if you want it withheld
rate worksheets based on your own individualand your employer agrees to withhold it. If you Changing Your Withholding income, adjustments, deductions, exemptions,do not have enough income tax withheld, you
and credits.may have to pay estimated tax, as discussed Events during the year may change your marital
status or the exemptions, adjustments, deduc-later under Estimated Tax. Alternative method of figuring withholdingtions, or credits you expect to claim on your tax allowances. You do not have to use the Formreturn. When this happens, you may need toFarmworkers. Income tax generally is with- W-4 worksheets if you use a more accurategive your employer a new Form W-4 to changeheld from your cash wages for work on a farm method of figuring the number of withholdingyour withholding status or number of al-unless your employer both: allowances. See Alternative method of figuringlowances. withholding allowances under Completing Form• Pays you cash wages of less than $150 If the event changes your withholding status W-4 and Worksheets in chapter 1 of Publicationduring the year, and or the number of allowances you are claiming, 505 for more information.you must give your employer a new Form W-4• Has expenditures for agricultural labor to-
within 10 days after either of the following.taling less than $2,500 during the year. Personal Allowances Worksheet. Use the
• Your divorce, if you have been claiming Personal Allowances Worksheet on page 1 of
You can ask your employer to withhold in- married status. Form W-4 to figure your withholding allowances
come tax from noncash wages and other wages based on exemptions and any special al-• Any event that decreases the number ofnot subject to withholding. If your employer does lowances that apply.withholding allowances you can claim.not agree to withhold tax, or if not enough is
Deductions and Adjustments Worksheet.withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, as Generally, you can submit a new Form W-4 Use this worksheet if you plan to itemize yourdiscussed later under Estimated Tax. whenever you wish to change the number of deductions, claim certain credits, or claim ad-your withholding allowances for any other rea- justments to the income on your 2008 tax returnson. and you want to reduce your withholding. Also,Determining Amount of Tax
complete this worksheet when you haveChanging your withholding for 2009. IfWithheld Using Form W-4
changes to these items to see if you need toevents in 2008 will decrease the number of your
change your withholding.The amount of income tax your employer with- withholding allowances for 2009, you must give
The Deductions and Adjustments Worksheetholds from your regular pay depends on two your employer a new Form W-4 by December 1,
is on page 2 of Form W-4. Chapter 1 of Publica-things. 2008. If the event occurs in December 2008,
tion 505 explains this worksheet.submit a new Form W-4 within 10 days.• The amount you earn.
Two-Earners/Multiple Jobs Worksheet.• The information you give your employer
You may need to complete this worksheet if youon Form W-4. Checking Your Withholding
have more than one job or a working spouse.
You also can add to the amount, if any, on line 8After you have given your employer a Form W-4,Form W-4 includes three types of information
of this worksheet any additional withholding nec-you can check to see whether the amount of taxthat your employer will use to figure your with-
essary to cover any amount you expect to owewithheld from your pay is too little or too much.holding.
other than income tax, such as self-employmentSee Publication 919, later. If too much or too• Whether to withhold at the single rate or at tax.little tax is being withheld, you should give your
the lower married rate. employer a new Form W-4 to change your with-
holding.• How many withholding allowances you
Getting the Right Amount of Taxclaim. (Each allowance reduces the
Note. You cannot give your employer a pay- Withheldamount withheld.)
ment to cover withholding for past pay periods or
• Whether you want an additional amount In most situations, the tax withheld from youra payment for estimated tax.
withheld. pay will be close to the tax you figure on your
return if you follow these two rules.
Completing Form W-4 and • You accurately complete all the Form W-4Note. You must specify a filing status and a Worksheets worksheets that apply to you.number of withholding allowances on Form W-4.
You cannot specify only a dollar amount of with- • You give your employer a new Form W-4Form W-4 has worksheets to help you figure
when changes occur.holding. how many withholding allowances you can
Page 36 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

But because the worksheets and withholding No Form W-4. If you do not give your em- Supplemental Wages
ployer a completed Form W-4, your employermethods do not account for all possible situa-
Supplemental wages include bonuses, commis-must withhold at the highest rate, as if you weretions, you may not be getting the right amount
sions, overtime pay, vacation allowances, cer-single and claimed no withholding allowances.withheld. This is most likely to happen in the
tain sick pay, and expense allowances underfollowing situations. Repaying withheld tax. If you find you are certain plans. The payer can figure withholding
• You are married and both you and your having too much tax withheld because you did on supplemental wages using the same method
spouse work. not claim all the withholding allowances you are used for your regular wages. However, if these
entitled to, you should give your employer a new payments are identified separately from your• You have more than one job at a time. Form W-4. Your employer cannot repay any of regular wages, your employer or other payer of
• You have nonwage income, such as inter- the tax previously withheld. Instead, claim the supplemental wages can withhold income tax
est, dividends, alimony, unemployment full amount withheld when you file your tax re- from these wages at a flat rate.
turn.compensation, or self-employment in-
However, if your employer has withheldcome. Expense allowances. Reimbursements or
more than the correct amount of tax for the Form other expense allowances paid by your em-• You will owe additional amounts with your W-4 you have in effect, you do not have to fill out ployer under a nonaccountable plan are treatedreturn, such as self-employment tax. a new Form W-4 to have your withholding low- as supplemental wages.
ered to the correct amount. Your employer can• Your withholding is based on obsolete Reimbursements or other expense al-
repay the amount that was withheld incorrectly.Form W-4 information for a substantial lowances paid under an accountable plan that
If you are not repaid, your Form W-2 will reflectpart of the year. are more than your proven expenses are treated
the full amount actually withheld. as paid under a nonaccountable plan if you do• Your earnings are more than $130,000 if not return the excess payments within a reason-you are single or $180,000 if you are mar- able period of time.ried. Exemption From Withholding For more information about accountable and
nonaccountable expense allowance plans, see• You work only part of the year. If you claim exemption from withholding, your Reimbursements in chapter 26.• You change the number of your withhold- employer will not withhold federal income tax
ing allowances during the year. from your wages. The exemption applies only to
income tax, not to social security or Medicare Penaltiestax.Cumulative wage method. If you change the You can claim exemption from withholding You may have to pay a penalty of $500 if both ofnumber of your withholding allowances during for 2008 only if both of the following situations the following apply.the year, too much or too little tax may have apply.been withheld for the period before you made • You make statements or claim withholding
• For 2007 you had a right to a refund of allthe change. You may be able to compensate for allowances on your Form W-4 that reduce
federal income tax withheld because youthis if your employer agrees to use the cumula- the amount of tax withheld.
had no tax liability.tive wage withholding method for the rest of the • You have no reasonable basis for thoseyear. You must ask in writing that your employer • For 2008 you expect a refund of all federal statements or allowances at the time youuse this method. income tax withheld because you expect prepare your Form W-4.To be eligible, you must have been paid for to have no tax liability.
the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi- There is also a criminal penalty for willfully
weekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year. supplying false or fraudulent information on yourStudents. If you are a student, you are not Form W-4 or for willfully failing to supply informa-automatically exempt. See chapter 1 to see tion that would increase the amount withheld.whether you must file a return. If you work onlyPublication 919 The penalty upon conviction can be either a finepart time or only during the summer, you may of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 1 year,qualify for exemption from withholding.To make sure you are getting the right amount of or both.tax withheld, get Publication 919. It will help you These penalties will apply if you deliberatelyAge 65 or older or blind. If you are 65 or oldercompare the total tax to be withheld during the and knowingly falsify your Form W-4 in an at-or blind, use one of the worksheets in chapter 1year with the tax you can expect to figure on tempt to reduce or eliminate the proper withhold-of Publication 505, under Exemption From With-your return. It also will help you determine how ing of taxes. A simple error or an honest mistakeholding, to help you decide whether you canmuch additional withholding, if any, is needed will not result in one of these penalties. Forclaim exemption from withholding. Do not useeach payday to avoid owing tax when you file example, a person who has tried to figure theeither worksheet if you will itemize deductions,
your return. If you do not have enough tax with- number of withholding allowances correctly, butclaim exemptions for dependents, or claim tax
held, you may have to pay estimated tax, as claims seven when the proper number is six, willcredits on your 2008 return. Instead, see Itemiz-
explained under Estimated Tax, later. not be charged a W-4 penalty.ing deductions or claiming exemptions or credits
in chapter 1 of Publication 505.
TipsClaiming exemption from withholding. ToRules Your Employer Must Follow
claim exemption, you must give your employer a The tips you receive while working on your jobIt may be helpful for you to know some of the Form W-4. Do not complete lines 5 and 6. Enter are considered part of your pay. You must in-withholding rules your employer must follow. ªExemptº on line 7. clude your tips on your tax return on the sameThese rules can affect how to fill out your Form If you claim exemption, but later your situa- line as your regular pay. However, tax is notW-4 and how to handle problems that may arise. tion changes so that you will have to pay income withheld directly from tip income, as it is fromtax after all, you must file a new Form W-4 within your regular pay. Nevertheless, your employer10 days after the change. If you claim exemptionNew Form W-4. When you start a new job, will take into account the tips you report whenin 2008, but you expect to owe income tax foryour employer should give you a Form W-4 to fill figuring how much to withhold from your regular2009, you must file a new Form W-4 by Decem-out. Beginning with your first payday, your em- pay.ber 1, 2008.ployer will use the information you give on the See chapter 6 for information on reportingYour claim of exempt status may be re-form to figure your withholding. your tips to your employer. For more informationviewed by the IRS.If you later fill out a new Form W-4, your on the withholding rules for tip income, see Pub-
employer can put it into effect as soon as possi- An exemption is good for only 1 year. lication 531, Reporting Tip Income.
ble. The deadline for putting it into effect is the You must give your employer a new Form W-4
start of the first payroll period ending 30 or more by February 15 each year to continue your ex- How employer figures amount to withhold.
days after you turn it in. emption. The tips you report to your employer are counted
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 37

as part of your income for the month you report Union agreements. If you receive sick pay It does not matter whether your winnings are
under a collective bargaining agreement be- paid in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Win-them. Your employer can figure your withholding
tween your union and your employer, the agree- nings not paid in cash are taken into account atin either of two ways.
ment may determine the amount of income tax their fair market value.• By withholding at the regular rate on the withholding. See your union representative or Gambling winnings from bingo, keno, and slotsum of your pay plus your reported tips. your employer for more information. machines generally are not subject to income• By withholding at the regular rate on your tax withholding. However, you may need to pro-Form W-4S. If you choose to have income taxpay plus a percentage of your reported vide the payer with a social security number towithheld from sick pay paid by a third party, suchtips. avoid withholding. See Backup withholding onas an insurance company, you must fill out Form gambling winnings in chapter 1 of PublicationW-4S. Its instructions contain a worksheet you 505. If you receive gambling winnings not sub-Not enough pay to cover taxes. If your regu- can use to figure the amount you want withheld. ject to withholding, you may need to pay esti-lar pay is not enough for your employer to with- They also explain restrictions that may apply. mated tax. See Estimated Tax, later.hold all the tax (including income tax, social Give the completed form to the payer of your If you do not pay enough tax through with-security tax, Medicare tax, or railroad retirement sick pay. The payer must withhold according to holding or estimated tax payments, you maytax) due on your pay plus your tips, you can give your directions on the form. have to pay a penalty. See Underpayment Pen-your employer money to cover the shortage.
alty, later.See Giving your employer money for taxes in Estimated tax. If you do not request withhold-
chapter 6. ing on Form W-4S, or if you do not have enough Form W-2G. If a payer withholds income taxtax withheld, you may have to make estimated from your gambling winnings, you should re-tax payments. If you do not pay enough esti-Allocated tips. Your employer should not ceive a Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Win-mated tax or have enough income tax withheld,withhold income tax, social security tax, Medi- nings, showing the amount you won and theyou may have to pay a penalty. See Underpay-care tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allo- amount withheld. Report the tax withheld on linement Penalty at the end of this chapter.cated tips. Withholding is based only on your 64 of Form 1040.
pay plus your reported tips. Your employer
Pensions and Annuitiesshould refund to you any incorrectly withheld Unemploymenttax. See Allocated Tips in chapter 6 for more Income tax usually will be withheld from your Compensationinformation. pension or annuity distributions unless you
choose not to have it withheld. This rule applies You can choose to have income tax withheld
Taxable Fringe Benefits to distributions from: from unemployment compensation. To make
this choice, you will have to fill out Form W-4V• A traditional individual retirement arrange-The value of certain noncash fringe benefits you (or a similar form provided by the payer) andment (IRA),receive from your employer is considered part of give it to the payer.your pay. Your employer generally must with- • A life insurance company under an en- Unemployment compensation is taxable. So,hold income tax on these benefits from your dowment, annuity, or life insurance con- if you do not have income tax withheld, you mayregular pay. tract, have to pay estimated tax. See Estimated Tax,
For information on fringe benefits, see Fringe later.• A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan,Benefits under Employee Compensation in If you do not pay enough tax, either through• A stock bonus plan, andchapter 5. withholding or estimated tax, you may have to
pay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty,• Any other plan that defers the time youAlthough the value of your personal use of an
later, for information.receive compensation.employer-provided car, truck, or other highway
motor vehicle is taxable, your employer can
The amount withheld depends on whetherchoose not to withhold income tax on that Federal Paymentsyou receive payments spread out over moreamount. Your employer must notify you if this
than 1 year (periodic payments), within 1 yearchoice is made. You can choose to have income tax withheld
(nonperiodic payments), or as an eligible rollo- from certain federal payments you receive.For more information on withholding on tax- ver distribution (ERD). You cannot choose not to These payments are:able fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of Publication have income tax withheld from an ERD.505. 1. Social security benefits,
More information. For more information on
2. Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,taxation of annuities and distributions (includingSick Pay
eligible rollover distributions) from qualified re- 3. Commodity credit loans you choose to in-Sick pay is a payment to you to replace your tirement plans, see chapter 10. For information clude in your gross income, andon IRAs, see chapter 17. For more informationregular wages while you are temporarily absent
on withholding on pensions and annuities, in- 4. Payments under the Agricultural Act offrom work due to sickness or personal injury. To
cluding a discussion of Form W-4P, see Pen- 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et. seq.), or title II ofqualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a plan
sions and Annuities in chapter 1 of Publication the Disaster Assistance Act of 1988, asto which your employer is a party.
505. amended, that are treated as insuranceIf you receive sick pay from your employer or proceeds and that you receive because:an agent of your employer, income tax must be
withheld. An agent who does not pay regular Gambling Winnings a. Your crops were destroyed or damaged
wages to you may choose to withhold income by drought, flood, or any other naturalIncome tax is withheld at a flat 25% rate fromtax at a flat rate. disaster, orcertain kinds of gambling winnings.However, if you receive sick pay from a third b. You were unable to plant crops be-Gambling winnings of more than $5,000 fromparty who is not acting as an agent of your cause of a natural disaster described inthe following sources are subject to income taxemployer, income tax will be withheld only if you (a).withholding.choose to have it withheld. See Form W-4S,
• Any sweepstakes; wagering pool, includ-below. To make this choice, you will have to fill outing payments made to winners of poker Form W-4V (or a similar form provided by theIf you receive payments under a plan in tournaments on or after March 4, 2008; or payer) and give it to the payer.which your employer does not participate (such lottery.as an accident or health plan where you paid all If you do not choose to have income tax
the premiums), the payments are not sick pay • Any other wager, if the proceeds are at withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax.
and usually are not taxable. least 300 times the amount of the bet. See Estimated Tax, later.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

If you do not pay enough tax, either through penalty applies, see Underpayment Penalty, at You and your spouse can make joint esti-
withholding or estimated tax, you may have to the end of this chapter. mated tax payments even if you are not living
pay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty, at together.
the end of this chapter, for information. However, you and your spouse cannot makeWho Does Not Have To
joint estimated tax payments if:Pay Estimated TaxMore information. For more information
• You are legally separated under a decreeabout the tax treatment of social security and If you receive salaries or wages, you can avoid of divorce or separate maintenance,railroad retirement benefits, see chapter 11. Get having to pay estimated tax by asking your em-Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide, for infor- • You and your spouse have different taxployer to take more tax out of your earnings. Tomation about the tax treatment of commodity years, ordo this, give a new Form W-4 to your employer.credit loans or crop disaster payments. See chapter 1 of Publication 505. • Either spouse is a nonresident alien (un-
less you elected to be treated as a resi-
Backup Withholding dent alien (see chapter 1 of PublicationEstimated tax not required. You do not have
519)).to pay estimated tax for 2008 if you meet allBanks or other businesses that pay you certain three of the following conditions.kinds of income must file an information return Whether you and your spouse make joint esti-• You had no tax liability for 2007.(Form 1099) with the IRS. The information re- mated tax payments or separate payments willturn shows how much you were paid during the not affect your choice of filing a joint tax return or• You were a U.S. citizen or resident for theyear. It also includes your name and taxpayer separate returns for 2008.whole year.identification number (TIN). TINs are explained
2007 separate returns and 2008 joint re-• Your 2007 tax year covered a 12-monthin chapter 1.
turn. If you plan to file a joint return with yourperiod.These payments generally are not subject to
spouse for 2008, but you filed separate returnswithholding. However, ªbackupº withholding is
for 2007, your 2007 tax is the total of the taxYou had no tax liability for 2007 if your total taxrequired in certain situations. Backup withhold-
shown on your separate returns. You filed awas zero or you did not have to file an incomeing can apply to most kinds of payments that are
separate return if you filed as single, head oftax return.reported on Form 1099.
household, or married filing separately.The payer must withhold at a flat 28% rate in
the following situations. 2007 joint return and 2008 separate re-Who Must Pay Estimated
turns. If you plan to file a separate return for• You do not give the payer your TIN in the Tax 2008, but you filed a joint return for 2007, yourrequired manner.
2007 tax is your share of the tax on the jointIf you had a tax liability for 2007, you may have• The IRS notifies the payer that the TIN return. You file a separate return if you file asto pay estimated tax for 2008.you gave is incorrect. single, head of household, or married filing sep-
arately.• You are required, but fail, to certify that General rule. You must pay estimated tax foryou are not subject to backup withholding. To figure your share of the tax on the joint2008 if both of the following apply.
return, first figure the tax both you and your• The IRS notifies the payer to start with- 1. You expect to owe at least $1,000 in tax spouse would have paid had you filed separateholding on interest or dividends because for 2008, after subtracting your withholding returns for 2007 using the same filing status asyou have underreported interest or divi- and credits. for 2008. Then multiply the tax on the joint returndends on your income tax return. The IRS
by the following fraction.will do this only after it has mailed you four 2. You expect your withholding and credits to
notices over at least a 210-day period. be less than the smaller of: The tax you would have paid
had you filed a separate returna. 90% of the tax to be shown on yourSee Backup Withholding in chapter 1 of Publi-
2008 tax return, orcation 505 for more information. The total tax you and your
spouse would have paid hadb. 100% of the tax shown on your 2007 you filed separate returnsPenalties. There are civil and criminal penal- tax return. Your 2007 tax return must
ties for giving false information to avoid backup cover all 12 months. Example. Joe and Heather filed a joint re-withholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi- turn for 2007 showing taxable income ofnal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up to $48,500 and a tax of $6,496. Of the $48,500Special rules for farmers, fishermen, and$1,000 or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or both. taxable income, $40,100 was Joe's and the resthigher income taxpayers. There are excep-
was Heather's. For 2008, they plan to file mar-tions to the general rule for farmers, fishermen,
ried filing separately. Joe figures his share of theand certain higher income taxpayers. See Fig-
tax on the 2007 joint return as follows.ure 4-A (on the next page) and chapter 2 of
Estimated Tax Publication 505 for more information.
Tax on $40,100 based on a separateAliens. Resident and nonresident aliensEstimated tax is the method used to pay tax on return ...................... $6,455
also may have to pay estimated tax. Residentincome that is not subject to withholding. This Tax on $8,400 based on a separate
aliens should follow the rules in this chapterincludes income from self-employment, interest, return ......................  873
unless noted otherwise. Nonresident aliensdividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale of Total ...................... $ 7,328
should get Form 1040-ES (NR), U.S. Estimatedassets, prizes, and awards. You also may have Joe's percentage of total ($6,455 ÷Tax for Nonresident Alien Individuals.to pay estimated tax if the amount of income tax $7,328) .................... 88%You are an alien if you are not a citizen orbeing withheld from your salary, pension, or Joe's share of tax on joint returnnational of the United States. You are a residentother income is not enough. ($6,496 × 88%) ............... $ 5,716alien if you either have a green card or meet theEstimated tax is used to pay both income tax
substantial presence test. For more informationand self-employment tax, as well as other taxes
about the substantial presence test, see Publi-and amounts reported on your tax return. If you How To Figure Estimatedcation 519.do not pay enough through withholding or esti-
mated tax payments, you may have to pay a Tax
penalty. If you do not pay enough by the due Married taxpayers. To figure whether you
date of each payment period (see When To Pay must pay estimated tax, apply the rules dis- To figure your estimated tax, you must figure
Estimated Tax, later), you may be charged a cussed here to your separate estimated income. your expected adjusted gross income (AGI), tax-
penalty even if you are due a refund when you If you can make joint estimated tax payments, able income, taxes, deductions, and credits for
file your tax return. For information on when the you can apply these rules on a joint basis. the year.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 39

Figure 4-A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Will you owe $1,000 or more
for 2008 after subtracting
income tax withholding and
credits from your total tax?
(Do not subtract any
estimated tax payments.)
You MUST make estimated
tax payment(s) by the
required due date(s).
Start Here
No
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 100%* of the tax shown
on your 2007 tax return?
/H17075
No
/H17075
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 90% (662⁄3 % for farmers
and fishermen) of the tax
shown on your 2008 tax
return? Note: Your 2007 return must
have covered a 12-month
period.
You are NOT required to pay
estimated tax.
See When To Pay
Estimated Tax.
No
Yes
* 110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2007 and 2008 is from farming or fishing and your 2007 adjusted gross in come was more than
$150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2008 is married filing a separate return).
/H17074
/H17076
/H17076
 For the period:  Due date:When figuring your 2008 estimated tax, it estimated tax at that time, or you can pay it in
may be helpful to use your income, deductions, installments. If you choose to pay in install-
Jan. 1* ± March 31 ..... April 15and credits for 2007 as a starting point. Use your ments, make your first payment by the due date
April 1 ± May 31 ....... June 152007 federal tax return as a guide. You can use for the first payment period. Make your remain-
Form 1040-ES to figure your estimated tax. June 1 ± August 31 ..... September 15 ing installment payments by the due dates for
Nonresident aliens use Form 1040-ES (NR) to the later periods.Sept. 1± Dec. 31 ....... January 15
next year**figure estimated tax. No income subject to estimated tax duringYou must make adjustments both for *If your tax year does not begin on January 1, first period. If you do not have income subjectchanges in your own situation and for recent see the Form 1040-ES instructions. to estimated tax until a later payment period, youchanges in the tax law. For 2008, there are **See January payment, later. must make your first payment by the due dateseveral changes in the law. For a discussion of for that period. You can pay your entire esti-these changes, see Publication 553, Highlights mated tax by the due date for that period, or youof 2007 Tax Changes, or visit the IRS website at Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule. If the due can pay it in installments by the due date for thatwww.irs.gov. date for an estimated tax payment falls on a period and the due dates for the remaining peri-Form 1040-ES includes a worksheet to help Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the payment ods. The following chart shows when to makeyou figure your estimated tax. Keep the work- will be on time if you make it on the next day that installment payments.sheet for your records. is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. For
For more complete information and exam- example, a payment due Sunday, June 15, If you first have
ples of how to figure your estimated tax for 2008, income on which Make a Make later2008, will be on time if you make it by Monday,
you must pay payment installmentssee chapter 2 of Publication 505. June 16, 2008.
estimated tax: by:* by:*
January payment. If you file your 2008 Form Before April 1 April 15 June 15When To Pay Estimated 1040 or Form 1040A by February 2, 2009, and Sept. 15
Tax Jan. 15 next yearpay the rest of the tax you owe, you do not need
to make the payment due on January 15, 2009. April 1 ± May 31 June 15 Sept. 15For estimated tax purposes, the year is divided Jan. 15 next yearFiscal year taxpayers. If your tax year doesinto four payment periods. Each period has a
June 1 ± Aug. 31 Sept. 15 Jan. 15 next yearnot start on January 1, see the Form 1040-ESspecific payment due date. If you do not pay
instructions for your payment due dates.enough tax by the due date of each of the pay- After Aug. 31 Jan. 15 (None)ment periods, you may be charged a penalty next year
even if you are due a refund when you file your
*See January payment, and Saturday, Sunday,income tax return. The following chart gives the When To Start
holiday rule under When To Pay Estimatedpayment periods and due dates for estimated
Tax, earlier.You do not have to make estimated tax pay-tax payments.
ments until you have income on which you will
owe the tax. If you have income subject to esti-
mated tax during the first payment period, you How much to pay to avoid a penalty. To
must make your first payment by the due date determine how much you should pay by each
for the first payment period. You can pay all your payment due date, see How To Figure Each
Page 40 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Payment, next. If the earlier discussion of No Crediting an Overpayment Paying Electronically
income subject to estimated tax during first pe-
If you show an overpayment of tax after complet- If you want to make estimated payments byriod or the later discussion of Change in esti-
ing your Form 1040 or Form 1040A for 2007, using EFTPS, by electronic funds withdrawal, ormated tax applies to you, you may need to read
you can apply part or all of it to your estimated by credit card, see the Form 1040-ES instruc-Annualized Income Installment Method in chap-
tax for 2008. On line 75 of Form 1040, or line 45ter 2 of Publication 505 for information on how to tions or How To Pay Estimated Tax in chapter 2
of Form 1040A, enter the amount you wantavoid a penalty. of Publication 505.
credited to your estimated tax rather than re-
funded. The amount you have credited shouldHow To Figure Each be taken into account when figuring your esti-
Payment mated tax payments. Credit for WithholdingThe credit will be applied to your payments inYou should pay enough estimated tax by the the order necessary to avoid the penalty for and Estimated Taxdue date of each payment period to avoid a underpayment of estimated tax. You cannotpenalty for that period. You can figure your re- have any of that amount refunded to you until When you file your 2007 income tax return, takequired payment for each period by using either the close of that tax year. You also cannot use credit for all the income tax and excess socialthe regular installment method or the annualized that overpayment in any other way. security or railroad retirement tax withheld fromincome installment method. These methods are
your salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also, takedescribed in chapter 2 of Publication 505. If you
credit for the estimated tax you paid for 2007.do not pay enough each payment period, you Using the Payment Vouchers These credits are subtracted from your tax. Youmay be charged a penalty even if you are due a
should file a return and claim these credits, evenrefund when you file your tax return. Each payment of estimated tax by check or if you do not owe tax.money order must be accompanied by a pay-Underpayment penalty. Under the regular
ment voucher from Form 1040-ES. If you mademethod, if your estimated tax payment for any Two or more employers. If you had two orestimated tax payments last year, you shouldperiod is less than one-fourth of your estimated more employers and were paid wages of morereceive a copy of the 2008 Form 1040-ES in thetax, you may be charged a penalty for underpay- than $97,500 during 2007, too much social se-mail. It will have payment vouchers preprintedment of estimated tax for that period when you curity or tier 1 railroad retirement tax may havewith your name, address, and social securityfile your tax return. See chapter 4 of Publication been withheld from your wages. You may benumber. Using the preprinted vouchers will505 for more information. able to claim the excess as a credit against yourspeed processing, reduce the chance of error,
income tax when you file your return. See Creditand help save processing costs.Change in estimated tax. After you make an
for Excess Social Security Tax or Railroad Re-estimated tax payment, changes in your income, If you did not pay estimated tax last year, you
tirement Tax Withheld in chapter 37.adjustments, deductions, credits, or exemptions will have to get Form 1040-ES. Follow the in-
may make it necessary for you to refigure your structions in the package to make sure you use
estimated tax. Pay the unpaid balance of your the vouchers correctly. Withholding
amended estimated tax by the next payment Use the window envelopes that came with
due date after the change or in installments by If you had income tax withheld during 2007, youyour Form 1040-ES package. If you use your
that date and the due dates for the remaining should be sent a statement by January 31, 2008,own envelopes, make sure you mail your pay-
payment periods. showing your income and the tax withheld. De-ment vouchers to the address shown in the
pending on the source of your income, you willForm 1040-ES instructions for the place where
receive:you live.
Estimated Tax Payments • Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement,Do not use the address shown in theNot Required Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruc- • Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,tions.
CAUTION
!You do not have to pay estimated tax if your or
withholding in each payment period is at least as If you file a joint return and you are making • A form in the 1099 series.much as: joint estimated tax payments, enter the names
and social security numbers on the payment• One-fourth of your required annual pay-
Forms W-2 and W-2G. Always file Form W-2voucher in the same order as they will appear onment, or
the joint return. with your income tax return. File Form W-2G
• Your required annualized income install- with your return only if it shows any federal
ment for that period. income tax withheld from your winnings.Change of address. You must notify the IRS
if you are making estimated tax payments and You should get at least two copies of eachYou also do not have to pay estimated tax if you
you changed your address during the year. You form you receive. Attach one copy to the front ofwill pay enough through withholding to keep the
must send a clear and concise written statement your federal income tax return. Keep one copyamount you owe with your return under $1,000.
to the Internal Revenue Service Center where for your records. You also should receive copies
you filed your last return and provide all of the to file with your state and local returns.How To Pay Estimated Tax following.
There are five ways to pay estimated tax. • Your full name (and spouse's full name).
Form W-2• By crediting an overpayment on your 2007 • Your signature (and spouse's signature).
return to your 2008 estimated tax. Your employer is required to provide or send• Your old address (and spouse's old ad- Form W-2 to you no later than January 31, 2008.dress if different).• By sending in your payment (check or You should receive a separate Form W-2 frommoney order) with a payment voucher • Your new address. each employer you worked for.from Form 1040-ES. If you stopped working before the end of the• Your social security number (and spouse's
• By using the Electronic Federal Tax Pay- year, your employer could have given you yoursocial security number).
ment System (EFTPS). Form W-2 at any time after you stopped working.
You can use Form 8822, Change of Address, for However, your employer must provide or send it• By electronic funds withdrawal if you are this purpose. to you by January 31, 2008.filing Form 1040 or Form 1040A electroni- If you ask for the form, your employer must If you have preprinted payment vouchers,cally. send it to you within 30 days after receiving yourcontinue to use them until the IRS sends you
• By credit card using a pay-by-phone sys- written request or within 30 days after your finalnew ones. However, do not correct the address
tem or the Internet. wage payment, whichever is later.on the old voucher.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 41

If you have not received your Form W-2 on You cannot use Form 1040EZ if you received • The IRS address to which you sent the
time, you should ask your employer for it. If you payments reported on Form 1099-R. payments,
do not receive it by February 15, call the IRS. • Your name when you made the payments,Backup withholding. If you were subject toForm W-2 shows your total pay and other andbackup withholding on income you received dur-compensation and the income tax, social secur- ing 2007, include the amount withheld, asity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheld dur- • Your social security number.shown in box 4 of your Form 1099, in the total oning the year. Include the federal income tax The statement should cover payments youline 64 of Form 1040, line 38 of Form 1040A, orwithheld (as shown on Form W-2) on: made jointly with your spouse as well as any youline 7 of Form 1040EZ.
• Line 64 if you file Form 1040, made separately.
• Line 38 if you file Form 1040A, or
Form Not Correct Separate Returns• Line 7 if you file Form 1040EZ.
If you receive a form with incorrect information If you and your spouse made separate esti-In addition, Form W-2 is used to report any on it, you should ask the payer for a corrected mated tax payments for 2007 and you file sepa-taxable sick pay you received and any income form. Call the telephone number or write to the rate returns, you can take credit only for yourtax withheld from your sick pay. address given for the payer on the form. The own payments.
corrected Form W-2G or Form 1099 you receive If you made joint estimated tax payments,Form W-2G will have an ªXº in the ªCORRECTEDº box at the you must decide how to divide the paymentstop of the form. A special form, Form W-2c, between your returns. One of you can claim allIf you had gambling winnings in 2007, the payer Corrected Wage and Tax Statement, is used tomay have withheld income tax. If tax was with- of the estimated tax paid and the other none, orcorrect a Form W-2.held, the payer will give you a Form W-2G show- you can divide it in any other way you agree on.
ing the amount you won and the amount of tax If you cannot agree, you must divide the pay-
withheld. ments in proportion to each spouse's individualForm Received After FilingReport the amounts you won on line 21 of tax as shown on your separate returns for 2007.
Form 1040. Take credit for the tax withheld on If you file your return and you later receive a
line 64 of Form 1040. If you had gambling win- form for income that you did not include on your
nings, you must use Form 1040; you cannot use Divorced Taxpayersreturn, you should report the income and take
Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. credit for any income tax withheld by filing Form If you made joint estimated tax payments for1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
2007, and you were divorced during the year,Return.
either you or your former spouse can claim all ofThe 1099 Series
the joint payments, or you each can claim part of
Most forms in the 1099 series are not filed with them. If you cannot agree on how to divide theSeparate Returnsyour return. You should be sent these forms by payments, you must divide them in proportion toJanuary 31, 2008. Unless instructed to file any of If you are married but file a separate return, you each spouse's individual tax as shown on yourthese forms with your return, keep them for your can take credit only for the tax withheld from separate returns for 2007.records. There are several different forms in this your own income. Do not include any amount If you claim any of the joint payments on yourseries, including: withheld from your spouse's income. However, tax return, enter your former spouse's social
different rules may apply if you live in a commu-• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and security number (SSN) in the space provided onnity property state.Barter Exchange Transactions; the front of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youCommunity property states are listed in divorced and remarried in 2007, enter your pres-• Form 1099-C, Cancellation of Debt; chapter 2. For more information on these rules, ent spouse's SSN in that space and write yourand some exceptions, see Publication 555,• Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distribu- former spouse's SSN, followed by ªDIV,º to theCommunity Property.tions; left of Form 1040, line 65, or Form 1040A, line
39.• Form 1099-G, Certain Government Pay-
ments; Fiscal Years
• Form 1099-INT, Interest Income; If you file your tax return on the basis of a fiscal
year (a 12-month period ending on the last day• Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income; Underpayment Penalty
of any month except December), you must fol-
• Form 1099-OID, Original Issue Discount; low special rules to determine your credit for If you did not pay enough tax, either through
federal income tax withholding. For a discussion• Form 1099-Q, Payments From Qualified withholding or by making estimated tax pay-of how to take credit for withholding on a fiscalEducation Programs; ments, you will have an underpayment of esti-year return, see Fiscal Years (FY) in chapter 3 of mated tax and you may have to pay a penalty.• Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen- Publication 505. Generally, you will not have to pay a penaltysions, Annuities, Retirement or
for 2007 if any of the following situations applies.Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Estimated TaxContracts, etc.; • The total of your withholding and esti-
mated tax payments was at least as muchTake credit for all your estimated tax payments• Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit
as your 2006 tax (or 110% of your 2006for 2007 on line 65 of Form 1040 or line 39 ofStatement; and
tax if your AGI was more than $150,000,Form 1040A. Include any overpayment from
• Form RRB-1099, Payments by the Rail- $75,000 if your 2007 filing status is mar-2006 that you had credited to your 2007 esti-
road Retirement Board. ried filing separately) and you paid all re-mated tax. You must use Form 1040 or Form
1040A if you paid estimated tax. You cannot use quired estimated tax payments on time.
If you received the types of income reported Form 1040EZ. • The tax balance due on your return is noon some forms in the 1099 series, you may not
more than 10% of your total 2007 tax, andName changed. If you changed your name,be able to use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
you paid all required estimated tax pay-and you made estimated tax payments usingSee the instructions to these forms for details.
ments on time.your old name, attach a brief statement to the
Form 1099-R. Attach Form 1099-R to your front of your tax return indicating: • Your total 2007 tax minus your withholdingreturn if box 4 shows federal income tax with- • When you made the payments, is less than $1,000.held. Include the amount withheld in the total on
line 64 of Form 1040 or line 38 of Form 1040A. • The amount of each payment, • You did not have a tax liability for 2006.
Page 42 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

• You did not have any withholding taxes IRS can figure the penalty for you. If you However, you must complete Form 2210 or
and your current year tax less any house- think you owe the penalty but you do not want to Form 2210-F and attach it to your return if you
hold employment taxes is less than figure it yourself when you file your tax return, think you are able to lower or eliminate your
$1,000. you may not have to. Generally, the IRS will penalty. See chapter 4 of Publication 505.
figure the penalty for you and send you a bill.Special rules apply if you are a farmer or fisher-
man. See Farmers and Fishermen in chapter 4
of Publication 505 for more information.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 43

Part Two.
The eight chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income. They explainIncome which income is and is not taxed. See Part Three for information on gains and
losses you report on Schedule D (Form 1040) and for information on selling
your home.
• Sickness and injury benefits. Miscellaneous
CompensationThe chapter explains what income is included
5. in the employee's gross income and what is not
This section discusses different types of em-included.
ployee compensation.
Useful ItemsWages, Salaries, Advance commissions and other earnings.
You may want to see: If you receive advance commissions or other
amounts for services to be performed in theand Other Publication future and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you
must include these amounts in your income in❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car the year you receive them.Earnings Expenses If you repay unearned commissions or other
❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care amounts in the same year you receive them,
Expenses reduce the amount included in your income by
What's New the repayment. If you repay them in a later tax❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),Health savings accounts (HSA). You can
or you may be able to take a credit for that year.fund your HSA with a one-time direct transfer
See  Repayments in chapter 12.from your individual retirement plan, health reim-
bursement account, or health flexible spending Allowances and reimbursements. If you re-account and exclude the amount of the transfer ceive travel, transportation, or other businessEmployeefrom income. expense allowances or reimbursements fromHowever, you must include the amount your employer, see Publication 463. If you areCompensationtransferred in your income, as well as pay a 10% reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-additional tax, if you do not remain an eligible tion 521, Moving Expenses.This section discusses various types of em-individual for at least 12 months after the month ployee compensation including fringe benefits,of the transfer. Back pay awards. Include in income amountsretirement plan contributions, stock options, and you are awarded in a settlement or judgment forrestricted property. back pay. These include payments made to you
for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,Form W-2. If you are an employee, you should and unpaid health insurance premiums. TheyReminder receive Form W-2 from your employer showing should be reported to you by your employer onthe pay you received for your services. Include Form W-2.Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or your pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A,
resident alien, you must report income from or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awardssources outside the United States (foreign in- receive a Form W-2. you receive for outstanding work are included income) on your tax return unless it is exempt by If you performed services, other than as an your income and should be shown on your FormU.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside independent contractor, and your employer did W-2. These include prizes such as vacation tripsor outside the United States and whether or not not withhold social security and Medicare taxes for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award youyou receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- from your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncol- receive is goods or services, you must includement, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This lected Social Security and Medicare Tax on the fair market value of the goods or services inapplies to earned income (such as wages and Wages, with your Form 1040. These wages your income. However, if your employer merelytips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- must be included on line 7 of Form 1040. See promises to pay you a bonus or award at someest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, Form 8919 for more information. future time, it is not taxable until you receive it orand royalties). it is made available to you.If you reside outside the United States, you Child care providers. If you provide child- Employee achievement award. If you re-may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign care, either in the child's home or in your home ceive tangible personal property (other thansource earned income. For details, see Publica- or other place of business, the pay you receive cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) astion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi- must be included in your income. If you are not an award for length of service or safety achieve-dent Aliens Abroad. an employee, you are probably self-employed ment, you generally can exclude its value fromand must include payments for your services on your income. However, the amount you can ex-Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From clude is limited to your employer's cost andBusiness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardsProfit From Business. You generally are not anIntroduction that are not qualified plan awards) for all suchemployee unless you are subject to the will and awards you receive during the year. Your em-This chapter discusses compensation received control of the person who employs you as to ployer can tell you whether your award is afor services as an employee, such as wages, what you are to do and how you are to do it. qualified plan award. Your employer must makesalaries, and fringe benefits. The following top-
Babysitting. If you babysit for relatives or the award as part of a meaningful presentation,ics are included.
neighborhood children, whether on a regular under conditions and circumstances that do not• Bonuses and awards. basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
• Special rules for certain employees. providers apply to you. guised pay.
Page 44 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

However, the exclusion does not apply to the services, you must include the fair market value Medicare taxes and your social security and
following awards. (usually the discount value) of the note in your Medicare benefits. However, these payments
income for the year you receive it. When you are not treated as social security and Medicare• A length-of-service award if you received it later receive payments on the note, a propor- wages if you are a household worker or a farmfor less than 5 years of service or if you tionate part of each payment is the recovery of worker.received another length-of-service award the fair market value that you previously in-during the year or the previous 4 years. Stock appreciation rights. Do not include acluded in your income. Do not include that part
stock appreciation right granted by your em-• A safety achievement award if you are a again in your income. Include the rest of the
ployer in income until you exercise (use) themanager, administrator, clerical employee, payment in your income in the year of payment.
or other professional employee or if more right. When you use the right, you are entitled toIf your employer gives you a nonnegotiable
than 10% of eligible employees previously unsecured note as payment for your services, a cash payment equal to the fair market value of
received safety achievement awards dur- payments on the note that are credited toward the corporation's stock on the date of use minus
ing the year. the principal amount of the note are compensa- the fair market value on the date the right was
tion income when you receive them. granted. You include the cash payment in your
income in the year you use the right.Example. Ben Green received three em- Severance pay. You must include in incomeployee achievement awards during the year: a amounts you receive as severance pay and anynonqualified plan award of a watch valued at Fringe Benefitspayment for the cancellation of your employ-$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereo ment contract. Fringe benefits received in connection with thevalued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued at
Accrued leave payment. If you are a fed- performance of your services are included in$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-
eral employee and receive a lump-sum payment your income as compensation unless you payfied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each
for accrued annual leave when you retire or fair market value for them or they are specificallyaward by itself would be excluded from income.
resign, this amount will be included as wages on excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-However, because the $1,750 total value of the
your Form W-2. ance of services (for example, under a covenantawards is more than $1,600, Ben must include
If you resign from one agency and are reem- not to compete) is treated as the performance of$150 ($1,750 ± $1,600) in his income.
ployed by another agency, you may have to services for purposes of these rules.
Government cost-of-living allowances. repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-
Cost-of-living allowances generally are included ment to the second agency. You can reduce Accounting period. You must use the same
in your income. However, they are not included gross wages by the amount you repaid in the accounting period your employer uses to report
in your income if you are a federal civilian em- same tax year in which you received it. Attach to your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-
ployee or a federal court employee who is sta- your tax return a copy of the receipt or statement ployer has the option to report taxable noncash
tioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United given to you by the agency you repaid to explain fringe benefits by using either of the following
States. the difference between the wages on the return rules.
Allowances and differentials that increase and the wages on your Forms W-2. • The general rule: benefits are reported foryour basic pay as an incentive for taking a less
Outplacement services. If you choose to a full calendar year (January 1±Decemberdesirable post of duty are part of your compen-
accept a reduced amount of severance pay so 31).sation and must be included in income. For
that you can receive outplacement servicesexample, your compensation includes Foreign • The special accounting period rule: bene-(such as training in rÂ esumÂ e writing and interviewPost, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropical fits provided during the last 2 months oftechniques), you must include the unreduceddifferentials. For more information, see Publica- the calendar year (or any shorter period)amount of the severance pay in income.tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees are treated as paid during the followingHowever, you can deduct the value of theseStationed Abroad. calendar year. For example, each yearoutplacement services (up to the difference be- your employer reports the value of bene-Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. tween the severance pay included in income fits provided during the last 2 months ofYour employer will report to you the total amount and the amount actually received) as a miscella- the prior year and the first 10 months ofof deferrals for the year under a nonqualified neous deduction (subject to the 2% of adjusted the current year.deferred compensation plan. This amount is gross income (AGI) limit) on Schedule A (Form
shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. This 1040).
amount is not included in your income. Your employer does not have to use the same
Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employerHowever, if at any time during the tax year, accounting period for each fringe benefit, but
while you are sick or injured is part of your salarythe plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is must use the same period for all employees who
or wages. In addition, you must include in yournot operated under those requirements, all receive a particular benefit.
income sick pay benefits received from any ofamounts deferred under the plan for the tax year You must use the same accounting periodthe following payers.and all preceding tax years are included in your that you use to report the benefit to claim anincome for the current year. This amount is in- • A welfare fund. employee business deduction (for use of a car,cluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, box for example).• A state sickness or disability fund.1. It also is shown on Form W-2, box 12, using
code Z. • An association of employers or employ- Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax-For information on the requirements and the ees. able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otheramount to include in income, see Internal Reve- compensation) of Form W-2. The total value of• An insurance company, if your employernue Code section 409A and Notice 2005-1. The your fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14.paid for the plan.notice is on page 274 of Internal Revenue Bulle- The value of your fringe benefits may be addedtin 2005-2 at However, if you paid the premiums on an acci- to your other compensation on one Form W-2, orwww.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb05-02.pdf. dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you you may receive a separate Form W-2 showing
receive under the policy are not taxable. For just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 withFor tax years beginning after 2007,
more information, see Publication 525. a notation in box 14.portions of Notice 2005-1 are obsolete
and replaced by final regulations is-
CAUTION
!
Social security and Medicare taxes paid bysued under section 409A. For information on the
employer. If you and your employer have anapplicability of the regulations, see the preamble Accident or Health Plan
agreement that your employer pays your socialto Treasury Decision 9321 on page 1123 of
Generally, the value of accident or health plansecurity and Medicare taxes without deductingInternal Revenue Bulletin 2007-19 at www.irs.
coverage provided to you by your employer isthem from your gross wages, you must reportgov/pub/irs-irbs/irb07-19.pdf.
not included in your income. Benefits you re-the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages
ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-Note received for services. If your employer on your tax return. The payment also is treated
plained later under Sickness and Injury Benefits.gives you a secured note as payment for your as wages for figuring your social security and
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 45

For information on the items covered in this are treated as guaranteed payments that are Educational Assistance
section, other than Long-term care coverage, includible in the partner's gross income. In both
You can exclude from your income up to $5,250see Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts situations, the partner can deduct the contribu-
of qualified employer-provided educational as-and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. tion made to the partner's HSA.
sistance. For more information, see PublicationContributions by an S corporation to a 2%Long-term care coverage. Contributions by 970, Tax Benefits for Education.shareholder-employee's HSA for services ren-your employer to provide coverage for long-term
dered are treated as guaranteed payments andcare services generally are not included in your
are includible in the shareholder-employee'sincome. However, contributions made through a Employer-Provided Vehiclesgross income. The shareholder-employee canflexible spending or similar arrangement (such
deduct the contribution made to the share-as a cafeteria plan) must be included in your If your employer provides a car (or other high-
holder-employee's HSA.income. This amount will be reported as wages way motor vehicle) to you, your personal use of
in box 1 of your Form W-2. the car is usually a taxable noncash fringe bene-Qualified HSA funding distribution. YouContributions you make to the plan are dis- fit.can make a one-time distribution from your indi-cussed in Publication 502, Medical and Dental Your employer must determine the actualvidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA andExpenses. value of this fringe benefit to include in youryou generally will not include any of the distribu-
income. For more information, see Publicationtion in your income. See Publication 590 for theArcher MSA contributions.  Contributions by 525.your employer to your Archer MSA generally are requirements for these qualified HSA funding
not included in your income. Their total will be distributions. Certain employer-provided transporta-
reported in box 12 of Form W-2 with code R. You tion can be excluded from gross in-Failure to maintain eligibility. If your HSAmust report this amount on Form 8853, Archer come. See the discussion on
TIPreceived qualified HSA distributions from aMSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance Con- Transportation, later.health FSA or HRA (discussed earlier) or a qual-tracts. File the form with your return. ified HSA funding distribution, you must be anIf your employer does not make contributions
eligible individual for HSA purposes for the pe-to your MSA, you can make your own contribu- Group-Term Life Insuranceriod beginning with the month in which the quali-tions to your MSA. These contributions are dis-
fied distribution was made and ending on thecussed in Publication 969. Also, see Form 8853. Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 oflast day of the 12th month following that month. group-term life insurance coverage provided toHealth flexible spending arrangement If you fail to be an eligible individual during this you by your employer (or former employer) is not(health FSA). If your employer provides a period, other than because of death or disability, included in your income. However, you musthealth FSA that qualifies as an accident or you must include the distribution in your income include in income the cost of employer-providedhealth plan, the amount of your salary reduction, for the tax year in which you become ineligible. insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000and reimbursements of your medical care ex- This income is also subject to an additional 10% of coverage reduced by any amount you paypenses and those of your spouse and depen- tax. toward the purchase of the insurance.dents, generally are not included in your income.
For exceptions, see Entire cost excluded,
Qualified HSA distribution. A health FSA and Entire cost taxed, later.Adoption Assistancecan make a qualified HSA distribution. This dis- If your employer provided more than $50,000tribution is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee of coverage, the amount included in your in-You may be able to exclude from your incomeby your employer. Generally, the distribution is come is reported as part of your wages in box 1amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-not included in your income and is not deducti- of your Form W-2. It also is shown separately inployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-ble. See Publication 969 for the requirements for box 12 with code C.nection with your adoption of an eligible child.these qualified HSA distributions.
See the Instructions for Form 8839 for more Group-term life insurance. This insurance isHealth reimbursement arrangement (HRA). information. term life insurance protection (insurance for aIf your employer provides an HRA that qualifies  Adoption benefits are reported by your em- fixed period of time) that:as an accident or health plan, coverage and ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. Theyreimbursements of your medical care expenses • Provides a general death benefit,also are included as social security and Medi-and those of your spouse and dependents gen- care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are • Is provided to a group of employees,erally are not included in your income. not included as wages in box 1. To determine • Is provided under a policy carried by theQualified HSA distribution. An HRA can the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must employer, andmake a qualified HSA distribution. This distribu- complete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-
tion is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee by tion Expenses. File the form with your return. • Provides an amount of insurance to each
your employer. Generally, the distribution is not employee based on a formula that pre-
included in your income and is not deductible. vents individual selection.
See Publication 969 for the requirements for De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
these qualified HSA distributions. Permanent benefits. If your group-term life
If your employer provides you with a product or insurance policy includes permanent benefits,Health savings accounts (HSA). If you are service and the cost of it is so small that it would such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, youan eligible individual, you and any other person, be unreasonable for the employer to account for must include in your income, as wages, the costincluding your employer or a family member, it, the value is not included in your income. of the permanent benefits minus the amount youcan make contributions to your HSA. Contribu- Generally, the value of benefits such as dis- pay for them. Your employer should be able totions, other than employer contributions, are de- counts at company cafeterias, cab fares home tell you the amount to include in your income.ductible on your return whether or not you when working overtime, and company picnicsitemize deductions. Contributions made by your Accidental death benefits. Insurance thatare not included in your income.employer are not included in your income. Distri- provides accidental or other death benefits but
butions from your HSA that are used to pay does not provide general death benefits (travelHoliday gifts. If your employer gives you aqualified medical expenses are not included in insurance, for example) is not group-term lifeturkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atyour income. Distributions not used for qualified insurance.
Christmas or other holidays, do not include themedical expenses are included in your income.
value of the gift in your income. However, if yourContributions by a partnership to a bona fide Former employer. If your former employer
employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or apartner's HSA are not contributions by an em- provided more than $50,000 of group-term life
similar item that you can easily exchange forployer. The contributions are treated as a distri- insurance coverage during the year, the amount
cash, you include the value of that gift as extrabution of money and are not included in the included in your income is reported as wages in
salary or wages regardless of the amount in-partner's gross income. Contributions by a part- box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately
volved.nership to a partner's HSA for services rendered in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show the
Page 46 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

amount of uncollected social security and Medi- a. You retired before January 2, 1984, andWorksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of
were covered by the plan when you re-care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes Group-Term Life Insurance to
tired, orM and N. You must pay these taxes with your Include in IncomeÐIllustrated
income tax return. Include them in your total tax b. You reached age 55 before January 2,
on line 63, Form 1040, and enter ªUTº and the 1984, and were employed by the em-1. Enter the total amount of youramount of the taxes on the dotted line next to ployer or its predecessor in 1983.insurance coverage from yourline 63. employer(s) ........... 1. 80,000
2. Limit on exclusion for
Entire cost taxed. You are taxed on the entireemployer-providedTwo or more employers. Your exclusion for
cost of group-term life insurance if either of thegroup-term life insuranceemployer-provided group-term life insurance
following circumstances apply.coverage ............. 2. 50,000coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 .. 3. 30,000coverage, whether the insurance is provided by • The insurance is provided by your em-4. Divide line 3 by $1,000.a single employer or multiple employers. If two ployer through a qualified employees'Figure to the nearest tenth 4. 30.0 trust, such as a pension trust or a qualifiedor more employers provide insurance coverage 5. Go to Table 5-1. Using your annuity plan.that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re- age on the last day of the taxported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not be year, find your age group in • You are a key employee and your em-
correct. You must figure how much to include in the left column, and enter the ployer's plan discriminates in favor of key
your income. Reduce the amount you figure by cost from the column on the employees.
any amount reported with code C in box 12 of right for your age group ... 5. .23
your Forms W-2, add the result to the wages 6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .... 6. 6.90
Retirement Planning Services7. Enter the number of fullreported in box 1, and report the total on your
months of coverage at thisreturn. If your employer has a qualified retirement plan,cost. ................ 7. 12 qualified retirement planning services provided8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 .... 8. 82.80 to you (and your spouse) by your employer areFiguring the taxable cost. Use the following 9. Enter the premiums not included in your income. Qualified servicesworksheet to figure the amount to include in your you paid per month 9. 4.15 include retirement planning advice, informationincome. 10. Enter the number of about your employer's retirement plan, and in-months you paid formation about how the plan may fit into yourthe premiums .... 10. 12
overall individual retirement income plan. YouWorksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of 11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. ... 11. 49.80 cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,Group-Term Life Insurance To 12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-Include this amount in yourInclude in Income vided by your employer.income as wages ....... 12. 33.00
1. Enter the total amount of your
insurance coverage from your Table 5-1. Cost of $1,000 of Transportation
employer(s) ........... 1. Group-Term Life Insurance for One If your employer provides you with a qualified2. Limit on exclusion for Month transportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedemployer-provided
from your income, up to certain limits. A qualifiedgroup-term life insurance Age Costcoverage ............. 2. 50,000 transportation fringe benefit is:Under 25 .................. $ .053. Subtract line 2 from line 1 .. 3. 25 through 29 ............... .06 • Transportation in a commuter highway ve-4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 30 through 34 ............... .08 hicle (such as a van) between your homeFigure to the nearest tenth 4. 35 through 39 ............... .09 and work place,5. Go to Table 5-1. Using your 40 through 44 ............... .10
age on the last day of the tax • A transit pass, or45 through 49 ............... .15
year, find your age group in 50 through 54 ............... .23 • Qualified parking.the left column, and enter the 55 through 59 ............... .43
cost from the column on the 60 through 64 ............... .66 Cash reimbursement by your employer for theseright for your age group ... 5. 65 through 69 ............... 1.27 expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .... 6. 70 and older ................ 2.06 rangement also is excludable. However, cash7. Enter the number of full reimbursement for a transit pass is excludablemonths of coverage at this Entire cost excluded. You are not taxed on only if a voucher or similar item that can becost. ................ 7. the cost of group-term life insurance if any of the exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 .... 8. following circumstances apply. available for direct distribution to you.9. Enter the premiums
1. You are permanently and totally disabledyou paid per month 9. Exclusion limit. The exclusion for commuterand have ended your employment.10. Enter the number of highway vehicle transportation and transit passmonths you paid 2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol- fringe benefits cannot be more than a total ofthe premiums .... 10. icy for the entire period the insurance is in $110 a month.11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. ... 11. force during the tax year.12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe
3. A charitable organization (defined in chap-Include this amount in your benefit cannot be more than $215 a month.
income as wages ....... 12. ter 24) to which contributions are deducti- If the benefits have a value that is more thanble is the only beneficiary of the policy for these limits, the excess must be included in yourthe entire period the insurance is in force income.during the tax year. (You are not entitled toExample. You are 51 years old and work for
Commuter highway vehicle. This is aa deduction for a charitable contribution foremployers A and B. Both employers provide
highway vehicle that seats at least six adults (notnaming a charitable organization as thegroup-term life insurance coverage for you for
including the driver). At least 80% of the vehi-beneficiary of your policy.)the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with
cle's mileage must reasonably be expected toemployer A and $45,000 with employer B. You 4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and be:pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
ployer B group plan. You figure the amount to • For transporting employees between their
include in your income as follows. homes and work place, and
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 47

• On trips during which employees occupy 5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans). chose to include in your income in the year
transferred are treated the same as any otherat least half of the vehicle's adult seating 6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. dividends. Report them on your return as divi-capacity (not including the driver).
7. Section 457 plans. dends. For a discussion of dividends, see chap-
ter 8.Transit pass. This is any pass, token, fare-
Overall limit on deferrals. For 2007, you   For information on how to treat dividendscard, voucher, or similar item entitling a person
generally should not have deferred more than a reported on both your Form W-2 and Formto ride mass transit (whether public or private)
1099-DIV, see Dividends received on restrictedtotal of $15,500 of contributions to the plansfree or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter
stock in Publication 525.listed in (1) through (3) and (5) above. The limithighway vehicle operated by a person in the
business of transporting persons for compensa- for SIMPLE plans is $10,500. The limit for sec-
tion. tion 501(c)(18)(D) plans is the lesser of $7,000
or 25% of your compensation. The limit for sec-Qualified parking. This is parking provided tion 457 plans is the lesser of your includible Special Rules forto an employee at or near the employer's place compensation or $15,500.of business. It also includes parking provided on
Certain Employeesor near a location from which the employee Designated Roth contributions. Employ-
commutes to work by mass transit, in a com- ers with section 401(k) and section 403(b) plans
This section deals with special rules for peoplemuter highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not can create qualified Roth contribution programs
in certain types of employment: members of theinclude parking at or near the employee's home. so that you may elect to have part or all of your
clergy, members of religious orders, peopleelective deferrals to the plan designated as af-
working for foreign employers, military person-ter-tax Roth contributions.Retirement Plan nel, and volunteers.
Excess deferrals. Your employer or planContributions administrator should apply the proper annual Clergylimit when figuring your plan contributions. How-Your employer's contributions to a qualified re-
ever, you are responsible for monitoring the totaltirement plan for you are not included in income If you are a member of the clergy, you mustyou defer to ensure that the deferrals are notat the time contributed. (Your employer can tell include in your income offerings and fees youmore than the overall limit.you whether your retirement plan is qualified.) receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,
If you set aside more than the limit, the ex-However, the cost of life insurance coverage masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the
cess generally must be included in your incomeincluded in the plan may have to be included. offering is made to the religious institution, it is
for that year, unless you have an excess deferralSee Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier, under not taxable to you.
of a designated Roth contribution. See Publica-Fringe Benefits.    If you are a member of a religious organiza-
tion 525 for a discussion of the tax treatment ofIf your employer pays into a nonqualified tion and you give your outside earnings to the
excess deferrals.plan for you, you generally must include the organization, you still must include the earnings
in your income. However, you may be entitled tocontributions in your income as wages for the Catch-up contributions. You may be al-
a charitable contribution deduction for thetax year in which the contributions are made. lowed catch-up contributions (additional elective
amount paid to the organization. See chapterHowever, if your interest in the plan is not trans- deferral) if you are age 50 or older by the end of
24.ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei- your tax year.
ture (you have a good chance of losing it) at the Pension. A pension or retirement pay for atime of the contribution, you do not have to member of the clergy is usually treated as anyStock Optionsinclude the value of your interest in your income other pension or annuity. It must be reported onuntil it is transferable or is no longer subject to a lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12aIf you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or sellsubstantial risk of forfeiture. and 12b of Form 1040A.stock or other property as payment for your
For information on distributions from services, you usually will have income when you Housing.  Special rules for housing apply toretirement plans, see Publication 575, receive the option, when you exercise the option members of the clergy. Under these rules, youPension and Annuity Income (or Publi- (use it to buy or sell the stock or other property),
TIP do not include in your income the rental value ofcation 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Re- or when you sell or otherwise dispose of the a home (including utilities) or a designated hous-tirement Benefits, if you are a federal employee option. However, if your option is a statutory ing allowance provided to you as part of youror retiree). stock option, you will not have any income until pay. However, the exclusion cannot be moreyou sell or exchange your stock. Your employer than the reasonable pay for your service. If youcan tell you which kind of option you hold. ForElective deferrals. If you are covered by cer- pay for the utilities, you can exclude any allow-more information, see Publication 525.tain kinds of retirement plans, you can choose to ance designated for utility cost, up to your actual
have part of your compensation contributed by cost. The home or allowance must be provided
your employer to a retirement fund, rather than as compensation for your services as an or-Restricted Property
have it paid to you. The amount you set aside dained, licensed, or commissioned minister.
(called an elective deferral) is treated as an However, you must include the rental value ofGenerally, if you receive property for your serv-
employer contribution to a qualified plan. An the home or the housing allowance as earningsices, you must include its fair market value in
elective deferral, other than a designated Roth from self-employment on Schedule SE (Formyour income in the year you receive the prop-
contribution (discussed later), is not included in 1040) if you are subject to the self-employmenterty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-
wages subject to income tax at the time contrib- tax. For more information, see Publication 517,erty that has certain restrictions that affect its
uted. However, it is included in wages subject to Social Security and Other Information for Mem-value, you do not include the value of the prop-
social security and Medicare taxes. bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.erty in your income until it has substantially
Elective deferrals include elective contribu- vested. (You can choose to include the value of
tions to the following retirement plans. the property in your income in the year it is Members of Religioustransferred to you.) For more information, see
1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section OrdersRestricted Property in Publication 525.
401(k) plans).
Dividends received on restricted stock. If you are a member of a religious order who has2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ- Dividends you receive on restricted stock are taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earningsees. treated as compensation and not as dividend that you renounce and turn over to the order
3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen- income. Your employer should include these depends on whether your services are per-
sion plans (SARSEP). formed for the order.payments on your Form W-2.
4. Savings incentive match plans for employ- Stock you chose to include in income. Services performed for the order. If you are
ees (SIMPLE plans). Dividends you receive on restricted stock you performing the services as an agent of the order
Page 48 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

in the exercise of duties required by the order, self-employment tax on your earnings from serv- • Disability compensation and pension pay-
do not include in your income the amounts ices performed in the United States, even ments for disabilities paid either to veter-
turned over to the order. though you are not self-employed. This rule also ans or their families.
applies if you are an employee of a qualifyingIf your order directs you to perform services • Grants for homes designed for wheelchairwholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-for another agency of the supervising church or living.ernment.an associated institution, you are considered to
• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans whobe performing the services as an agent of the Employees of international organizations or lost their sight or the use of their limbs.order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an foreign governments. Your compensationorder that you turn over to the order are not • Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-for official services to an international organiza-included in your income. dends paid either to veterans or their ben-tion is exempt from federal income tax if you are
eficiaries, including the proceeds of anot a citizen of the United States or you are aExample. You are a member of a church veteran's endowment policy paid beforecitizen of the Philippines (whether or not you areorder and have taken a vow of poverty. You death.a citizen of the United States).renounce any claims to your earnings and turn Your compensation for official services to a • Interest on insurance dividends you leaveover to the order any salaries or wages you foreign government is exempt from federal in- on deposit with the VA.earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order come tax if all of the following are true.assigns you to work in a hospital that is an • Benefits under a dependent-care assis-• You are not a citizen of the United Statesassociated institution of the church. However, tance program.or you are a citizen of the Philippinesyou remain under the general direction and con-
• The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a(whether or not you are a citizen of thetrol of the order. You are considered to be an
member of the Armed Forces who diedUnited States).agent of the order and any wages you earn at
after September 10, 2001.the hospital that you turn over to your order are • Your work is like the work done by em-not included in your income. • Payments made under the compensatedployees of the United States in foreign
work therapy program.countries.
Services performed outside the order. If
• The foreign government gives an equalyou are directed to work outside the order, your
exemption to employees of the Unitedservices are not an exercise of duties required VolunteersStates in its country.by the order unless they meet both of the follow-
ing requirements. The tax treatment of amounts you receive as a
Waiver of alien status. If you are an alien volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similar• They are the kind of services that are ordi- who works for a foreign government or interna- agency is covered in the following discussions.narily the duties of members of the order. tional organization and you file a waiver under
Peace Corps. Living allowances you receivesection 247(b) of the Immigration and National-• They are part of the duties that you must as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leaderity Act to keep your immigrant status, differentexercise for, or on behalf of, the religious for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,rules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Publi-order as its agent. and clothing are exempt from tax.cation 525.
If you are an employee of a third party, the Taxable allowances. The following al-Employment abroad. For information on theservices you perform for the third party will not lowances must be included in your income andtax treatment of income earned abroad, seebe considered directed or required of you by the reported as wages.Publication 54.order. Amounts you receive for these services
are included in your income, even if you have • Allowances paid to your spouse and minor
taken a vow of poverty. children while you are a volunteer leaderMilitary
training in the United States.
Example. Mark Brown is a member of a  Payments you receive as a member of a military • Living allowances designated by the Di-religious order and has taken a vow of poverty. service generally are taxed as wages except for rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-He renounces all claims to his earnings and retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. pensation. These are allowances forturns over his earnings to the order. Allowances generally are not taxed. For more personal items such as domestic help,Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed information on the tax treatment of military al- laundry and clothing maintenance, enter-by the superiors of the order to get a job with a lowances and benefits, see Publication 3, tainment and recreation, transportation,private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em- Armed Forces' Tax Guide. and other miscellaneous expenses.ployee of the school, and, at his request, the Military retirement pay. If your retirement • Leave allowances.school made the salary payments directly to the pay is based on age or length of service, it isorder. • Readjustment allowances or terminationtaxable and must be included in your income asBecause Mark is an employee of the school, payments. These are considered receiveda pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 orhe is performing services for the school rather by you when credited to your account.on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do notthan as an agent of the order. The wages Mark include in your income the amount of any reduc-earns working for the school are included in his tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corpsincome. survivor annuity for your spouse or children volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustmentunder the Retired Serviceman's Family Protec- allowance during his period of service, to be paidtion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.Foreign Employer to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofFor more detailed discussion of survivor an- duty. Although the allowance is not available toSpecial rules apply if you work for a foreign nuities, see chapter 10. him until the end of his service, Gary must in-employer. clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it isDisability. If you are retired on disability,
credited to his account.see  Military and Government Disability Pen-U.S. citizen. If you are a U.S. citizen who sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). Ifworks in the United States for a foreign govern-
you are a VISTA volunteer, you must includement, an international organization, a foreign Veterans' benefits. Do not include in your in-
meal and lodging allowances paid to you in yourembassy, or any foreign employer, you must come any veterans' benefits paid under any law,
income as wages.include your salary in your income. regulation, or administrative practice adminis-
tered by the Department of Veterans AffairsSocial security and Medicare taxes. You National Senior Services Corps programs.(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans orare exempt from social security and Medicare Do not include in your income amounts youtheir families are not taxable.employee taxes if you are employed in the receive for supportive services or reimburse-
United States by an international organization or • Education, training, and subsistence al- ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-
a foreign government. However, you must pay lowances. lowing programs.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 49

• Retired Senior Volunteer Program you may have to include some, or all, of the to become a member, on September 24,
(RSVP). reimbursement in your income. See Reimburse- 1975.
ment in a later year in chapter 21.• Foster Grandparent Program. 3. You receive the disability payments for a
Cafeteria plans. Generally, if you are cov- combat-related injury. This is a personal• Senior Companion Program. ered by an accident or health insurance plan injury or sickness that
through a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the
a. Results directly from armed conflict,Service Corps of Retired Executives insurance premiums was not included in your
(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support- income, you are not considered to have paid the b. Takes place while you are engaged in
ive services or reimbursements for premiums and you must include any benefits extra-hazardous service,
out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not you receive in your income. If the amount of the
c. Takes place under conditions simulat-include these amounts in income. premiums was included in your income, you are
ing war, including training exercisesconsidered to have paid the premiums, and any
Volunteer tax counseling. Do not include in such as maneuvers, orbenefits you receive are not taxable.
your income any reimbursements you receive d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.for transportation, meals, and other expenses Retirement and profit-sharing plans. If you
you have in training for, or actually providing, receive payments from a retirement or 4. You would be entitled to receive disabilityvolunteer federal income tax counseling for the profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa- compensation from the Department of Vet-elderly (TCE). bility retirement, do not treat the payments as a erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-You can deduct as a charitable contribution disability pension. The payments must be re- tion for it. Your exclusion under thisyour unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in ported as a pension or annuity. For more infor- condition is equal to the amount you wouldtaking part in the volunteer income tax assis- mation on pensions, see chapter 10. be entitled to receive from the VA.tance (VITA) program. See chapter 24.
Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa-
bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for Pension based on years of service. If you
accrued annual leave is a salary payment. The receive a disability pension based on years of
payment is not a disability payment. Include it in service, you generally must include it in yourSickness and Injury your income in the tax year you receive it. income. However, if the pension qualifies for the
exclusion for a service-connected disability (dis-Benefits How to report. If you retired on disability, you cussed earlier), do not include in income the partmust include in income any disability pension of your pension that you would have received ifThis section discusses sickness and injury ben- you receive under a plan that is paid for by your the pension had been based on a percentage ofefits including disability pensions, long-term employer. You must report your taxable disabil- disability. You must include the rest of your pen-care insurance contracts, workers' compensa- ity payments as wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or sion in your income.tion, and other benefits. Form 1040A, until you reach minimum retire-
Retroactive VA determination. If you retirement age. Minimum retirement age generally is
from the armed services based on years of serv-the age at which you can first receive a pensionDisability Pensions
ice and are later given a retroactive serv-or annuity if you are not disabled.
ice-connected disability rating by the VA, yourGenerally, if you retire on disability, you must Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-report your pension or annuity as income. mum retirement age, payments you receive are
cluded from income up to the amount of VAtaxable as a pension or annuity. Report theYou may be entitled to a tax credit if disability benefits you would have been entitledpayments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 oryou were permanently and totally dis- to receive. You can claim a refund of any taxon lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. The rulesabled when you retired. For informa-
TIP paid on the excludable amount (subject to thefor reporting pensions are explained in How Totion on this credit and the definition of permanent statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-Report in chapter 10.and total disability, see chapter 33. turn on Form 1040X for each previous year
For information on disability payments from a during the retroactive period.
governmental program provided as a substitute Military and Government If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-for unemployment compensation, see chapter ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-Disability Pensions12. ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance
Certain military and government disability pen- benefit from your income. However, you mustDisability income. Generally, you must report sions are not taxable. include in your income any lump-sum readjust-as income any amount you receive for personal ment or other nondisability severance paymentinjury or sickness through an accident or health Service-connected disability. You may be you received on release from active duty, even ifplan that is paid for by your employer. If both you able to exclude from income amounts you re- you are later given a retroactive disability ratingand your employer pay for the plan, only the ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowance by the VA.amount you receive that is due to your em- for personal injury or sickness resulting fromployer's payments is reported as income. How- active service in one of the following govern- Terrorist attack or military action. Do notever, certain payments may not be taxable to ment services. include in your income disability payments youyou. Your employer should be able to give you
receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter-• The armed forces of any country.specific details about your pension plan and tell
rorist or military action.you the amount you paid for your disability pen- • The National Oceanic and Atmosphericsion. In addition to disability pensions and annui- Administration.ties, you may be receiving other payments for Long-Term Care• The Public Health Service.sickness and injury. Insurance Contracts• The Foreign Service.Do not report as income any amounts
paid to reimburse you for medical ex- Long-term care insurance contracts generally
Conditions for exclusion. Do not includepenses you incurred after the plan was are treated as accident and health insurance
TIP
the disability payments in your income if any ofestablished. contracts. Amounts you receive from them
the following conditions apply. (other than policyholder dividends or premium
refunds) generally are excludable from incomeCost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of 1. You were entitled to receive a disability as amounts received for personal injury or sick-a health or accident insurance plan, do not in- payment before September 25, 1975. ness. To claim an exclusion for payments madeclude any amounts you receive from the plan for
on a per diem or other periodic basis under apersonal injury or sickness as income on your 2. You were a member of a listed govern-
long-term care insurance contract, you must filetax return. If your plan reimbursed you for medi- ment service or its reserve component, or
Form 8853 with your return.cal expenses you deducted in an earlier year, were under a binding written commitment
Page 50 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

A long-term care insurance contract is an If part of your workers' compensation • Disability benefits you receive for loss of
insurance contract that only provides coverage reduces your social security or income or earning capacity as a result of
for qualified long-term care services. The con- equivalent railroad retirement benefits injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-
CAUTION
!
tract must: received, that part is considered social security icy.
(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and• Be guaranteed renewable, • Compensation you receive for permanentmay be taxable. For more information, see Pub- loss or loss of use of a part or function of• Not provide for a cash surrender value or lication 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail- your body, or for your permanent disfig-other money that can be paid, assigned, road Retirement Benefits. urement. This compensation must bepledged, or borrowed, based only on the injury and not on theReturn to work.   If you return to work after• Provide that refunds, other than refunds period of your absence from work. Thesequalifying for workers' compensation, salaryon the death of the insured or complete benefits are not taxable even if your em-payments you receive for performing light dutiessurrender or cancellation of the contract, ployer pays for the accident and healthare taxable as wages.and dividends under the contract may be plan that provides these benefits.
used only to reduce future premiums or
increase future benefits, and Other Sickness and Injury Reimbursement for medical care. A reim-
• Generally not pay or reimburse expenses bursement for medical care is generally not tax-Benefits
incurred for services or items that would able. However, it may reduce your medical
be reimbursed under Medicare, except In addition to disability pensions and annuities, expense deduction. For more information, see
where Medicare is a secondary payer or you may receive other payments for sickness or chapter 21.
the contract makes per diem or other peri- injury.
odic payments without regard to ex-
penses. Railroad sick pay.    Payments you receive as
sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-
surance Act are taxable and you must includeQualified long-term care services. Qualified them in your income. However, do not includelong-term care services are: them in your income if they are for an on-the-job 6.• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera- injury.
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re- If you received income because of a disabil-
habilitative services, and maintenance and ity, see Disability Pensions, earlier.
personal care services, and Tip Income
Federal Employees' Compensation Act• Required by a chronically ill individual and (FECA). Payments received under this Act forprovided pursuant to a plan of care as personal injury or sickness, including paymentsprescribed by a licensed health care prac- Introductionto beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.titioner. However, you are taxed on amounts you receive This chapter is for employees who receive tips.
under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45 All tips you receive are income and are sub-Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill in- days while a claim is being decided. Report this ject to federal income tax. You must include individual is one who has been certified by a income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or gross income all tips you receive directly,licensed health care practitioner within the previ- on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sick charged tips paid to you by your employer, andous 12 months as one of the following. leave while a claim is being processed is taxable your share of any tips you receive under aand must be included in your income as wages. tip-splitting or tip-pooling arrangement.• An individual who, for at least 90 days, is
unable to perform at least two activities of The value of noncash tips, such as tickets,If part of the payments you receive
daily living without substantial assistance passes, or other items of value are also incomeunder FECA reduces your social se-
due to loss of functional capacity. Activi- and subject to tax.curity or equivalent railroad retirement
CAUTION
!
ties of daily living are eating, toileting, benefits received, that part is considered social Reporting your tip income correctly is not
transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti- security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene- difficult. You must do three things.
nence. fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of the
1. Keep a daily tip record.taxability of these benefits, see Social security• An individual who requires substantial su- and equivalent railroad retirement benefits 2. Report tips to your employer.pervision to be protected from threats to under Other Income, in Publication 525.health and safety due to severe cognitive 3. Report all your tips on your income tax  You can deduct the amount you spend toimpairment. return.buy back sick leave for an earlier year to be
eligible for nontaxable FECA benefits for thatLimit on exclusion. You generally can ex- period. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject to This chapter will explain these three things andclude from gross income up to $260 a day for the 2% of AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). show you what to do on your tax return if you2007. See Limit on exclusion, under Long-Term If you buy back sick leave in the same year you have not done the first two. This chapter will alsoCare Insurance Contracts, under Sickness and used it, the amount reduces your taxable sick show you how to treat allocated tips.Injury Benefits in Publication 525 for more infor- leave pay. Do not deduct it separately.mation. Useful ItemsOther compensation. Many other amounts You may want to see:you receive as compensation for sickness orWorkers' Compensation
injury are not taxable. These include the follow- Publicationing amounts.Amounts you receive as workers' compensation
❏ 531 Reporting Tip Incomefor an occupational sickness or injury are fully • Compensatory damages you receive forexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers' ❏ 1244 Employee's Daily Record of Tipsphysical injury or physical sickness,compensation act or a statute in the nature of a and Report to Employerwhether paid in a lump sum or in periodicworkers' compensation act. The exemption also payments.applies to your survivors. The exemption, how- Form (and Instructions)
• Benefits you receive under an accident orever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits ❏ 4137 Social Security and Medicare Taxhealth insurance policy on which eitheryou receive based on your age, length of serv- on Unreported Tip Incomeyou paid the premiums or your employerice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you
paid the premiums but you had to includeretired because of an occupational sickness or ❏ 4070 Employee's Report of Tips to
them in your income.injury. Employer
Chapter 6 Tip Income Page 51

Example 1. You must report your tips re-
ceived in April 2008 by May 12, 2008. May 10thKeeping a Daily Tip Reporting Tips to Your is a Saturday, and the 12th is the next day that is
not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.Record Employer
Example 2. You must report your tips re-
Why keep a daily tip record? You must keep ceived in May 2008 by June 10, 2008.Why report tips to your employer? You
a daily tip record so you can: must report tips to your employer so that: Final report. If your employment ends dur-
• Report your tips accurately to your em- ing the month, you can report your tips when• Your employer can withhold federal in-
ployer, your employment ends.come tax and social security and Medicare
taxes or railroad retirement tax,• Report your tips accurately on your tax Penalty for not reporting tips. If you do notreturn, and • Your employer can report the correct report tips to your employer as required, you
amount of your earnings to the Social Se-• Prove your tip income if your return is ever may be subject to a penalty equal to 50% of the
curity Administration or Railroad Retire-questioned. social security and Medicare taxes or railroad
ment Board (which affects your benefits retirement tax you owe on the unreported tips.
when you retire or if you become disabled, (For information about these taxes, see Report-How to keep a daily tip record. There are two or your family's benefits if you die), and ing social security and Medicare taxes on tipsways to keep a daily tip record. You can either: not reported to your employer under Reporting• You can avoid the penalty for not reporting• Write information about your tips in a tip Tips on Your Tax Return, later.) The penaltytips to your employer (explained later).diary, or amount is in addition to the taxes you owe.
You can avoid this penalty if you can show• Keep copies of documents that show your What tips to report. Report to your employer reasonable cause for not reporting the tips totips, such as restaurant bills and credit only cash, check, debit, or credit card tips you your employer. To do so, attach a statement tocard charge slips. receive. your return explaining why you did not reportYou should keep your daily tip record with your them.If your total tips for any one month from anypersonal records. You must keep your records one job are less than $20, do not report the tipsfor as long as they are important for administra- Giving your employer money for taxes.for that month to that employer.tion of the federal tax law. For information on Your regular pay may not be enough for yourIf you participate in a tip-splitting orhow long to keep records, see Publication 552, employer to withhold all the taxes you owe ontip-pooling arrangement, report only the tips youRecordkeeping for Individuals. your regular pay plus your reported tips. If thisreceive and retain. Do not report to your em- happens, you can give your employer money  If you keep a tip diary, you can use Form ployer any portion of the tips you receive that until the close of the calendar year to pay the4070A, Employee's Daily Record of Tips. To get you pass on to other employees. rest of the taxes.Form 4070A, ask the Internal Revenue Service Do not report the value of any noncash tips, If you do not give your employer enough(IRS) or your employer for Publication 1244. such as tickets or passes, to your employer. You money, your employer will apply your regularPublication 1244 includes a 1-year supply of do not pay social security and Medicare taxes or pay and any money you give to the taxes in theForm 4070A. Each day, write in the information railroad retirement tax on these tips. following order.asked for on the form.
If you do not use Form 4070A, start your How to report.   If your employer does not 1. All taxes on your regular pay.records by writing your name, your employer's give you any other way to report tips, you can 2. Social security and Medicare taxes or rail-name, and the name of the business (if it is use Form 4070. Fill in the information asked for road retirement tax on your reported tips.different from your employer's name). Then, on the form, sign and date the form, and give it to
each workday, write the date and the following your employer. To get a 1-year supply of the 3. Federal, state, and local income taxes on
information. form, ask the IRS or your employer for Publica- your reported tips.
tion 1244.• Cash tips you get directly from customers Any taxes that remain unpaid can be col-If you do not use Form 4070, give your em-or from other employees. lected by your employer from your nextployer a statement with the following informa- paycheck. If withholding taxes remain uncol-• Tips from credit card charge customers tion. lected at the end of the year, you may be subjectthat your employer pays you. (Also include to a penalty for underpayment of estimated• Your name, address, and social securitytips from debit card charge customers.) taxes. See Publication 505, Tax Withholdingnumber.• The value of any noncash tips you get, and Estimated Tax, for more information.
• Your employer's name, address, and busi-such as tickets, passes, or other items of Uncollected taxes.  You must reportness name (if it is different from your em-value. on your tax return any social securityployer's name).• The amount of tips you paid out to other and Medicare taxes or railroad retire-
CAUTION
!
• The month (or the dates of any shorteremployees through tip pools or tip split- ment tax that remained uncollected at the end of
period) in which you received tips. 2007. See Reporting uncollected social securityting, or other arrangements, and the
and Medicare taxes on tips under Reportingnames of the employees to whom you • The total tips required to be reported for Tips on Your Tax Return, later. These uncol-paid the tips. that period. lected taxes will be shown in box 12 of your 2007
You must sign and date the statement. You Form W-2 (codes A and B).Do not write in your tip diary the should keep a copy with your personal records.amount of any service charge that your
Your employer may require you to report youremployer adds to a customer's bill and Tip Rate Determination
CAUTION
!
tips more than once a month. However, thethen pays to you and treats as wages. This is and Education Programstatement cannot cover a period of more thanpart of your wages, not a tip.
one calendar month. Your employer may participate in the Tip RateElectronic tip record. You can use an elec- Determination and Education Program. The pro-Electronic tip statement. Your employertronic system provided by your employer to re- gram was developed to help employees andcan have you furnish your tip statements elec-cord your daily tips. If you do, you must receive employers understand and meet their tip report-tronically.and keep a paper copy of this record. ing responsibilities.
When to report. Give your report for each There are two agreements under the pro-
month to your employer by the 10th of the next gram: the Tip Rate Determination Agreement
month. If the 10th falls on a Saturday, Sunday, (TRDA) and the Tip Reporting Alternative Com-
or legal holiday, give your employer the report by mitment (TRAC). In addition, employers in the
the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or food and beverage industry may be able to get
legal holiday. approval of an employer-designed EmTRAC
Page 52 Chapter 6 Tip Income

program. For information on the EmTRAC pro- John's Form W-2 from Diamond Restaurant using either a method provided by an em-
shows $17,000 ($10,000 wages plus $7,000 re- ployer-employee agreement or a method pro-gram, see Notice 2001-1, which is on page 261
ported tips) in box 1. He adds the $18 unre- vided by IRS regulations based on employees'of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2 at
ported tips to that amount and reports $17,018 sales or hours worked. For information about thewww.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-02.pdf.
as wages on his tax return. exact allocation method used, ask your em-If you are employed in the gaming industry, ployer.your employer may have a Gaming Industry Tip Reporting social security and MedicareCompliance Agreement Program. See Revenue Must you report your allocated tips on yourtaxes on tips not reported to your employer.
Procedure 2007-32, which is on page 1322 of return? You must report allocated tips on yourIf you received $20 or more in cash and charge
Internal Revenue Bulletin No. 2007-22 at tax return unless either of the following excep-tips in a month from any one job and did not
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb07-22.pdf. tions applies.report all of those tips to your employer, you
must report the social security and MedicareIf you are employed in the food and beverage • You kept a daily tip record, or other evi-taxes on the unreported tips as additional tax onindustry, your employer may participate in an dence that is as credible and as reliable asyour return. To report these taxes, you must fileAttributed Tip Income Program (ATIP). See a daily tip record, as required under rulesa return even if you would not otherwise have toRevenue Procedure 2006-30, which is on page explained earlier.file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot file110 of Internal Revenue Bulletin No. 2006-31 at • Your tip record is incomplete, but it showsForm 1040EZ or Form 1040A.)www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-31.pdf. that your actual tips were more than theUse Form 4137 to figure these taxes. EnterYour employer can provide you with a copy tips you reported to your employer plusthe tax on line 59, Form 1040, and attach Formof any applicable agreement. To find out more the allocated tips.4137 to your return.
about these agreements, visit www.irs.gov and If either exception applies, report your actual tipsIf you are subject to the Railroad Re-type ªrestaurant tip reportingº in the Keyword on your return. Do not report the allocated tips.tirement Tax Act, you cannot use Formsearch box. You may also call 1-800-829-4933 See What tips to report under Reporting Tips on4137 to pay railroad retirement tax on
CAUTION
!or visit www.irs.gov/localcontacts for the IRS Your Tax Return, earlier.unreported tips. To get railroad retirement credit,Taxpayer Assistance Center in your area; or you must report tips to your employer.send an email to TIP.Program@irs.gov and re- How to report allocated tips. If you mustquest information on this program. report allocated tips on your return, add theReporting uncollected social security and amount in box 8 of your Form W-2 to the amountMedicare taxes on tips. If your employer in box 1. Report the total as wages on line 7 ofcould not collect all the social security and Medi- Form 1040. (You cannot file Form 1040EZ orcare taxes or railroad retirement tax you owe on Form 1040A.)tips reported for 2007, the uncollected taxes willReporting Tips on Your Because social security and Medicare taxesbe shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 (codes A were not withheld from the allocated tips, youand B). You must report these amounts as addi-Tax Return must report those taxes as additional tax on yourtional tax on your return. You may have uncol- return. Complete Form 4137, and include thelected taxes if your regular pay was not enoughHow to report tips.   Report your tips with allocated tips on line 1 of the form. See Report-for your employer to withhold all the taxes youyour wages on line 1 of Form 1040EZ or line 7 of ing social security and Medicare taxes on tipsowe and you did not give your employer enoughForm 1040A or Form 1040. not reported to your employer under Reportingmoney to pay the rest of the taxes. Tips on Your Tax Return, earlier.To report these uncollected taxes, you must
file a return even if you would not otherwise haveWhat tips to report. You must report all tips
to file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot fileyou received in 2007 on your tax return, includ-
Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A.) Include the taxesing both cash tips and noncash tips. Any tips you
in your total tax amount on line 63, and writereported to your employer for 2007 are included
ªUTº and the total of the uncollected taxes on thein the wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2. dotted line next to line 63.Add to the amount in box 1 only the tips you did
7.not report to your employer.
If you received $20 or more in cash and
charge tips in a month and did not Allocated Tipsreport all of those tips to your em- Interest Income
CAUTION
!
ployer, see Reporting social security and Medi- If your employer allocated tips to you, they arecare taxes on tips not reported to your employer, shown separately in box 8 of your Form W-2.later. They are not included in box 1 with your wages Reminderand reported tips. If box 8 is blank, this discus-If you did not keep a daily tip record as
sion does not apply to you.required and an amount is shown in Foreign-source income. If you are a U.S. citi-box 8 of your Form W-2, see Allocated
CAUTION
! zen with interest income from sources outsideWhat are allocated tips? These are tips thatTips, later. your employer assigned to you in addition to the the United States (foreign income), you mustIf you kept a daily tip record and reported tips tips you reported to your employer for the year. report that income on your tax return unless it isto your employer as required under the rules Your employer will have done this only if: exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether youexplained earlier, add the following tips to the reside inside or outside the United States and• You worked in a restaurant, cocktailamount in box 1 of your Form W-2. whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from thelounge, or similar business that must allo-• Cash and charge tips you received that foreign payer.cate tips to employees,
totaled less than $20 for any month.
• The tips you reported to your employer
• The value of noncash tips, such as tickets, were less than your share of 8% of food
passes, or other items of value. and drink sales, and
Introduction• You did not participate in your employer's
Attributed Tip Income Program (ATIP). This chapter discusses the following topics.Example. John Allen began working at the
Diamond Restaurant (his only employer in 2007) • Different types of interest income.on June 30 and received $10,000 in wages How were your allocated tips figured? The
• What interest is taxable and what interestduring the year. John kept a daily tip record tips allocated to you are your share of an amount
is nontaxable.showing that his tips for June were $18 and his figured by subtracting the reported tips of all
tips for the rest of the year totaled $7,000. He employees from 8% (or an approved lower rate) • When to report interest income.was not required to report his June tips to his of food and drink sales (other than carryout
employer, but he reported all of the rest of his • How to report interest income on your taxsales and sales with a service charge of 10% or
tips to his employer as required. return.more). Your share of that amount was figured
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 53

In general, any interest you receive or that is return if certain requirements are met. Use Form
Income from property given to a child.credited to your account and can be withdrawn 8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter-
Property you give as a parent to your child underis taxable income. Exceptions to this rule are est and Dividends, for this purpose.
the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, thediscussed later in this chapter. For more information about the tax on invest- Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar lawYou may be able to deduct expenses you ment income of children and the parents' elec- becomes the child's property.have in earning this income on Schedule A tion, see chapter 31. Income from the property is taxable to the(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. See
child, except that any part used to satisfy a legalchapter 28. Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest obligation to support the child is taxable to theyou receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust parent or guardian having that legal obligation.is generally taxable income. You should receiveUseful Items
a Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary's Savings account with parent as trustee.You may want to see:
Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from Interest income from a savings account opened
the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its for a child who is a minor, but placed in the namePublication
instructions will tell you where to report the in- and subject to the order of the parents as trust-❏ 537 Installment Sales come on your Form 1040. ees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the
state in which the child resides, both of the❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses Social security number (SSN). You must following are true.❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount give your name and SSN to any person required
• The savings account legally belongs to the(OID) Instruments by federal tax law to make a return, statement,
child.or other document that relates to you. This in-
Form (and Instructions) cludes payers of interest. • The parents are not legally permitted to
use any of the funds to support the child.❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and SSN for joint account. If the funds in a joint
Ordinary Dividends account belong to one person, list that person's
name first on the account and give that person's Form 1099-INT. Interest income is generally❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and SSN to the payer. (For information on who owns reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similarOrdinary Dividends for Form 1040A the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts, statement, by banks, savings and loans, andFilers later.) If the joint account contains combined other payers of interest. This form shows you the❏ 3115 Application for Change in funds, give the SSN of the person whose name interest you received during the year. Keep thisAccounting Method is listed first on the account. form for your records. You do not have to attach
These rules apply both to joint ownership by it to your tax return.❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series
a married couple and to joint ownership by other Report on your tax return the total amount ofEE and I U.S. Savings Bonds
individuals. For example, if you open a joint interest income that you receive for the tax year.Issued After 1989
savings account with your child using funds be- Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT.❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record longing to the child, list the child's name first on Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, youRedemption of Series EE and I the account and give the child's SSN. must still report all of your taxable interest in-U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After
Custodian account for your child. If your come. For example, you may receive distributive1989
child is the actual owner of an account that is shares of interest from partnerships or S corpo-
recorded in your name as custodian for the child, rations. This interest is reported to you on
give the child's SSN to the payer. For example, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or Schedule K-1
you must give your child's SSN to the payer of (Form 1120S).
interest on an account owned by your child,General Information Nominees. Generally, if someone receiveseven though the interest is paid to you as custo- interest as a nominee for you, that person willdian.A few items of general interest are covered here. give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest
Penalty for failure to supply SSN. If youRecordkeeping. You should keep a received on your behalf.
do not give your SSN to the payer of interest,list showing sources and amounts of If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes
you may have to pay a penalty. See Failure tointerest received during the year. Also, amounts belonging to another person, see the
RECORDS
supply social security number under Penalties inkeep the forms you receive that show your inter- discussion on nominee distributions under How
chapter 1. Backup withholding also may apply.est income (Forms 1099-INT, for example) as To Report Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publi-
an important part of your records. cation 550, or see the Schedule 1 (Form 1040A)
Backup withholding. Your interest income is or Schedule B (Form 1040) instructions.
generally not subject to regular withholding.Tax on investment income of a child under Incorrect amount. If you receive a FormHowever, it may be subject to backup withhold-age 18. Part of a child's 2007 investment in- 1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (oring to ensure that income tax is collected on thecome may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. This other incorrect information), you should ask theincome. Under backup withholding, the payer ofmay happen if all the following are true. issuer for a corrected form. The new Forminterest must withhold, as income tax, 28% of 1099-INT you receive will be marked ªCor-the amount you are paid.1. The child was under age 18 at the end of rected.º2007. A child born on January 1, 1990, is Backup withholding may also be required if
considered to be age 18 at the end of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter- Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest income
2007. mined that you underreported your interest or may also be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original
dividend income. For more information, see Issue Discount. For more information about2. The child had more than $1,700 of invest- Backup Withholding in chapter 4. amounts shown on this form, see Original Issuement income (such as taxable interest and
Discount (OID), later in this chapter.dividends) and has to file a tax return. Reporting backup withholding. If backup
withholding is deducted from your interest in-3. Either parent was alive at the end of 2007. Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interestcome, the payer must give you a Form 1099-INT dividends you receive from a mutual fund orIf all these statements are true, Form 8615, Tax for the year that indicates the amount withheld. other regulated investment company are not in-for Children Under Age 18 With Investment In- The Form 1099-INT will show any backup with- cluded in your taxable income. (However, seecome of More Than $1,700, must be completed holding as ªFederal income tax withheld.º Information-reporting requirement, next.) Ex-and attached to the child's tax return. If any of empt-interest dividends should be shown in boxthese statements is not true, Form 8615 is not Joint accounts. If two or more persons hold 8 of Form 1099-INT.required and the child's income is taxed at his or property (such as a savings account or bond) as
her own tax rate. joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or tenants Information-reporting requirement. Al-
However, the parent can choose to include in common, each person's share of any interest though exempt-interest dividends are not tax-
the child's interest and dividends on the parent's from the property is determined by local law. able, you must show them on your tax return if
Page 54 Chapter 7 Interest Income

you have to file. This is an information-reporting penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav- Interest on condemnation award. If the con-
requirement and does not change the ex- ings in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more demning authority pays you interest to compen-
empt-interest dividends into taxable income. information on how to report the interest and sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the
deduct the penalty. interest is taxable.
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from Money borrowed to invest in certificate of Installment sale payments. If a contract forspecified private activity bonds may be subject deposit. The interest you pay on money bor- the sale or exchange of property provides forto the alternative minimum tax. See Alternative rowed from a bank or savings institution to meet deferred payments, it also usually provides forMinimum Tax in chapter 30 for more informa- the minimum deposit required for a certificate of interest payable with the deferred payments.tion. Chapter 1 of Publication 550 contains a deposit from the institution and the interest you That interest is taxable when you receive it. Ifdiscussion on private activity bonds under State earn on the certificate are two separate items. little or no interest is provided for in a deferredor Local Government Obligations. You must report the total interest you earn on payment contract, part of each payment may be
the certificate in your income. If you itemize treated as interest. See Unstated Interest andInterest on VA dividends. Interest on insur- deductions, you can deduct the interest you pay Original Issue Discount in Publication 537, In-ance dividends that you leave on deposit with as investment interest, up to the amount of your stallment Sales.the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not net investment income. See Interest Expensestaxable. This includes interest paid on dividends Interest on annuity contract. Accumulatedin chapter 3 of Publication 550.on converted United States Government Life interest on an annuity contract you sell before itsInsurance and on National Service Life Insur- maturity date is taxable.Example. You deposited $5,000 with aance policies. bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to Usurious interest. Usurious interest is inter-make up the $10,000 minimum deposit requiredIndividual retirement arrangements (IRAs). est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable asto buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable. interest unless state law automatically changestificate earned $575 at maturity in 2007, but youInterest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You it to a payment on the principal.received only $265, which represented the $575generally do not include it in your income until you earned minus $310 interest charged on your Interest income on frozen deposits. Ex-you make withdrawals from the IRA. See chap- $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form clude from your gross income interest on frozenter 17. 1099-INT for 2007 showing the $575 interest deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the
you earned. The bank also gives you a state- year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-
ment showing that you paid $310 interest for posit because:
2007. You must include the $575 in your in-
• The financial institution is bankrupt or in-Taxable Interest come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-
solvent, orule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject
Taxable interest includes interest you receive to the net investment income limit. • The state where the institution is locatedfrom bank accounts, loans you make to others, has placed limits on withdrawals becauseGift for opening account. If you receive non-and other sources. The following are some other other financial institutions in the state arecash gifts or services for making deposits or forsources of taxable interest. bankrupt or insolvent.opening an account in a savings institution, you
may have to report the value as interest.Dividends that are actually interest. Certain The amount of interest you must exclude isFor deposits of less than $5,000, gifts ordistributions commonly called dividends are ac- the interest that was credited on the frozen de-services valued at more than $10 must be re-tually interest. You must report as interest posits minus the sum of:ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 orso-called ªdividendsº on deposits or on share
more, gifts or services valued at more than $20accounts in: 1. The net amount you withdrew from thesemust be reported as interest. The value is deter- deposits during the year, and• Cooperative banks, mined by the cost to the financial institution.
2. The amount you could have withdrawn as• Credit unions,
of the end of the year (not reduced by anyExample. You open a savings account at• Domestic building and loan associations, penalty for premature withdrawals of ayour local bank and deposit $800. The account
time deposit).earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-• Domestic savings and loan associations,
culator. If no other interest is credited to your If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in-• Federal savings and loan associations, account during the year, the Form 1099-INT you come on deposits that were frozen at the end ofand receive will show $35 interest for the year. You 2007, see Frozen deposits under How To Re-must report $35 interest income on your tax• Mutual savings banks. port Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publicationreturn. 550, for information about reporting this interest
income exclusion on your tax return.Interest on insurance dividends. Interest onMoney market funds. Generally, amounts
The interest you exclude is treated asinsurance dividends left on deposit with an in-you receive from money market funds should be
credited to your account in the following year.surance company that can be withdrawn annu-reported as dividends, not as interest.
You must include it in income in the year you canally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to
withdraw it.your account. However, if you can withdraw itCertificates of deposit and other deferred
only on the anniversary date of the policy (orinterest accounts. If you open any of these
Example. $100 of interest was credited onother specified date), the interest is taxable inaccounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervals
your frozen deposit during the year. You with-the year that date occurs.of 1 year or less during the term of the account.
drew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofYou generally must include this interest in your Prepaid insurance premiums. Any increase the end of the year. You must include $80 inincome when you actually receive it or are enti- in the value of prepaid insurance premiums, your income and exclude $20 from your incometled to receive it without paying a substantial advance premiums, or premium deposit funds is for the year. You must include the $20 in yourpenalty. The same is true for accounts that ma- interest if it is applied to the payment of premi- income for the year you can withdraw it.ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single ums due on insurance policies or made avail-payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for able for you to withdraw. Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at amore than 1 year, see Original Issue Discount discount when interest has been defaulted orU.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations,(OID), later. when the interest has accrued but has not beensuch as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,Interest subject to penalty for early with- paid, the transaction is described as trading aissued by any agency or instrumentality of thedrawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferred bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is notUnited States is taxable for federal income taxinterest account before maturity, you may have income and is not taxable as interest if paid later.purposes.to pay a penalty. You must report the total When you receive a payment of that interest, it is
amount of interest paid or credited to your ac- Interest on tax refunds. Interest you receive a return of capital that reduces the remaining
count during the year, without subtracting the on tax refunds is taxable income. cost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 55

after the date of purchase, however, is taxable Before July 1980, series E bonds were is- Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc.
interest income for the year it is received or 2002-9 (or later update).ºsued. The original 10-year maturity period of
accrued. See Bonds Sold Between Interest series E bonds has been extended to 40 years 2. It includes your name and social securityDates, later, for more information. for bonds issued before December 1965 and 30 number under the label in (1).years for bonds issued after November 1965.Below-market loans. In general, a be- 3. It identifies the savings bonds for whichPaper series EE and series E bonds are issuedlow-market loan is a loan on which no interest is you are requesting this change.at a discount. The face value is payable to you atcharged or on which interest is charged at a rate maturity. Electronic series EE bonds are issued 4. It includes your agreement tobelow the applicable federal rate. See Be- at their face value. The face value plus accruedlow-Market Loans in chapter 1 of Publication a. Report all interest on any bonds ac-interest is payable to you at maturity.550 for more information. quired during or after the year ofOwners of paper series E and EE bonds can
change when the interest is realizedconvert them to electronic bonds. These con-
U.S. Savings Bonds upon disposition, redemption, or finalverted bonds do not retain the denomination
maturity, whichever is earliest, andlisted on the paper certificate but are posted atThis section provides tax information on U.S. their purchase price (with accrued interest). b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-savings bonds. It explains how to report the quired before the year of change wheninterest income on these bonds and how to treat Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first the interest is realized upon disposition,transfers of these bonds. offered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed redemption, or final maturity, whicheverbonds issued at their face amount with a matur-For other information on U.S. savings is earliest, with the exception of the in-ity period of 30 years. The face value plus allbonds, write to: terest reported in prior tax years.accrued interest is payable to you at maturity.
For series EE and I: Reporting options for cash method tax- 5. It includes your signature.
Bureau of the Public Debt payers. If you use the cash method of report- You must attach this statement to your tax re-Division of Customer Assistance ing income, you can report the interest on series turn for the year of change, which you must fileP.O. Box 7012 EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of the by the due date (including extensions).Parkersburg, WV 26106-7012 following ways. You can have an automatic extension of 6
months from the due date of your return for theFor series HH/H: 1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest year of change (excluding extensions) to file theBureau of the Public Debt until the earlier of the year you cash or statement with an amended return. At the top ofDivision of Customer Assistance dispose of the bonds or the year they ma- the statement, enter ªFiled pursuant to sectionP.O. Box 2186 ture. (However, see Savings bonds traded, 301.9100-2.º To get this extension, you mustParkersburg, WV 26106-2186 later.) have filed your original return for the year ofNote. Series E bonds issued in 1977 ma- change by the due date (including extensions).Or, on the Internet, visit: tured in 2007. If you have used method 1,www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/prod- By the date you file the original state-you generally must report the interest onucts/products.htm.
 ment with your return, you must alsothese bonds on your 2007 return.
send a copy to the address below.
2. Method 2. Choose to report the increaseAccrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac-
in redemption value as interest each year.crual method of accounting, you must report Internal Revenue Service
interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic RulingsYou must use the same method for all series EE,accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interest Branch)series E, and series I bonds you own. If you dountil you receive it or until the bonds mature. P.O. Box 7604not choose method 2 by reporting the increaseAccrual methods of accounting are explained in Benjamin Franklin Stationin redemption value as interest each year, youchapter 1 under Accounting Methods. Washington, DC 20044must use method 1.
Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash If you plan to cash your bonds in the If you use a private delivery service, send themethod of accounting, as most individual tax- same year that you will pay for higher copy to the address below.payers do, you generally report the interest on education expenses, you may want to
TIP
U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. The use method 1 because you may be able to
cash method of accounting is explained in chap- exclude the interest from your income. To learn Internal Revenue Serviceter 1 under Accounting Methods. how, see Education Savings Bond Program, Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic
Rulings Branch)later.Series HH bonds.  These bonds were issued 1111 Constitution Avenue, NWat face value. Interest is paid twice a year by Change from method 1. If you want to Washington, DC 20224direct deposit to your bank account. If you are a change your method of reporting the interest Instead of filing this statement, you can re-cash method taxpayer, you must report interest from method 1 to method 2, you can do so quest permission to change from method 2 toon these bonds as income in the year you re- without permission from the IRS. In the year of method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,ceive it. change you must report all interest accrued to follow the form instructions for an automaticSeries HH bonds were first offered in 1980; date and not previously reported for all your change. No user fee is required.they were last offered in August 2004. Before bonds.1980, series H bonds were issued. Series H
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued inOnce you choose to report the interest eachbonds are treated the same as series HH bonds.
the names of co-owners, such as you and youryear, you must continue to do so for all seriesIf you are a cash method taxpayer, you must
child or you and your spouse, interest on theEE, series E, and series I bonds you own and forreport the interest when you receive it.
bond is generally taxable to the co-owner whoany you get later, unless you request permissionSeries H bonds have a maturity period of 30
bought the bond.to change, as explained next.years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.
One co-owner's funds used.  If you usedChange from method 2. To change fromSeries EE and series I bonds. Interest on your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the taxmethod 2 to method 1, you must request permis-these bonds is payable when you redeem the on the interest. This is true even if you let thesion from the IRS. Permission for the change isbonds. The difference between the purchase other co-owner redeem the bond and keep allautomatically granted if you send the IRS aprice and the redemption value is taxable inter- the proceeds. Under these circumstances, sincestatement that meets all the following require-est. the other co-owner will receive a Form 1099-INTments. 
Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds were at the time of redemption, the other co-owner
1. You have typed or printed at the top:first offered in January 1980. They have a matur- must provide you with another Form 1099-INT
ªChange in Method of Accounting Underity period of 30 years. showing the amount of interest from the bond
Page 56 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Savings bonds traded. If you postponed re-Table 7-1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
porting the interest on your series EE or series E
bonds, you did not recognize taxable income
IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ... when you traded the bonds for series HH or
series H bonds, unless you received cash in theyou buy a bond in your name and the name of you.
trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-another person as co-owners, using only your
ries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can-own funds
not trade any other series of bonds for series HH
you buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond. bonds.) Any cash you received is income up to
who is the sole owner of the bond the amount of the interest earned on the bonds
traded. When your series HH or series H bondsyou and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion
mature, or if you dispose of them before matur-co-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond.
ity, you report as interest the difference betweenpurchase price
their redemption value and your cost. Your cost
you and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate is the sum of the amount you paid for the traded
property state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally series EE or series E bonds plus any amountproperty report one-half of the interest. you had to pay at the time of the trade.
Example.  In 2004, you traded series EE
that is taxable to you. The co-owner who re- former co-owner and a new co-owner. But the bonds (on which you postponed reporting the
deemed the bond is a ªnominee.º See Nominee new co-owner will report only his or her share of interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223
distributions under How To Report Interest In- the interest earned after the transfer. in cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in-
come in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more If bonds that you and a co-owner bought come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the time
information about how a person who is a nomi- jointly are reissued to each of you separately in of the trade, the series EE bonds had accrued
nee reports interest income belonging to an- the same proportion as your contribution to the interest of $523 and a redemption value of
other person. purchase price, neither you nor your co-owner $2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma-
has to report at that time the interest earned turity, when you receive $2,500. You must reportBoth co-owners' funds used. If you and before the bonds were reissued. $300 as interest income in the year of maturity.the other co-owner each contribute part of the
This is the difference between their redemptionbond's purchase price, the interest is generally
value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (theExample 1. You and your spouse eachtaxable to each of you, in proportion to the
amount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It isspent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 seriesamount each of you paid.
also the difference between the accrued interestEE savings bond. The bond was issued to you
Community property. If you and your of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-
spouse live in a community property state and cash received on the trade.)pone reporting interest on the bond. You later
hold bonds as community property, one-half of have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one Choice to report interest in year of trade.the interest is considered received by each of in your name and one in your spouse's name. At You could have chosen to treat all of the previ-you. If you file separate returns, each of you that time neither you nor your spouse has to ously unreported accrued interest on the seriesgenerally must report one-half of the bond inter- report the interest earned to the date of reissue. EE or series E bonds traded for series HH bondsest. For more information about community
as income in the year of the trade. If you madeproperty, see Publication 555, Community Prop- Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE this choice, it is treated as a change fromerty. savings bond entirely with your own funds. The method 1. See Change from method 1 underbond was issued to you and your spouse asTable 7-1. These rules are also shown in Series EE and series I bonds, earlier.co-owners. You both postpone reporting interestTable 7-1.
on the bond. You later have the bond reissued Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds inter-
as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one in est. When you cash a bond, the bank or otherOwnership transferred. If you bought series
your spouse's name. You must report half the payer that redeems it must give you a FormE, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with your
interest earned to the date of reissue. 1099-INT if the interest part of the payment youown funds and had them reissued in your
receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Formco-owner's name or beneficiary's name alone,
Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, series 1099-INT should show the interest as the differ-you must include in your gross income for the
EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a ence between the amount you received and theyear of reissue all interest that you earned on
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must amount paid for the bond. However, your Formthese bonds and have not previously reported.
include in your income for that year the interest 1099-INT may show more interest than youBut, if the bonds were reissued in your name
earned to the date of transfer if you have not have to include on your income tax return. Foralone, you do not have to report the interest
already reported it. However, if you are consid- example, this may happen if any of the followingaccrued at that time.
ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in are true.This same rule applies when bonds (other value both before and after the transfer contin-than bonds held as community property) are • You chose to report the increase in theues to be taxable to you, you can continue totransferred between spouses or incident to di- redemption value of the bond each year.defer reporting the interest earned each year.vorce. The interest shown on your FormYou must include the total interest in your in- 1099-INT will not be reduced by amountsPurchased jointly. If you and a co-owner come in the year you cash or dispose of the previously included in income.each contributed funds to buy series E, series bonds or the year the bonds finally mature,
EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the whichever is earlier. • You received the bond from a decedent.
bonds reissued in the co-owner's name alone, The interest shown on your FormThe same rules apply to previously unre-
you must include in your gross income for the 1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter-ported interest on series EE or series E bonds if
year of reissue your share of all the interest est reported by the decedent before death,the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or
earned on the bonds that you have not previ- or on the decedent's final return, or by theseries H bonds you acquired in a trade for the
ously reported. The former co-owner does not estate on the estate's income tax return.series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds
have to include in gross income at the time of traded, later. • Ownership of the bond was transferred.reissue his or her share of the interest earned
The interest shown on your Formthat was not reported before the transfer. This Decedents. The manner of reporting interest 1099-INT will not be reduced by interestinterest, however, as well as all interest earned income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds, that accrued before the transfer.after the reissue, is income to the former after the death of the owner, depends on the
co-owner. accounting and income-reporting methods pre- • You were named as a co-owner and the
This income-reporting rule also applies when viously used by the decedent. This is explained other co-owner contributed funds to buy
the bonds are reissued in the name of your in chapter 1 of Publication 550. the bond. The interest shown on your
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 57

Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by the Qualified expenses include any contribution • $98,400 to $128,400 for married taxpayers
you make to a qualified tuition program or to a filing jointly or for a qualifying widow(er)amount you received as nominee for the
Coverdell education savings account. with dependent child.other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in
Qualified expenses do not include expensesthis chapter, for more information about You do not qualify for the interest exclusion iffor room and board or for courses involvingthe reporting requirements.) your modified AGI is equal to or more than thesports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a upper limit for your filing status.• You received the bond in a taxable distri- degree or certificate granting program.bution from a retirement or profit-sharing Modified AGI, for purposes of this exclusion,Eligible educational institutions. Theseplan. The interest shown on your Form is adjusted gross income (Form 1040A, line 21institutions include most public, private, and1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter- or Form 1040, line 37) figured before the interestnonprofit universities, colleges, and vocationalest portion of the amount taxable as a exclusion, and modified by adding back any:schools that are accredited and are eligible todistribution from the plan and not taxable
participate in student aid programs run by the 1. Foreign earned income exclusion,as interest. (This amount is generally
Department of Education.shown on Form 1099-R, Distributions 2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction,From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or Reduction for certain benefits. You must 3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residentsProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance reduce your qualified higher educational ex- of American Samoa,Contracts, etc., for the year of distribution.) penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.
4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,For more information on including the correct 1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-
5. Exclusion for adoption benefits receivedships (see Scholarships and fellowships inamount of interest on your return, see How To
under an employer's adoption assistancechapter 12).Report Interest Income, later. Publication 550
program,includes examples showing how to report these 2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-amounts. 6. Deduction for tuition and fees,tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex- 7. Deduction for student loan interest, and3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-empt from state and local taxes. The tion of distributions from a qualified tuition 8. Deduction for domestic production activi-Form 1099-INT you receive will indi-
TIP program. ties.cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bond
4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts orinterest in box 3. Use the worksheet in the instructions for lineinheritances) received for educational ex- 9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If youpenses, such as claim any of the exclusion or deduction itemsEducation Savings listed above (except items 6, 7, and 8), add thea. Veterans' educational assistance bene-Bond Program amount of the exclusion or deduction (exceptfits, any deduction for tuition and fees, student loan
You may be able to exclude from income all or b. Qualified tuition reductions, or interest, or domestic production activities) to the
part of the interest you receive on the redemp- amount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter thec. Employer-provided educational assis-tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the total on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI.tance.year if you pay qualified higher educational ex- If you have investment interest expense in-
penses during the same year. This exclusion is curred to earn royalties and other investment5. Any expense used in figuring the Hopeknown as the Education Savings Bond Program. income, see Education Savings Bond Programand lifetime learning credits.
You do not qualify for this exclusion if your in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
filing status is married filing separately. Amount excludable. If the total proceeds Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-(interest and principal) from the qualified U.S.Form 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure your est exclusion, you must keep a writtensavings bonds you redeem during the year areexclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 or record of the qualified U.S. savings
RECORDSnot more than your adjusted qualified higherForm 1040A. bonds you redeem. Your record must includeeducational expenses for the year, you may be the serial number, issue date, face value, andQualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified able to exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds total redemption proceeds (principal and inter-U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued are more than the expenses, you may be able to est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818,after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be exclude only part of the interest. Optional Form To Record Redemption of Seriesissued either in your name (sole owner) or in To determine the excludable amount, multi- EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989,your and your spouse's names (co-owners). ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction. to record this information. You should also keepYou must be at least 24 years old before the The numerator of the fraction is the qualified bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-bond's issue date. For example, a bond bought higher educational expenses you paid during mentation that shows you paid qualified higherby a parent and issued in the name of his or her the year. The denominator of the fraction is the educational expenses during the year.child under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu- total proceeds you received during the year.
sion by the parent or child.
Example. In February 2007, Mark and U.S. Treasury Bills,The issue date of a bond may be earlier Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-than the date the bond is purchased Notes, and Bondsries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in Aprilbecause the issue date assigned to a
CAUTION
! 1996. They received proceeds of $7,512 repre- Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debtsbond is the first day of the month in which it is senting principal of $5,000 and interest of (obligations) of the U.S. Government.purchased. $2,512. In 2007, they paid $4,000 of their daugh-
ter's college tuition. They are not claiming an Taxation of interest. Interest income fromBeneficiary. You can designate any individual education credit for that amount, and their Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to(including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond. daughter does not have any tax-free educational federal income tax, but is exempt from all state
assistance. They can exclude $1,338 ($2,512 × and local income taxes. You should receiveVerification by IRS. If you claim the exclu- ($4,000 ÷ $7,512)) of interest in 2007. They Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interestsion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp- must pay tax on the remaining $1,174 ($2,512 − (in box 3) that was paid to you for the year.tion information from the Department of the $1,338) interest.Treasury. Payments of principal and interest generally
Modified adjusted gross income limit. will be credited to your designated checking orQualified expenses. Qualified higher edu- The interest exclusion is limited if your modified savings account by direct deposit through thecational expenses are tuition and fees required adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is: TREASURY DIRECT system.for you, your spouse, or your dependent (for
whom you can claim an exemption) to attend an • $65,600 to $80,600 for taxpayers filing sin- Treasury bills. These bills generally have a
eligible educational institution. gle or head of household, and 4-week, 13-week, or 26-week maturity period.
Page 58 Chapter 7 Interest Income

They are issued at a discount in the amount of See chapter 10 for information on pension and Example 2. The facts are the same as in
$1,000 and multiples of $1,000. The difference Example 1, except that the bond was issued atannuity income from nonqualified plans.
between the discounted price you pay for the $950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount
bills and the face value you receive at maturity is is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, youState or Localinterest income. Generally, you report this inter- must include the OID in income as it accrues
Government Obligationsest income when the bill is paid at maturity. over the term of the bond.
Treasury notes and bonds. Treasury Debt instrument bought after original is-Interest on a bond used to finance governmentnotes have maturity periods of more than 1 year, sue. If you buy a debt instrument with deoperations generally is not taxable if the bond isranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods for minimis OID at a premium, the discount is notissued by a state, the District of Columbia, aTreasury bonds are longer than 10 years. Both includible in income. If you buy a debt instrumentpossession of the United States, or any of theirnotes and bonds generally pay interest every 6 with de minimis OID at a discount, the discountpolitical subdivisions.months. Generally, you report this interest for is reported under the market discount rules. SeeBonds issued after 1982 by an Indian tribalthe year paid. For more information, see U.S. Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publica-government are treated as issued by a state.Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds in chapter 1 of tion 550.Interest on these bonds is generally tax exemptPublication 550. if the bonds are part of an issue of which sub- Exceptions to reporting OID. The OID rulesFor other information on Treasury stantially all of the proceeds are to be used in the discussed in this chapter do not apply to thenotes or bonds, write to: exercise of any essential government function. following debt instruments. 
Interest on arbitrage bonds issued by state
Bureau of The Public Debt 1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, seeor local governments after October 9, 1969, is
P.O. Box 7015 Stripped tax-exempt obligations undertaxable.
Parkersburg, WV 26106±7015 Stripped Bonds and Coupons in chapter 1Interest on a private activity bond that is not a
of Publication 550).qualified bond is taxable. For more informationOr, on the Internet, visit: www.
on whether such interest is taxable or tax ex- 2. U.S. savings bonds.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/indiv.htm
empt, see State or Local Government Obliga-
 3. Short-term debt instruments (those with ations in chapter 1 of Publication 550. fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year
from the date of issue).For information on series EE, series I, and Information reporting requirement. If youseries HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savings must file a tax return, you are required to show 4. Obligations issued by an individual beforeBonds, earlier. any tax-exempt interest you received on your March 2, 1984.
return. This is an information-reporting require-Treasury inflation-protected securities 5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow-ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a ing are true.est to taxable interest.year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amount
that is adjusted to take into account inflation and a. The lender is not in the business of
deflation. For the tax treatment of these securi- lending money.Original Issueties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments b. The amount of the loan, plus theDiscount (OID)under Original Issue Discount (OID), in Publica- amount of any outstanding prior loanstion 550. between the same individuals, isOriginal issue discount (OID) is a form of inter-
$10,000 or less.est. You generally include OID in your income as
Bonds Sold Between it accrues over the term of the debt instrument, c. Avoiding any federal tax is not one ofwhether or not you receive any payments fromInterest Dates the principal purposes of the loan.the issuer.
If you sell a bond between interest payment A debt instrument generally has OID when
dates, part of the sales price represents interest the instrument is issued for a price that is less Form 1099-OID. The issuer of the debt instru-
accrued to the date of sale. You must report that than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID ment (or your broker, if you held the instrument
part of the sales price as interest income for the is the difference between the stated redemption through a broker) should give you Form
year of sale. price at maturity and the issue price. 1099-OID, Original Issue Discount, or a similar
If you buy a bond between interest payment statement, if the total OID for the calendar yearAll debt instruments that pay no interest
dates, part of the purchase price represents is $10 or more. Form 1099-OID will show, in boxbefore maturity are presumed to be issued at a
interest accrued before the date of purchase. 1, the amount of OID for the part of the year thatdiscount. Zero coupon bonds are one example
When that interest is paid to you, treat it as a you held the bond. It also will show, in box 2, theof these instruments.
return of your capital investment, rather than stated interest that you must include in yourThe OID accrual rules generally do not apply
interest income, by reducing your basis in the income. A copy of Form 1099-OID will be sent toto short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-
bond. See Accrued interest on bonds under the IRS. Do not file your copy with your return.turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).
How To Report Interest Income in chapter 1 of Keep it for your records.See Discount on Short-Term Obligations in
Publication 550 for information on reporting the In most cases, you must report the entirechapter 1 of Publication 550.
payment. amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as
interest income. But see Refiguring OID shownDe minimis OID. You can treat the discount on Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, foras zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)Insurance more information.of the stated redemption price at maturity multi-
Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi- plied by the number of full years from the date of Form 1099-OID not received. If you had OIDciary of the insured person are usually not tax- original issue to maturity. This small discount is for the year but did not receive a Formable. But if you receive the proceeds in known as ªde minimisº OID. 1099-OID, seewww.irs.gov, which lists total OIDinstallments, you must usually report a part of on certain debt instruments and has informationeach installment payment as interest income. Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond with that will help you figure OID. If your debt instru-a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,For more information about insurance pro- ment is not listed, consult the issuer for furtherissued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofceeds received in installments, see Publication information about the accrued OID for the year.1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
(the number of full years from the date of original Nominee. If someone else is the holder of
issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur- record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-
discount is less than $25, the OID is treated asance proceeds, the annuity payments you re- ment that belongs to you and receives a Form
zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willceive are taxed as pension and annuity income 1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give
recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income. you a Form 1099-OID.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 59

Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID. Example. On September 1, 2005, you • You are claiming the interest exclusion
You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or box loaned another individual $2,000 at 12%, com- under the Education Savings Bond Pro-
6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the following pounded annually. You are not in the business gram (discussed earlier).
apply. of lending money. The note stated that principal • You received interest from aand interest would be due on August 31, 2007.• You bought the debt instrument after its seller-financed mortgage, and the buyerIn 2007, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-original issue and paid a premium or an used the property as a home.pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cashacquisition premium. • You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.method, you must include in income on your
• The debt instrument is a stripped bond or savings bond interest that includes2007 return the $508.80 interest you received in
a stripped coupon (including certain zero amounts you reported before 2007.that year.
coupon instruments). • You received, as a nominee, interest thatConstructive receipt. You constructively
For information about figuring the correct actually belongs to someone else.receive income when it is credited to your ac-
amount of OID to include in your income, see count or made available to you. You do not need • You received a Form 1099-INT for interestFiguring OID on Long-Term Debt Instruments in to have physical possession of it. For example, on frozen deposits.Publication 1212. you are considered to receive interest, divi-
List each payer's name and the amount of inter-dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-
est income received from each payer on line 1. IfRefiguring periodic interest shown on Form count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar
you received a Form 1099-INT or Form1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument financial institution, or interest on life insurance
1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-or acquired it from another holder during the policy dividends left to accumulate, when they
age firm as the payer.year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, are credited to your account and subject to your
earlier, for information about the treatment of withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet You cannot use Form 1040A if you must useperiodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of entered in your passbook. Form 1040, as described next.Form 1099-OID for that instrument. You constructively receive income on the
Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 insteaddeposit or account even if you must:
Certificates of deposit (CDs). If you buy a of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:• Make withdrawals in multiples of evenCD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you must amounts, 1. You forfeited interest income because ofinclude in income each year a part of the total
the early withdrawal of a time deposit,interest due and report it in the same manner as • Give a notice to withdraw before making
other OID. the withdrawal, 2. You received or paid accrued interest on
This also applies to similar deposit arrange- securities transferred between interest• Withdraw all or part of the account to with-ments with banks, building and loan associa- payment dates,draw the earnings, ortions, etc., including: 3. You had a financial account in a foreign• Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless• Time deposits, country, unless the combined value of allthe interest you are to receive on an early
foreign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-withdrawal or redemption is substantially• Bonus plans,
ing all of 2007 or the accounts were withless than the interest payable at maturity.• Savings certificates, certain U.S. military banking facilities,
• Deferred income certificates, 4. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987Accrual method. If you use an accrual
and choose to reduce interest income frommethod, you report your interest income when• Bonus savings certificates, and
the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-you earn it, whether or not you have received it.• Growth savings certificates. mium (see Bond Premium Amortization inInterest is earned over the term of the debt
chapter 3 of Publication 550),instrument.Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 gener-
5. You are reporting OID in an amount moreally must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are Example. If, in the previous example, you or less than the amount shown on FormCDs that are not in registered form. They are not use an accrual method, you must include the 1099-OID, orissued in the depositor's name and are transfer- interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldable from one individual to another. 6. You received tax-exempt interest from pri-report the interest as follows: 2005, $80; 2006,Banks must provide the IRS and the person vate activity bonds issued after August 7,$249.60; and 2007, $179.20.redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT. 1986.
Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is
More information. See chapter 1 of Publica- taxable in the year the coupon becomes due and Schedule B. You must complete Schedule
tion 550 for more information about OID and payable. It does not matter when you mail the B (Form 1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 and
related topics, such as market discount bonds. coupon for payment. any of the following apply.
1. Your taxable interest income is more than
$1,500.
How To Report 2. You are claiming the interest exclusionWhen To Report
under the Education Savings Bond Pro-
Interest Income gram (discussed earlier).Interest Income
3. You had a foreign account or you receivedGenerally, you report all of your taxable interestWhen to report your interest income depends on a distribution from, or were a grantor of, orincome on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, linewhether you use the cash method or an accrual transferor to, a foreign trust.8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.method to report income.
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest 4. You received interest from a
income is more than $1,500. Instead, you mustCash method. Most individual taxpayers use seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer
use Form 1040A or Form 1040.the cash method. If you use this method, you used the property as a home.
generally report your interest income in the year Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1 5. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.in which you actually or constructively receive it. (Form 1040A), Part I, if you file Form 1040A and savings bond interest that includesHowever, there are special rules for reporting any of the following are true. amounts you reported before 2007.the discount on certain debt instruments. See
U.S. Savings Bonds and Original Issue Dis- • Your taxable interest income is more than 6. You received, as a nominee, interest that
count, earlier. $1,500. actually belongs to someone else.
Page 60 Chapter 7 Interest Income

7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
on frozen deposits. General Information
8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest 8. This section discusses general rules for divi-on a bond that you bought between inter-
dend income.est payment dates.
Tax on investment income of a child under9. Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list is
age 18. Part of a child's 2007 investment in-true. Dividends and come may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. ThisOn Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and the may happen if all of the following are true.amount received from each. If you received a Other CorporateForm 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-
• The child was under age 18 at the end ofkerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.
2007. A child born on January 1, 1990, isDistributions
considered to be age 18 at the end ofForm 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,
2007.except for interest from U.S. savings bonds and
Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Form • The child had more than $1,700 of invest-
1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxable Reminder ment income (such as taxable interest and
interest income you received. You must report dividends) and has to file a tax return.
all of your taxable interest income even if you do Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen with • Either parent was alive at the end of 2007.not receive a Form 1099-INT. dividend income from sources outside the
If all of these statements are true, Form 8615,If you forfeited interest income because of United States (foreign income), you must report
Tax for Children Under Age 18 With Investmentthe early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de- that income on your tax return unless it is ex-
Income of More Than $1,700, must be com-ductible amount will be shown on Form empt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re-
pleted and attached to the child's tax return. If1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with- side inside or outside the United States and
any of these statements is not true, Form 8615 isdrawal of savings in chapter 1 of Publication whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the
not required and the child's income is taxed atforeign payer.550.
his or her own tax rate.Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amount
of interest income you received from U.S. sav- However, the parent can choose to include
ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and the child's interest and dividends on the parent's
Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3 return if certain requirements are met. Use FormIntroductionto any other taxable interest income you re- 8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter-
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of:ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 was est and Dividends, for this purpose.
previously included in interest income. If part of For more information about the tax on invest-• Ordinary dividends,the amount shown in box 3 was previously in- ment income of children and the parents' elec-
• Capital gain distributions,cluded in your interest income, see U.S. savings tion, see chapter 31.
bond interest previously reported, later. • Nondividend distributions, and Beneficiary of an estate or trust. DividendsBox 4 of Form 1099-INT (federal income tax and other distributions you receive as a benefi-• Other distributions you may receive from awithheld) will contain an amount if you were ciary of an estate or trust are generally taxablecorporation or a mutual fund.subject to backup withholding. Report the income. You should receive a Schedule K-1amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7, on (Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share of Income,This chapter also explains how to report divi-Form 1040A, line 38, or on Form 1040, line 64 Deductions, Credits, etc., from the fiduciary.dend income on your tax return.(federal income tax withheld). Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its instructions  Dividends are distributions of money, stock,Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment will tell you where to report the income on youror other property paid to you by a corporation.expenses you may be able to deduct as an Form 1040.You also may receive dividends through a part-itemized deduction. See chapter 3 of Publication
nership, an estate, a trust, or an association that Social security number (SSN).  You must550 for more information about investment ex-
is taxed as a corporation. However, some give your name and SSN (or individual taxpayerpenses.
amounts you receive that are called dividends identification number (ITIN)) to any person re-U.S. savings bond interest previously re- are actually interest income. (See Dividends that quired by federal tax law to make a return, state-ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for are actually interest under Taxable Interest in ment, or other document that relates to you. ThisU.S. savings bond interest, the form may show chapter 7.) includes payers of dividends. If you do not giveinterest you do not have to report. See Form your SSN or ITIN to the payer of dividends, youMost distributions are paid in cash (or1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds interest, ear- may have to pay a penalty.check). However, distributions can consist oflier, under U.S. Savings Bonds. For more information on SSNs and ITINs,more stock, stock rights, other property, or serv-On Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, or see Social security number (SSN) in chapter 7.ices.on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1,
Backup withholding. Your dividend incomereport all the interest shown on your Form
Useful Items is generally not subject to regular withholding.1099-INT. Then follow these steps.
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-You may want to see:
1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the
of all interest listed on line 1. income. Under backup withholding, the payer ofPublication
dividends must withhold, as income tax, 28% of2. Below the subtotal enter ªU.S. Savings ❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals the amount you are paid.Bond Interest Previously Reportedº and Backup withholding may also be required if❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesenter amounts previously reported or inter- the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter-est accrued before you received the bond. ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions mined that you underreported your interest or
3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal dividend income. For more information, seeForm (and Instructions)and enter the result on line 2. Backup Withholding in chapter 4.
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and Stock certificate in two or more names. IfOrdinary DividendsMore information. For more information two or more persons hold stock as joint tenants,
about how to report interest income, see chapter ❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common,
1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for the Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040A each person's share of any dividends from the
form you must file. Filers stock is determined by local law.
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions Page 61

Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Form 121-day period (from July 6, 2007, through Sep-Qualified Dividends1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to show tember 4, 2007).
you the distributions you received from them Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividends Example 3. You bought 10,000 shares ofduring the year. Keep this form with your rec- that are subject to the same 5% or 15% maxi- ABC Mutual Fund common stock on June 28,ords. You do not have to attach it to your tax mum tax rate that applies to net capital gain. 2007. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend ofreturn. They should be shown in box 1b of the Form 10 cents a share. The ex-dividend date was July1099-DIV you receive.Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV. 6, 2007. The ABC Mutual Fund advises you thatQualified dividends are subject to the 15%Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, you the portion of the dividend eligible to be treatedrate if the regular tax rate that would apply ismust still report all of your taxable dividend in- as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per share.25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that wouldcome. For example, you may receive distributive Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual Fundapply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends areshares of dividends from partnerships or sub- shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000 andsubject to the 5% rate.chapter S corporations. These dividends are qualified dividends of $200. However, you soldTo qualify for the 5% or 15% maximum rate,reported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) the 10,000 shares on August 1, 2007. You haveall of the following requirements must be met.and Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual Fund
• The dividends must have been paid by aReporting tax withheld. If tax is withheld because you held the ABC Mutual Fund stock
U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor-from your dividend income, the payer must give for less than 61 days.
poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora-you a Form 1099-DIV that indicates the amount Holding period reduced where risk of losstion later.)withheld. is diminished. When determining whether
• The dividends are not of the type listedNominees. If someone receives distribu- you met the minimum holding period discussed
later under Dividends that are not qualifiedtions as a nominee for you, that person will give earlier, you cannot count any day during which
dividends.you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu- you meet any of the following conditions.
tions received on your behalf. • You meet the holding period (discussed 1. You had an option to sell, were under anext).Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay- contractual obligation to sell, or had made
ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interest (and not closed) a short sale of substan-
that are received by a broker on your behalf tially identical stock or securities.Holding period. You must have held the stock
must be reported to you on Form 1099-MISC, for more than 60 days during the 121-day period 2. You were grantor (writer) of an option toMiscellaneous Income, or a similar statement. that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date. buy substantially identical stock or securi-See Reporting Substitute Payments under Short The ex-dividend date is the first date following ties.Sales in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for more the declaration of a dividend on which the buyer
3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holdinginformation about reporting these payments. of a stock will not receive the next dividend
one or more other positions in substantiallypayment. Instead, the seller will get the divi-Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. If similar or related property.dend.you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect When counting the number of days you held For information about how to apply conditionamount (or other incorrect information), you the stock, include the day you disposed of the (3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The stock, but not the day you acquired it. See thenew Form 1099 you receive will be marked ªCor- examples later. Qualified foreign corporation. A foreign cor-rected.º poration is a qualified foreign corporation if itException for preferred stock. In the case
meets any of the following conditions. Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold, of preferred stock, you must have held the stock
exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a more than 90 days during the 181-day period 1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.dividend is declared, but before it is paid, the that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend date possession.owner of record (usually the payee shown on the if the dividends are due to periods totaling more
dividend check) must include the dividend in than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are due 2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits
income. to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold- of a comprehensive income tax treaty with
ing period in the previous paragraph applies. the United States that the Treasury De-Dividends received in January. If a mutual partment determines is satisfactory for thisfund (or other regulated investment company) or Example 1. You bought 5,000 shares of purpose and that includes an exchange ofreal estate investment trust (REIT) declares a XYZ Corp. common stock on June 28, 2007. information program. For a list of thosedividend (including any exempt-interest divi- XYZ Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per treaties, seeTable 8-1.dend or capital gain distribution) in October, share. The ex-dividend date was July 6, 2007. 3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)November, or December payable to sharehold- Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. shows above, but the stock for which the dividenders of record on a date in one of those months $500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in box is paid is readily tradable on an estab-but actually pays the dividend during January of 1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold the lished securities market in the Unitedthe next calendar year, you are considered to 5,000 shares on August 1, 2007. You held your States. See Readily tradable stock, later.have received the dividend on December 31. shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of theYou report the dividend in the year it was de- 121-day period (from June 29, 2007, through Exception. A corporation is not a qualifiedclared. August 1, 2007). The 121-day period began on foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-May 7, 2007 (60 days before the ex-dividend vestment company during its tax year in whichdate), and ended on September 4, 2007. You the dividends are paid or during its previous taxhave no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be- year.Ordinary Dividends cause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61
Readily tradable stock. Any stock (such asdays.
Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com- common, ordinary stock, or preferred stock) or
mon type of distribution from a corporation. They Example 2. Assume the same facts as in an American depositary receipt in respect of that
are paid out of the earnings and profits of a Example 1 except that you bought the stock on stock is considered to satisfy requirement (3) if it
corporation and are ordinary income to you. This July 5, 2007 (the day before the ex-dividend is listed on one of the following securities mar-
means they are not capital gains. You can as- date), and you sold the stock on September 6, kets: the New York Stock Exchange, the NAS-
sume that any dividend you receive on common 2007. You held the stock for 63 days (from July DAQ Stock Market, the American Stock
or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless 6, 2007, through September 6, 2007). The $500 Exchange, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cin-
the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi- of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of your cinnati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stock Ex-
nary dividends will be shown in box 1a of the Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends be- change, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, or
Form 1099-DIV you receive. cause you held the stock for 61 days of the the Pacific Exchange, Inc.
Page 62 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return,Dividends that are not qualified dividends. Dividends Used to Buy and keep Copy C for your records.The following dividends are not qualified divi-
More Stockdends. They are not qualified dividends even if Basis adjustment. Increase your basis in
they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV. your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, byThe corporation in which you own stock may the difference between the gain you report and• Capital gain distributions. have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan the credit you claim for the tax paid.lets you choose to use your dividends to buy• Dividends paid on deposits with mutual
(through an agent) more shares of stock in the Additional information. For more informationsavings banks, cooperative banks, credit
on the treatment of distributions from mutualcorporation instead of receiving the dividends inunions, U.S. building and loan associa-
funds, see Publication 564.cash. If you are a member of this type of plantions, U.S. savings and loan associations,
and you use your dividends to buy more stock atfederal savings and loan associations, and
a price equal to its fair market value, you stillsimilar financial institutions. (Report these
must report the dividends as income.amounts as interest income.)
If you are a member of a dividend reinvest- Nondividend• Dividends from a corporation that is a ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a pricetax-exempt organization or farmer's coop- Distributionsless than its fair market value, you must reporterative during the corporation's tax year in as dividend income the fair market value of thewhich the dividends were paid or during A nondividend distribution is a distribution that isadditional stock on the dividend payment date.the corporation's previous tax year. not paid out of the earnings and profits of aYou also must report as dividend income any corporation. You should receive a Formservice charge subtracted from your cash divi-• Dividends paid by a corporation on em- 1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora-dends before the dividends are used to buy theployer securities which are held on the tion showing the nondividend distribution. Onadditional stock. But you may be able to deductdate of record by an employee stock own- Form 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution willthe service charge. See chapter 28 for moreership plan (ESOP) maintained by that be shown in box 3. If you do not receive such ainformation about deducting expenses of pro-corporation. statement, you report the distribution as an ordi-ducing income. nary dividend.• Dividends on any share of stock to the In some dividend reinvestment plans, youextent that you are obligated (whether Basis adjustment. A nondividend distributioncan invest more cash to buy shares of stock at aunder a short sale or otherwise) to make reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxedprice less than fair market value. If you chooserelated payments for positions in substan- until your basis in the stock is fully recovered.to do this, you must report as dividend incometially similar or related property. This nontaxable portion is also called a return ofthe difference between the cash you invest and
capital. It is a return of your investment in thethe fair market value of the stock you buy. When• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if stock of the company. If you buy stock in afiguring this amount, use the fair market value ofyou know or have reason to know that the corporation in different lots at different times,the stock on the dividend payment date.payments are not qualified dividends. and you cannot definitely identify the shares
subject to the nondividend distribution, reduce• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box
Money Market Funds the basis of your earliest purchases first.1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent
When the basis of your stock has been re-you know or have reason to know the pay-
Report amounts you receive from money market duced to zero, report any additional nondividendments are not qualified dividends.
funds as dividend income. Money market funds distribution that you receive as a capital gain.
Whether you report it as a long-term orare a type of mutual fund and should not be
short-term capital gain depends on how longconfused with bank money market accounts thatTable 8-1. Income Tax Treaties you have held the stock. See Holding Period inpay interest.
chapter 14.Income tax treaties the United States has
with the following countries satisfy Example. You bought stock in 1995 forrequirement (2) under Qualified foreign $100. In 1998, you received a nondividend dis-corporation. Capital Gain tribution of $80. You did not include this amount
in your income, but you reduced the basis ofAustralia Indonesia Romania
Distributions your stock to $20. You received a nondividendAustria Ireland Russian
distribution of $30 in 2007. The first $20 of thisBangladesh1 Israel Federation     Capital gain distributions (also called capital amount reduced your basis to zero. You reportBarbados2 Italy Slovak gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to the other $10 as a long-term capital gain forBelgium Jamaica Republic your account by mutual funds (or other regu- 2007. You must report as a long-term capitalCanada Japan Slovenia lated investment companies) and real estate gain any nondividend distribution you receive onChina Kazakhstan South Africa investment trusts (REITs). They will be shown in this stock in later years.
Cyprus Korea Spain box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive from
Czech Latvia Sri Lanka3 the mutual fund or REIT. Liquidating DistributionsReport capital gain distributions as long-termRepublic Lithuania Sweden
capital gains regardless of how long you ownedDenmark Luxembourg Switzerland  Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liq-your shares in the mutual fund or REIT.Egypt Mexico Thailand uidating dividends, are distributions you receive
Estonia Morocco Trinidad and during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-Undistributed capital gains of mutual fundsFinland Netherlands Tobago poration. These distributions are, at least in part,and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs one form of a return of capital. They may be paidFrance New Zealand Tunisia keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on in one or more installments. You will receive aGermany Norway Turkey them. You must treat your share of these gains Form 1099-DIV from the corporation showingGreece Pakistan Ukraine as distributions, even though you did not actu- you the amount of the liquidating distribution inHungary Philippines United ally receive them. However, they are not in- box 8 or 9.Iceland Poland Kingdom cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are For more information on liquidating distribu-India Portugal Venezuela reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share- tions, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.1Effective for dividends paid after August 6, 2006. holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital
2Effective for dividends paid after December 19, Gains.
2004. Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a of3Effective for dividends paid after July 11, 2004. Form 2439) as long-term capital gains on Distributions of StockSchedule D (Form 1040), column (f), line 11.
The tax paid on these gains by the mutual and Stock Rights
fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.
You take credit for this tax by including it on   Distributions by a corporation of its own stock
Form 1040, line 70, and checking box a on that are commonly known as stock dividends. Stock
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions Page 63

Fair market value of old stock ..... $200.00rights (also known as ªstock optionsº) are distri- Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage
Fair market value of stock dividendbutions by a corporation of rights to acquire the dividends you receive in money from a coopera-
(cash received) ...............  +10.00corporation's stock. Generally, stock dividends tive organization are included in your income.
Fair market value of old stock andand stock rights are not taxable to you, and you Do not include in your income patronage
stock dividend ................ $210.00do not report them on your return. dividends you receive on:
Basis (cost) of old stock after the • Property bought for your personal use, orTaxable stock dividends and stock rights. stock dividend (($200 ÷ $210) × $100) $95.24Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights • Capital assets or depreciable propertyBasis (cost) of stock dividend (($10 ÷are taxable to you if any of the following apply. $210) × $100) ................ + 4.76 bought for use in your business. But you
Total ...................... $100.00 must reduce the basis (cost) of the items1. You or any other shareholder has the
bought. If the dividend is more than thechoice to receive cash or other property Cash received ................ $10.00 adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-instead of stock or stock rights. Basis (cost) of stock dividend ...... − 4.76 port the excess as income.Gain $5.242. The distribution gives cash or other prop-
Because you had held the share of stock forerty to some shareholders and an increase These rules are the same whether the cooper-more than 1 year at the time the stock dividendin the percentage interest in the corpora- ative paying the dividend is a taxable orwas declared, your gain on the stock dividend istion's assets or earnings and profits to tax-exempt cooperative.a long-term capital gain.other shareholders.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.   Do notScrip dividends. A corporation that de-3. The distribution is in convertible preferred report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-clares a stock dividend may issue you a scripstock and has the same result as in (2). port these amounts on Form 1040, line 21, Formcertificate that entitles you to a fractional share.4. The distribution gives preferred stock to 1040A, line 13, or Form 1040EZ, line 3.The certificate is generally nontaxable when yousome common stock shareholders and receive it. If you choose to have the corporationcommon stock to other common stock sell the certificate for you and give you the pro-shareholders. ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be-
tween the proceeds and the portion of your basis5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The How To Report
in the corporation's stock that is allocated to thedistribution, however, is not taxable if it is
certificate.an increase in the conversion ratio of con- Dividend Income
However, if you receive a scrip certificatevertible preferred stock made solely to take
that you can choose to redeem for cash instead  Generally, you can use either Form 1040 orinto account a stock dividend, stock split,
of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re- Form 1040A to report your dividend income.or similar event that would otherwise result
ceive it. You must include its fair market value in Report the total of your ordinary dividends onin reducing the conversion right.)
income on the date you receive it. line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. ReportThe term ªstockº includes rights to acquire qualified dividends on line 9b of Form 1040 orstock, and the term ªshareholderº includes a Form 1040A.holder of rights or of convertible securities.   If you receive capital gain distributions, youIf you receive taxable stock dividends or may be able to use Form 1040A or you mayOther Distributionsstock rights, include their fair market value at the have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-time of the distribution in your income. butions only in chapter 16. If you receive nondiv-You may receive any of the following distribu-Preferred stock redeemable at a premium. idend distributions required to be reported astions during the year.If you hold preferred stock having a redemption capital gains, you must use Form 1040. You
Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interestprice higher than its issue price, the difference cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receive any
dividends you receive from a mutual fund or(the redemption premium) generally is taxable dividend income.
other regulated investment company are not in-as a constructive distribution of additional stock
Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichcluded in your taxable income. Exempt-intereston the preferred stock. For more information,
you received $10 or more in dividends and otherdividends should be shown on box 8 of Formsee chapter 1 of Publication 550.
distributions, you should receive a Form1099-INT.Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re- 1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive FormInformation reporting requirement. Al-ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair market 1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxablethough exempt-interest dividends are not tax-value when distributed. If you receive stock or dividend income.able, you must show them on your tax return ifstock rights that are not taxable to you, see See Form 1099-DIV for more information onyou have to file a return. This is an informationStocks and Bonds under Basis of Investment how to report dividend income.reporting requirement and does not change theProperty in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for infor-
exempt-interest dividends to taxable income.mation on how to figure their basis. Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1
(Form 1040A), Part II, and attach it to your FormAlternative minimum tax treatment. Ex-Fractional shares. You may not own enough 1040A, if:empt-interest dividends paid from specified pri-stock in a corporation to receive a full share of
vate activity bonds may be subject to thestock if the corporation declares a stock divi- • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,alternative minimum tax. See Alternative Mini-dend. However, with the approval of the share- box 1a) are more than $1,500, ormum Tax in chapter 30 for more information.holders, the corporation may set up a plan in • You received, as a nominee, dividendswhich fractional shares are not issued, but in- Dividends on insurance policies. Insurance that actually belong to someone else.stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are given policy dividends that the insurer keeps and usesto the shareholders. Any cash you receive for to pay your premiums are not taxable. However, List on line 5 each payer's name and thefractional shares under such a plan is treated as you must report as taxable interest income the amount of ordinary dividends you received. Ifan amount realized on the sale of the fractional interest that is paid or credited on dividends left you received a Form 1099-DIV from a brokerageshares. You must determine your gain or loss with the insurance company. firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched- If dividends on an insurance contract (other Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is the than a modified endowment contract) are distrib- on line 5. Also enter this total on Form 1040A,difference between the cash you receive and the uted to you, they are a partial return of the line 9a.basis of the fractional shares sold. premiums you paid. Do not include them in your
gross income until they are more than the total of Form 1040. You must fill in Schedule B, PartExample. You own one share of common all net premiums you paid for the contract. Re- II, and attach it to your Form 1040, if:stock that you bought on January 3, 1999, for port any taxable distributions on insurance poli-$100. The corporation declared a common stock • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,cies on Form 1040, line 21.dividend of 5% on June 30, 2007. The fair mar- box 1a) are more than $1,500, or
ket value of the stock at the time the stock Dividends on veterans' insurance. Divi- • You received, as a nominee, dividendsdividend was declared was $200. You were paid dends you receive on veterans' insurance poli- that actually belong to someone else.$10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on
a plan described in the above paragraph. You dividends left with the Department of Veterans If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,
figure your gain or loss as follows: Affairs is not taxable. you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.
Page 64 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, each receive as normal rent payments, there are
payer's name and the amount of ordinary divi- other amounts that may be rental income.
dends you received. If your securities are held
9. When to report. If you are a cash basis tax-by a brokerage firm (in ªstreet nameº), list the
payer, you report rental income on your returnname of the brokerage firm that is shown on
for the year you actually or constructively re-Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock is
ceive it. You are a cash basis taxpayer if youheld by a nominee who is the owner of record,
Rental Income report income in the year you receive it, regard-and the nominee credited or paid you dividends
less of when it was earned. You constructivelyon the stock, show the name of the nominee and
receive income when it is made available to you,the dividends you received or for which you were and Expenses for example, by being credited to your bankcredited.
account.Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed
For more information about when you con-on line 5. Also enter this total on Form 1040, line
structively receive income, see Accounting9a. Introduction Methods in chapter 1.
This chapter discusses rental income and ex-Qualified dividends. Report qualified divi-
Advance rent. Advance rent is any amountpenses. It covers the following topics.dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b of
you receive before the period that it covers.Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in box • Rental income. Include advance rent in your rental income in the1b is already included in box 1a. Do not add the
year you receive it regardless of the period cov-• Rental expenses.amount in box 1b to, or substract it from, the
ered or the method of accounting you use.amount in box 1a. Do not include any of the • Personal use of dwelling unit (includingfollowing on lines 9b. vacation home). Example. You sign a 10-year lease to rent• Qualified dividends you received as a your property. In the first year, you receive• Depreciation.nominee. See Nominees under How to $5,000 for the first year's rent and $5,000 as rent• Limits on rental losses.Report Dividend Income in chapter 1 of for the last year of the lease. You must includePublication 550. $10,000 in your income in the first year.• How to report your rental income and ex-
• Dividends on stock for which you did not penses.
Security deposits. Do not include a securitymeet the holding period. See Holding pe-
deposit in your income when you receive it if youriod earlier under Qualified Dividends. If you sell or otherwise dispose of your rental
plan to return it to your tenant at the end of theproperty, see Publication 544, Sales and Other• Dividends on any share of stock to the lease. But if you keep part or all of the securityDispositions of Assets.extent that you are obligated (whether deposit during any year because your tenantIf you have a loss from damage to, or theft of,under a short sale or otherwise) to make does not live up to the terms of the lease, includerental property, see Publication 547, Casualties,related payments for positions in substan- the amount you keep in your income in that year.Disasters, and Thefts.tially similar or related property. If an amount called a security deposit is to beIf you rent a condominium or a cooperative• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if used as a final payment of rent, it is advanceapartment, some special rules apply to you evenyou know or have reason to know that the rent. Include it in your income when you receivethough you receive the same tax treatment aspayments are not qualified dividends. it.other owners of rental property. See Publication
• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box 527, Residential Rental Property, for more infor- Payment for canceling a lease. If your tenant1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent mation. pays you to cancel a lease, the amount youyou know or have reason to know the pay- receive is rent. Include the payment in yourments are not qualified dividends. Useful Items income in the year you receive it regardless of
your method of accounting.You may want to see:If you have qualified dividends, you must fig-
ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi- Expenses paid by tenant. If your tenant paysPublicationdends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the any of your expenses, the payments are rentalForm 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched- ❏ 527 Residential Rental Property income. You must include them in your income.ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc- You can deduct the expenses if they are deduct-❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed intions, whichever applies. Enter qualified ible rental expenses. See Rental Expenses,Service Before 1987dividends on line 2 of the worksheet.
later, for more information.❏ 535 Business ExpensesInvestment interest deducted. If you claim
a deduction for investment interest, you may Property or services. If you receive property❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Ruleshave to reduce the amount of your qualified or services, instead of money, as rent, include
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertydividends that are eligible for the 5% or 15% tax the fair market value of the property or services
rate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi- in your rental income.
Form (and Instructions)dends you choose to include in investment in- If the services are provided at an agreed
come when figuring the limit on your investment upon or specified price, that price is the fair❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortizationinterest deduction. This is done on the Qualified market value unless there is evidence to the
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐ contrary.
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor- Individuals
mation about the limit on investment interest, Rental of property also used as a home. If❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationssee Interest Expenses in chapter 23. you rent property that you also use as your
❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental home and you rent it fewer than 15 days during
Income and LossExpenses related to dividend income. You the tax year, do not include the rent you receive
may be able to deduct expenses related to divi- in your income and do not deduct rental ex-
dend income if you itemize your deductions on penses. However, you can deduct on Schedule
Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28 for A (Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualty
general information about deducting expenses and theft losses that are allowed for nonrental
of producing income. Rental Income property. See Personal Use of Dwelling Unit
(Including Vacation Home), later.
More information. For more information You generally must include in your gross income
about how to report dividend income, see chap- all amounts you receive as rent. Rental income Part interest. If you own a part interest in
ter 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for the is any payment you receive for the use or occu- rental property, you must report your part of the
form you must file. pation of property. In addition to amounts you rental income from the property.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 65

out, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster- or maintain your rental property. You must prop-
ing, and replacing broken windows are exam- erly allocate your expenses between rental andRental Expenses ples of repairs. nonrental activities. You cannot deduct the cost
If you make repairs as part of an extensive of traveling away from home if the primary pur-This part discusses expenses of renting prop- remodeling or restoration of your property, the pose of the trip was the improvement of yourerty that you ordinarily can deduct from your whole job is an improvement. property. You recover the cost of improvementsrental income. It includes information on the by taking depreciation. For information on travelexpenses you can deduct if you rent part of your Improvements. An improvement adds to the expenses, see chapter 26.property, or if you change your property to rental value of property, prolongs its useful life, oruse. Depreciation, which you can also deduct To deduct travel expenses, you mustadapts it to new uses. Improvements include thefrom your rental income, is discussed later. keep records that follow the rules infollowing items.
chapter 26.
RECORDSWhen to deduct. You generally deduct your • Putting a recreation room in an unfinishedrental expenses in the year you pay them. basement. Local transportation expenses.  You canVacant rental property. If you hold property • Paneling a den. deduct your ordinary and necessary local trans-for rental purposes, you may be able to deduct portation expenses if you incur them to collect• Adding a bathroom or bedroom.your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ- rental income or to manage, conserve, or main-ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or • Putting decorative grillwork on a balcony. tain your rental property.maintaining the property while the property is Generally, if you use your personal car,• Putting up a fence.vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss of pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, yourental income for the period the property is va- • Putting in new plumbing or wiring. can deduct the expenses using one of two meth-cant. ods: actual expenses or the standard mileage• Putting in new cabinets. rate. For 2007, the standard mileage rate for allPre-rental expenses. You can deduct your
• Putting on a new roof. business miles is 48 1/2 cents a mile. For moreordinary and necessary expenses for managing,
information, see chapter 26.conserving, or maintaining rental property from • Paving a driveway.
the time you make it available for rent. To deduct car expenses under either
If you make an improvement to property, the method, you must keep records thatDepreciation. You can begin to depreciate
cost of the improvement must be capitalized. follow the rules in chapter 26. In addi-rental property when it is ready and available for
RECORDS
The capitalized cost can generally be depreci- tion, you must complete Form 4562, Part V, andrent. See Placed-in-Service Date under Depre-
ated as if the improvement were separate prop- attach it to your tax return.ciation in Publication 527.
erty.
Expenses for rental property sold. If you sell Tax return preparation. You can deduct, as aproperty you held for rental purposes, you can rental expense, the part of tax return preparationOther Expensesdeduct the ordinary and necessary expenses for fees you paid to prepare Schedule E (Formmanaging, conserving, or maintaining the prop- 1040), Part I. For example, on your 2007 Sched-Other expenses you can deduct from your rentalerty until it is sold. ule E, you can deduct fees paid in 2007 toincome include advertising, cleaning and main-
Personal use of rental property. If you prepare your 2006 Schedule E, Part I. You cantenance, utilities, fire and liability insurance,
sometimes use your rental property for personal also deduct, as a rental expense, any expensetaxes, interest, commissions for the collection of
purposes, you must divide your expenses be- (other than federal taxes and penalties) you paidrent, ordinary and necessary travel and trans-
tween rental and personal use. Also, your rental to resolve a tax underpayment related to yourportation, and other expenses, discussed next.
expense deductions may be limited. See Per- rental activities.
Rental payments for property. You can de-sonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation
duct the rent you pay for property that you useHome), later.
for rental purposes. If you buy a leasehold for
Part interest. If you own a part interest in rental purposes, you can deduct an equal part of Not Rented for Profitrental property, you can deduct your part of the the cost each year over the term of the lease.
expenses that you paid.
If you do not rent your property to make a profit,Rental of equipment. You can deduct theUncollected rent. If you are a cash basis tax- you can deduct your rental expenses only up torent you pay for equipment that you use forpayer, you do not report uncollected rent. Be- the amount of your rental income. You cannotrental purposes. However, in some cases, leasecause you do not include it in your income, you carry forward to the next year any rental ex-contracts are actually purchase contracts. If so,cannot deduct it. penses that are more than your rental income foryou cannot deduct these payments. You canIf you use an accrual method, you report the year. For more information about the rulesrecover the cost of purchased equipmentincome when you earn it. If you are unable to for an activity not engaged in for profit, seethrough depreciation.collect the rent, you may be able to deduct it as a Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica-business bad debt. See chapter 10 of Publica- Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you tion 535.tion 535 for more information about business pay an insurance premium for more than one
bad debts. year in advance, each year you can deduct the Where to report. Report your not-for-profit
part of the premium payment that will apply to rental income on Form 1040, line 21. You can
that year. You cannot deduct the total premium include your mortgage interest and any qualifiedRepairs and Improvements
in the year you pay it. mortgage insurance premiums (if you use the
property as your main home or second home),You can deduct the cost of repairs to your rental Local benefit taxes. Generally, you cannot real estate taxes, and casualty losses on theproperty. You cannot deduct the cost of im- deduct charges for local benefits that increase appropriate lines of Form 1040, Schedule A, ifprovements. You recover the cost of improve- the value of your property, such as charges for you itemize your deductions.ments by taking depreciation (explained later). putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewer Claim your other rental expenses, subject toSeparate the costs of repairs and im- systems. These charges are nondepreciable the rules explained in chapter 1 of Publicationprovements, and keep accurate rec- capital expenditures. You must add them to the 535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions onords. You will need to know the cost of basis of your property. You can deduct local
RECORDS Form 1040, Schedule A, line 23. You can deductimprovements when you sell or depreciate your benefit taxes if they are for maintaining, repair- these expenses only if they, together with cer-property. ing, or paying interest charges for the benefits. tain other miscellaneous itemized deductions,
total more than 2% of your adjusted gross in-Repairs. A repair keeps your property in good Travel expenses. You can deduct the ordi- come.operating condition. It does not materially add to nary and necessary expenses of traveling away
the value of your property or substantially pro- from home if the primary purpose of the trip was
long its life. Repainting your property inside or to collect rental income or to manage, conserve,
Page 66 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

the furniture and equipment you use for rental Dwelling UnitProperty Changed purposes.
Used as Hometo Rental Use How to divide expenses. If an expense is for The tax treatment of rental income and ex-both rental use and personal use, such as mort-If you change your home or other property (or a penses for a dwelling unit that you also use forgage interest or heat for the entire house, youpart of it) to rental use at any time other than the personal purposes depends on whether you usemust divide the expense between the rental usebeginning of your tax year, you must divide it as a home. (See How To Figure Rental Incomeand the personal use. You can use any reasona-yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance, and Deductions, later.)ble method for dividing the expense. It may bebetween rental use and personal use. You use a dwelling unit as a home during thereasonable to divide the cost of some items (forYou can deduct as rental expenses only the tax year if you use it for personal purposes moreexample, water) based on the number of peoplepart of the expense that is for the part of the year than the greater of:
using them. However, the two most commonthe property was used or held for rental pur-
methods for dividing an expense are one based 1. 14 days, orposes.
on the number of rooms in your home and oneFor depreciation purposes, treat the property 2. 10% of the total days it is rented to othersbased on the square footage of your home.as being placed in service on the conversion at a fair rental price.date.
See Figuring Days of Personal Use, later.You cannot deduct depreciation or insurance
If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur-for the part of the year the property was held for
poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price,personal use. However, you can include the Personal Use of do not count that day as a day of rental use inhome mortgage interest, qualified mortgage in-
applying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day ofsurance premiums, and real estate tax ex- Dwelling Unit personal use in applying both (1) and (2) above.penses for the part of the year the property was
This rule does not apply when dividing expensesheld for personal use as an itemized deduction (Including Vacation between rental and personal use.on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Fair rental price. A fair rental price for yourHome)Example. Your tax year is the calendar property generally is the amount of rent that ayear. You moved from your home in May and person who is not related to you would be willingIf you have any personal use of a dwelling unitstarted renting it out on June 1. You can deduct to pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rental(including a vacation home) that you rent, youas rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearly price if it is substantially less than the rentsmust divide your expenses between rental useexpenses, such as taxes and insurance. charged for other properties that are similar toand personal use. See Figuring Days of Per-Starting with June, you can deduct as rental your property.sonal Use and  How To Divide Expenses, later.expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-
 If you used a dwelling unit for personalally billed monthly, such as utilities.
purposes, it may be considered a ªdwelling unit
Examplesused as a home.º If it is, you cannot deduct
rental expenses that are more than your rental The following examples show how to determineincome for the unit. See Dwelling Unit Used asRenting Part of whether you used your rental property as aHome andHow To Figure Rental Income and home.Deductions, later. If your dwelling unit is notProperty
considered a dwelling unit used as a home, you Example 1. You converted the basement of
can deduct rental expenses that are more thanIf you rent part of your property, you must divide your home into an apartment with a bedroom, a
rental income for the unit subject to certain lim-certain expenses between the part of the prop- bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented the
its. See Limits on Rental Losses, later.erty used for rental purposes and the part of the basement apartment at a fair rental price to
property used for personal purposes, as though college students during the regular school year.
Exception for minimal rental use. If you useyou actually had two separate pieces of prop- You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273
the dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewererty. days). You figured 10% of the total days rented
You can deduct the expenses related to the than 15 days during the year, do not include any to others at a fair rental price is 27 days.
part of the property used for rental purposes, During June (30 days), your brothers stayedof the rent in your income and do not deduct any
such as home mortgage interest, qualified mort- with you and lived in the basement apartmentof the rental expenses. To determine if you use a
gage insurance premiums, and real estate rent free.dwelling unit as a home, see Dwelling Unit Used
taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Form Your basement apartment was used as aas Home, later.
1040). You can also deduct as a rental expense home because you used it for personal pur-
a part of other expenses that normally are non- poses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your broth-Dwelling unit.  A dwelling unit includes a
deductible personal expenses, such as ex- ers is considered personal use. Your personalhouse, apartment, condominium, mobile home,
penses for electricity or painting the outside of use (30 days) is more than the greater of 14boat, vacation home, or similar property. Ayour house. days or 10% of the total days it was rented (27dwelling unit has basic living accommodations,You can deduct the expenses for the part of days).such as sleeping space, a toilet, and cookingthe property used for personal purposes, subject facilities. A dwelling unit does not include prop-to certain limitations, only if you itemize your Example 2. You rented the guest bedroomerty used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similardeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). in your home at a fair rental price during the localestablishment.You cannot deduct any part of the cost of the college's homecoming, commencement, and  Property is used solely as a hotel, motel,first phone line even if your tenants have unlim- football weekends (a total of 27 days). Yourinn, or similar establishment if it is regularlyited use of it. sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for the
available for occupancy by paying customersYou do not have to divide the expenses that last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 10%
and is not used by an owner as a home duringbelong only to the rental part of your property. of the total days rented to others at a fair rental
the year.For example, if you paint a room that you rent, or price is 3 days.
if you pay premiums for liability insurance in The room was used as a home because you
Example. You rent a room in your homeconnection with renting a room in your home, used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That is
that is always available for short-term occu-your entire cost is a rental expense. If you install more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of the
pancy by paying customers. You do not use thea second phone line strictly for your tenants' 27 days it was rented (3 days).
room yourself, and you allow only paying cus-use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-
tomers to use the room. The room is used solelyble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre- Example 3. You own a condominium apart-
as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishmentciation, discussed later, on the part of the ment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair rental
and is not a dwelling unit.property used for rental purposes as well as on price for a total of 170 days during the year. For
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 67

12 of those days, the tenant was not able to use land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti- on the number of days used for each purpose.
tled to occupy the unit as his or her main homethe apartment and allowed you to use it even You can deduct expenses for the rental use of
upon payment of rent to the other co-owner orthough you did not refund any of the rent. Your the unit under the rules explained in How To
owners.family actually used the apartment for 10 of Figure Rental Income and Deductions, later.
those days. Therefore, the apartment is treated  When dividing your expenses, follow theseDonation of use of property. You use aas having been rented for 160 (170 − 10) days. rules.dwelling unit for personal purposes if:You figure 10% of the total days rented to others
at a fair rental price is 16 days. Your family also • Any day that the unit is rented at a fair• You donate the use of the unit to a charita-
used the apartment for 7 other days during the rental price is a day of rental use even ifble organization,
year. you used the unit for personal purposes• The organization sells the use of the unitYou used the apartment as a home because that day. This rule does not apply whenat a fund-raising event, andyou used it for personal purposes for 17 days. determining whether you used the unit as
That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10% • The ªpurchaserº uses the unit. a home.of the 160 days it was rented (16 days).
• Any day that the unit is available for rent
Examples but not actually rented is not a day of
Use As Main Home Before or After rental use.The following examples show how to determineRenting days of personal use.
Example. Your beach cottage was avail-For purposes of determining whether a dwelling Example 1. You and your neighbor are able for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92unit was used as a home, you may not have to co-owners of a condominium at the beach. You days). Your family uses the cottage during thecount days you used the property as your main rent the unit to vacationers whenever possible. last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unablehome before or after renting it or offering it for The unit is not used as a main home by anyone. to find a renter for the first week in August (7rent as days of personal use. Do not count them Your neighbor uses the unit for 2 weeks every days). The person who rented the cottage foras days of personal use if: year. July allowed you to use it over a weekend (2• You rented or tried to rent the property for Because your neighbor has an interest in the days) without any reduction in or refund of rent.12 or more consecutive months. unit, both of you are considered to have used the The cottage was not used at all before May 17 orunit for personal purposes during those 2• You rented or tried to rent the property for after August 31.weeks.a period of less than 12 consecutive You figure the part of the cottage expensesmonths and the period ended because Example 2. You and your neighbors are to treat as rental expenses as follows.you sold or exchanged the property. co-owners of a house under a shared equity • The cottage was used for rental a total ofThis special rule does not apply when dividing financing agreement. Your neighbors live in the
85 days (92 − 7). The days it was avail-expenses between rental and personal use. house and pay you a fair rental price.
able for rent but not rented (7 days) areEven though your neighbors have an interest
not days of rental use. The July weekendin the house, the days your neighbors live thereFiguring Days are not counted as days of personal use by you. (2 days) you used it is rental use because
of Personal Use This is because your neighbors rent the house you received a fair rental price for the
as their main home under a shared equity fi- weekend.A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is any nancing agreement. • You used the cottage for personal pur-day that the unit is used by any of the following
persons. poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks inExample 3. You own a rental property that
May).you rent to your son. Your son has no interest in1. You or any other person who has an inter- this property. He uses it as his main home. He • The total use of the cottage was 99 daysest in it, unless you rent it to another owner pays you a fair rental price for the property. (14 days personal use + 85 days rentalas his or her main home under a shared Your son's use of the property is not personalequity financing agreement (defined later). use).use by you because your son is using it as hisHowever, see Use as Main Home Before main home, he has no interest in the property, • Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) ofor After Renting under Dwelling Unit Used and he is paying you a fair rental price. the cottage expenses.As Home, earlier.
2. A member of your family or a member of Example 4. You rent your beach house to When determining whether you used the cot-
the family of any other person who has an Joshua. Joshua rents his house in the moun- tage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) you
interest in it, unless the family member tains to you. You each pay a fair rental price. used it is personal use even though you re-
uses the dwelling unit as his or her main You are using your house for personal pur- ceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There-home and pays a fair rental price. Family poses on the days that Joshua uses it because fore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83includes only brothers and sisters, your house is used by Joshua under an arrange- days of rental use for this purpose. Because youhalf-brothers and half-sisters, spouses, an- ment that allows you to use his house. used the cottage for personal purposes morecestors (parents, grandparents, etc.) and
than 14 days and more than 10% of the days oflineal descendants (children, grandchild-
rental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If youren, etc.). Days Used for Repairs and
have a net loss, you may not be able to deductMaintenance3. Anyone under an arrangement that lets all of the rental expenses. See Property Used asyou use some other dwelling unit. Any day that you spend working substantially full a Home in the following discussion.
4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price. time repairing and maintaining (not improving)
your property is not counted as a day of personal How To Figure Rentaluse. Do not count such a day as a day of per-Main home. If the other person or member of sonal use even if family members use the prop- Income and Deductionsthe family in (1) or (2) above has more than one erty for recreational purposes on the same day.home, his or her main home is ordinarily the one How you figure your rental income and deduc-he or she lived in most of the time. tions depends on whether you used the dwellingHow To Divide Expenses unit as a home (see Dwelling Unit Used asShared equity financing agreement. This is
Home, earlier) and, if you used it as a home,an agreement under which two or more persons If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and
how many days the property was rented at a fairacquire undivided interests for more than 50 personal purposes, divide your expenses be-
years in an entire dwelling unit, including the tween the rental use and the personal use based rental price.
Page 68 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Worksheet 9-1. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling
Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer ªyesº to all the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
1. Enter rents received ........................................................
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums
(see instructions) ..........................................................
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes ..........................................
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ..................
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) ........................................
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a ± 2d (See instructions) .......................
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ....................................
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining the dwelling unit (such as
repairs, insurance, and utilities) .................................................
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums (see
instructions) ..............................................................
c. Add lines 4a and 4b ........................................................
d. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4c (See instructions) ....................
5. Subtract line 4d from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ....................................
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ....................
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit ................................
c. Add lines 6a and 6b ........................................................
d. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6c (See
instructions) ..............................................................
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4d from line 4c ...............
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 6d
from line 6c ..............................................................
Worksheet Instructions
Follow these instructions for the worksheet above. To find the rental portion of your expenses for lines 2a ± 2c, 4a ± 4b, and 6a ± 6b, follow the directions
given earlier under How To Divide Expenses. If you were unable to deduct all your expenses last year because of the rental income limit, add these unused
amounts to your expenses for this year.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not rented the unit. Do not include
interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit. For example, do not include interest on a home equity loan used to pay off credit cards or other personal
loans, buy a car, or pay college tuition. Include interest on a loan used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such a loan. Include the rental
portion of this interest in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Figure the qualified mortgage insurance premiums on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 13, if you had not rented the
unit. See page A-7 of the Schedule A (Form 1040) instructions. However, figure your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line 38) without your rental income
and expenses from the dwelling unit. See Line 4b below to deduct part of the qualified mortgage insurance premiums not allowed because of the adjusted
gross income limit. Include the rental portion of the amount from Schedule A, line 13, in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Schedule A or use it to figure the amount to deduct on line 13 of that schedule. Instead, figure the personal portion on a separate
Schedule A.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses related to the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not rented the dwelling
unit. To do this, complete Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts, Section A, treating the losses as personal losses. On Form 4684, line 17, enter 10% of your
adjusted gross income figured without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter the rental portion of the result from Form 4684, line 18, on
line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to figure your personal losses on Schedule A. Instead, figure the personal portion on a separate Form 4684.
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used for rental activities
other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also include rental agency fees, advertising, office supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in
your rental activity.
Line 2e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses on Schedule E even if your rental expenses are more than your rental
income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental portion of the mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums you could deduct on Schedule A if
you had not rented the dwelling unit. Enter on line 4b of this worksheet the rental portion of the mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums
you could not deduct on Schedule A because it is more than the limit on home mortgage interest or qualified mortgage insurance premiums. Do not include
interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit (as explained in the line 2a instructions).
Line 4d. You can deduct the amounts on lines 4a and 4b as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more than the amount on line 4d.
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684 you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A. Enter the amount from Form 4684, line 10 .........................................................
B. Enter the rental portion of line A ...............................................................
C. Enter the amount from line 2c of this worksheet .....................................................
D. Subtract line C from line B. Enter the result here and on line 6a of this worksheet ................................
Allocating the limited deduction. If you cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4c or 6c this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you
wish among the expenses included on line 4c or 6c. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
Line 6d. You can deduct the amounts on lines 6a and 6b as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more than the amount on line 6d.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 69

Claiming the correct amount of depreciation inProperty Not Used as a Home At-Risk RulesPublication 527 for more information.
If you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,  The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount youChanging your accounting method to de-report all the rental income and deduct all the can deduct as losses from activities often de-duct unclaimed depreciation. To changerental expenses. See How To Report Rental scribed as tax shelters. Losses from holding realyour accounting method, you must file FormIncome and Expenses, later. property (other than mineral property) placed in3115, Application for Change in Accounting Your deductible rental expenses can be service before 1987 are not subject to the at-riskMethod, to get the consent of the IRS. In somemore than your gross rental income. However, rules.instances, that consent is automatic. For moresee Limits on Rental Losses, later. Generally, any loss from an activity subjectinformation, see chapter 1 of Publication 946.
to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of
Land. You can never depreciate the cost ofProperty Used as a Home the total amount you have at risk in the activity at
land because land does not wear out, become the end of the tax year. You are considered at
obsolete, or get used up. The costs of clearing,If you use a dwelling unit as a home during the risk in an activity to the extent of cash and the
grading, planting, and landscaping are usuallyyear (see Dwelling Unit Used as Home, earlier), adjusted basis of other property you contributed
all part of the cost of land and cannot be depreci-how you figure your rental income and deduc- to the activity and certain amounts borrowed for
ated.tions depends on how many days the unit was use in the activity. See Publication 925 for more
rented at a fair rental price. information.More information. See Publication 527 for
Rented fewer than 15 days. If you use a more information about depreciating rental
dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer property and see Publication 946 for more infor- Passive Activity Limits
than 15 days during the year, do not include any mation about depreciation.
rental income in your income. Also, you cannot In general, all rental activities (except those
deduct any expenses as rental expenses. meeting the exception for real estate profession-Other Rules About als, below) are passive activities. For this pur-Rented 15 days or more. If you use a dwell- Depreciable Property pose, a rental activity is an activity from whiching unit as a home and rent it 15 days or more you receive income mainly for the use of tangi-during the year, you include all your rental in- In addition to the rules about what methods you ble property, rather than for services.come in your income. See How To Report can use, there are other rules you should be
Rental Income and Expenses, later. If you had a Limits on passive activity deductions andaware of with respect to depreciable property.
net profit from the rental property for the year credits.  Deductions for losses from passiveGain from disposition. If you dispose of(that is, if your rental income is more than the activities are limited. You generally cannot offsetdepreciable property at a gain, you may have tototal of your rental expenses, including depreci- income, other than passive income, with lossesreport, as ordinary income, all or part of the gain.ation), deduct all of your rental expenses. How- from passive activities. Nor can you offset taxesSee Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-ever, if you had a net loss, your deduction for on income, other than passive income, withtions of Assets.certain rental expenses is limited. credits resulting from passive activities. Any ex-
To figure your deductible rental expenses cess loss or credit is carried forward to the nextAlternative minimum tax. If you use acceler-and any carryover to next year, use Worksheet tax year.ated depreciation, you may have to file Form9-1. For a detailed discussion of these rules, see6251. Accelerated depreciation can be deter-
Publication 925.mined under MACRS, ACRS, and any other
You may have to complete Form 8582 tomethod that allows you to deduct more depreci-
figure the amount of any passive activity loss foration than you could deduct using a straight line
the current tax year for all activities and theDepreciation method.
amount of the passive activity loss allowed on
your tax return.You recover the cost of income producing prop-
erty through yearly tax deductions. You do this Exception for real estate professionals.by depreciating the property; that is, by deduct- Limits on Rental activities in which you materially partici-ing some of the cost on the tax return each year. pated during the year are not passive activitiesThree basic factors determine how much de- Rental Losses if, for that year, you were a real estate profes-preciation you can deduct. They are: (1) your sional. For a detailed discussion of the require-basis in the property, (2) the recovery period for Rental real estate activities are generally con- ments, see Publication 527. For a detailedthe property, and (3) the depreciation method sidered passive activities, and the amount of discussion of material participation, see Publica-used. You cannot simply deduct your mortgage loss you can deduct is limited. Generally, you tion 925.or principal payments, or the cost of furniture, cannot deduct losses from rental real estatefixtures and equipment, as an expense. activities unless you have income from otherYou can deduct depreciation only on the part passive activities. However, you may be able to Losses From Rental Real Estateof your property used for rental purposes. De- deduct rental losses without regard to whether Activitiespreciation reduces your basis for figuring gain or you have income from other passive activities ifloss on a later sale or exchange. you ªmateriallyº or ªactivelyº participated in your If you or your spouse actively participated in aYou may have to use Form 4562 to figure rental activity. See Passive Activity Limits, later. passive rental real estate activity, you can de-and report your depreciation. See How To Re- Losses from passive activities are first sub- duct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity fromport Rental Income and Expenses, later. ject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit the your nonpassive income. This special allowance
amount of deductible losses from holding mostClaiming the correct amount of depreciation. is an exception to the general rule disallowing
real property placed in service after 1986.You should claim the correct amount of depreci- losses in excess of income from passive activi-
ation each tax year. Even if you did not claim ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from theException. If your rental losses are less thandepreciation that you were entitled to deduct, activity against the tax on up to $25,000 of$25,000, and you actively participated in theyou must still reduce your basis in the property nonpassive income after taking into account anyrental activity, the passive activity limits probablyby the full amount of depreciation that you could losses allowed under this exception.do not apply to you. See Losses From Rentalhave deducted. If you did not deduct the correct If you are married, filing a separate return,Real Estate Activities, later.amount of depreciation for property in any year, and lived apart from your spouse for the entire
you may be able to make a correction for that Property used as a home. If you used the tax year, your special allowance cannot be more
year by filing Form 1040X, Amended U.S Indi- rental property as a home during the year, the than $12,500. If you lived with your spouse at
vidual Income Tax Return. If you are not allowed passive activity rules do not apply to that home. any time during the year and are filing a sepa-
to make the correction on an amended return, Instead, you must follow the rules explained rate return, you cannot use the special allow-
you can change your accounting method to under Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including ance to reduce your nonpassive income or tax
claim the correct amount of depreciation. See Vacation Home), earlier. on nonpassive income.
Page 70 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

The maximum amount of the special allow- Complete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How- IRA. See Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary
ance is reduced if your modified adjusted gross ever, fill in the ªTotalsº column on only one under Rollovers, later, for more information.
income is more than $100,000 ($50,000 if mar- Schedule E. The figures in the ªTotalsº column
Retired public safety officers. For distribu-ried filing separately). on that Schedule E should be the combined
tions beginning in 2007, an eligible retired publictotals of all Schedules E.
safety officer can elect to exclude from incomeActive participation. You actively partici- Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in-
distributions of up to $3,000 made directly from apated in a rental real estate activity if you (and come or loss from partnerships, S corporations,
governmental retirement plan to the providers ofyour spouse) owned at least 10% of the rental estates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-
accident, health, or long-term care insurance.property and you made management decisions ment conduits. If you need to use Schedule E,
See Insurance Premiums for Retired Publicin a significant and bona fide sense. Manage- page 2, use page 2 of the same Schedule E you
Safety Officers in Publication 575, Pension andment decisions include approving new tenants, used to enter the combined totals in Part I.
deciding on rental terms, approving expendi- Annuity Income, for more information.On Schedule E, page 1, line 20, enter the
tures, and similar decisions. depreciation you are claiming. You must com-
plete and attach Form 4562 for rental activities
More information. See Publication 925 for only if you are claiming:
more information on the passive loss limits, in- What's New for 2008• Depreciation on property placed in servicecluding information on the treatment of unused
during 2007,disallowed passive losses and credits and the
Rollovers to Roth IRAs.  After 2007, you cantreatment of gains and losses realized on the • Depreciation on listed property (such as a roll over distributions directly from a qualifieddisposition of a passive activity. car), regardless of when it was placed in retirement plan to a Roth IRA if, for the tax yearservice, or of the distribution, your modified adjusted gross
• Any car expenses reported on a form income for Roth IRA purposes is not more than
other than Schedule C or C-EZ (Form $100,000, and your filing status is not marriedHow To Report 1040) or Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ. filing separately. See Rollovers to Roth IRAs, in
Publication 575, for more information.Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your ownRental Income
worksheet. You do not have to attach these
computations to your return.and Expenses
If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and Reminder
provide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,
you normally report your rental income and ex- Hurricane tax relief. Special rules apply to
penses on Form 1040, Schedule E, Part I. How- retirement funds received by qualified individu-
ever, do not use that schedule to report a als who suffered an economic loss as a result of10.not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented for Profit, Hurricane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma. See Hurri-
earlier. cane-Related Relief, in Publication 575, or Pub-
If you provide significant services that are lication 4492, Information for Taxpayers
primarily for your tenant's convenience, such as Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma,Retirementregular cleaning, changing linen, or maid serv- for information on these special rules.
ice, you report your rental income and expenses
on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Plans, Pensions,
Business or Schedule C-EZ, Net Profit From
Business (Sole Proprietorship). Significant serv- Introductionand Annuitiesices do not include the furnishing of heat and
light, cleaning of public areas, trash collection, This chapter discusses the tax treatment of dis-
etc. For information, see Publication 334, Tax tributions you receive from:
Guide for Small Business. You also may have to What's New for 2007 • An employee pension or annuity from apay self-employment tax on your rental income. qualified plan,
Rollover of after-tax contributions. For taxForm 1098. If you paid $600 or more of mort- • A disability retirement, andyears beginning in 2007, the nontaxable part ofgage interest on your rental property to any one
an eligible rollover distribution (such as after-tax • A purchased commercial annuity.person, you should receive a Form 1098, Mort-
contributions) from a qualified retirement plangage Interest Statement, or similar statement
can be rolled over to another qualified retirementshowing the interest you paid for the year. If you What is not covered in this chapter. Theplan that is either a qualified employee plan orand at least one other person (other than your following topics are not discussed in this chap-an annuity contract described in section 403(b).spouse if you file a joint return) were liable for, ter.Previously, this part of the distribution could beand paid interest on the mortgage, and the other
rolled over only to another qualified retirement The General Rule. This is the method gen-person received the Form 1098, report your
plan that was a defined contribution plan. erally used to determine the tax treatment ofshare of the interest on Form 1040, Schedule E,
The rollover must be a direct trus- pension and annuity income from nonqualifiedline 13. Attach a statement to your return show-
tee-to-trustee transfer. The plan to which the plans (including commercial annuities). For aing the name and address of the other person. In
rollover is made must separately account for qualified plan, you generally cannot use thethe left margin of Schedule E (Form 1040), next
these contributions and the earnings on them. General Rule unless your annuity starting dateto line 13, enter ªSee attached.º
See Rollover of nontaxable amounts under Roll- is before November 19, 1996. For more informa-
overs, later, for more information. tion about the General Rule, see PublicationSchedule E (Form 1040) 939, General Rule for Pensions and Annuities.Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary. For
Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I, to report Civil service retirement benefits. If youdistributions beginning in 2007, a nonspouse
your rental income and expenses. List your total are retired from the federal government (eitherdesignated beneficiary may have a distribution
income, expenses, and depreciation for each regular or disability retirement), see Publicationfrom an eligible retirement plan of a deceased
rental property. Be sure to answer the question 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirementemployee directly transferred (trus-
on line 2. Benefits. Publication 721 also covers the infor-tee-to-trustee) to his or her own IRA set up to
mation that you need if you are the survivor orIf you have more than three rental or royalty receive the distribution. The transfer will be
beneficiary of a federal employee or retiree whoproperties, complete and attach as many treated as an eligible rollover distribution and the
died.Schedules E as are needed to list the properties. receiving plan will be treated as an inherited
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 71

Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). if you have more than one pension or annuity cost basis. If you have an investment (cost) in
contract. the plan, however, your pension or annuity pay-Information on the tax treatment of amounts you
ments from a qualified plan are taxed under thereceive from an IRA is in chapter 17. Designated Roth accounts. A designated Simplified Method. For more information aboutRoth account is a separate account created qualified plans, see Publication 560, RetirementUseful Items under a qualified Roth contribution program to Plans for Small Business.which participants may elect to have part or all ofYou may want to see:
their elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b) plan Section 457 deferred compensation plans.designated as Roth contributions. Elective de-Publication If you work for a state or local government or forferrals that are designated as Roth contributions a tax-exempt organization, you may be able to❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income are included in your income. However, qualified participate in a section 457 deferred compensa-distributions are not included in your income.❏ 721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service tion plan. If your plan is an eligible plan, you areSee Publication 575 for more information.Retirement Benefits not taxed currently on pay that is deferred under
the plan or on any earnings from the plan'sRailroad retirement benefits. Part of the rail-❏ 939 General Rule for Pensions and
investment of the deferred pay. You are gener-road retirement benefits you receive is treatedAnnuities
ally taxed on amounts deferred in an eligiblefor tax purposes like social security benefits, and
state or local government plan only when theypart is treated like an employee pension. ForForm (and Instructions)
are distributed from the plan. You are taxed oninformation about railroad retirement benefits❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pension amounts deferred in an eligible tax-exempt or-treated as social security benefits, see Publica-or Annuity Payments ganization plan when they are distributed ortion 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-
otherwise made available to you.road Retirement Benefits. For information about❏ 1099-R Distributions From Pensions,
railroad retirement benefits treated as an em- This chapter covers the tax treatment of ben-Annuities, Retirement or
ployee pension, see Railroad Retirement Bene- efits under eligible section 457 plans, but it doesProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs,
fits in Publication 575. not cover the treatment of deferrals. For infor-Insurance Contracts, etc.
mation on deferrals under section 457 plans,Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If you❏ 4972 Tax on Lump-Sum Distributions see Retirement Plan Contributions under Em-receive a disability pension or annuity, you may ployee Compensation in Publication 525, Tax-❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans be able to take the credit for the elderly or the able and Nontaxable Income.(Including IRAs) and Other disabled. See chapter 33.
For general information on these deferredTax-Favored Accounts
Withholding and estimated tax. The payer compensation plans, see Section 457 Deferred
of your pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, an- Compensation Plans in Publication 575.
nuity, or deferred compensation plan will with-
hold income tax on the taxable parts of amounts Purchased annuities. If you receive pension
paid to you. You can choose not to have tax or annuity payments from a privately purchasedGeneral Information
withheld unless they are eligible rollover distri- annuity contract from a commercial organiza-
butions. See Eligible rollover distributions under tion, such as an insurance company, you gener-Disability pensions. If you retired on disabil- Rollovers, later. You make this choice by filing ally must use the General Rule to figure theity, you generally must include in income any Form W-4P. tax-free part of each annuity payment. For more
disability pension you receive under a plan that For payments other than eligible rollover dis- information about the General Rule, get Publica-
is paid for by your employer. You must report tributions, you can tell the payer how much to tion 939. Also, see Variable Annuities in Publica-
your taxable disability payments as wages on withhold by filing Form W-4P. If you receive an tion 575 for the special provisions that apply to
line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A until you eligible rollover distribution, 20% will generally these annuity contracts.
reach minimum retirement age. Minimum retire- be withheld. There is no withholding on a direct Tax-free exchange. No gain or loss is rec-ment age generally is the age at which you can rollover of an eligible rollover distribution. See ognized on an exchange of an annuity contractfirst receive a pension or annuity if you are not Direct rollover option under Rollovers, later. If for another annuity contract if the insured oryou choose not to have tax withheld or you dodisabled. annuitant remains the same. However, if an an-not have enough tax withheld, you may have toYou may be entitled to a tax credit if nuity contract is exchanged for a life insurancepay estimated tax.you were permanently and totally dis- or endowment contract, any gain due to interestFor more information, see Pensions and An-abled when you retired. For informa- accumulated on the contract is ordinary income.
TIPnuities under Withholding in chapter 4.tion on this credit, see chapter 33. See Transfers of Annuity Contracts in Publica-
Loans. If you borrow money from your quali- tion 575 for more information about exchangesBeginning on the day after you reach mini-
fied pension or annuity plan, tax-sheltered annu- of annuity contracts.mum retirement age, payments you receive are
ity program, government plan, or contracttaxable as a pension or annuity. Report the
purchased under any of these plans, you maypayments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b, or How To Reporthave to treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribu-on Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b. tion unless certain exceptions apply. This If you file Form 1040, report your total annuity onDisability payments for injuries in- means that you must include in income all or line 16a and the taxable part on line 16b. If yourcurred as a direct result of a terrorist part of the amount borrowed. Even if you do not pension or annuity is fully taxable, enter it on lineattack directed against the United have to treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribu-
TIP 16b; do not make an entry on line 16a.States (or its allies) are not included in income. tion, you may not be able to deduct the interest If you file Form 1040A, report your total an-For more information about payments to survi- on the loan in some situations. For details, see nuity on line 12a and the taxable part on linevors of terrorist attacks, see Publication 3920, Loans Treated as Distributions in Publication 12b. If your pension or annuity is fully taxable,Tax Relief for Victims of Terrorist Attacks. 575. For information on the deductibility of inter- enter it on line 12b; do not make an entry on lineest, see chapter 23.For more information on how to report disa- 12a.bility pensions, including military and certain Qualified plans for self-employed individu-
government disability pensions, see chapter 5. als. Qualified plans set up by self-employed More than one annuity. If you receive more
individuals are sometimes called Keogh or H.R. than one annuity and at least one of them is not
More than one program. If you receive bene- 10 plans. Qualified plans can be set up by sole fully taxable, enter the total amount received
fits from more than one program under a single proprietors, partnerships (but not a partner), and from all annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, or
trust or plan of your employer, such as a pension corporations. They can cover self-employed Form 1040A, line 12a, and enter the taxable part
plan and a profit-sharing plan, you may have to persons, such as the sole proprietor or partners, on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line
figure the taxable part of each pension or annu- as well as regular (common-law) employees. 12b. If all the annuities you receive are fully
ity contract separately. Your former employer or Distributions from a qualified plan are usually taxable, enter the total of all of them on Form
the plan administrator should be able to tell you fully taxable because most recipients have no 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b.
Page 72 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Joint return. If you file a joint return and you If you had more than one partly taxable pen- More information. For complete information
and your spouse each receive one or more pen- sion or annuity, figure the tax-free part and the on using the General Rule, including the actua-
sions or annuities, report the total of the pen- taxable part of each separately. rial tables you need, see Publication 939.
sions and annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, or If your annuity is paid under a qualified plan
Exclusion limit. Your annuity starting dateForm 1040A, line 12a, and report the taxable and your annuity starting date is after July 1,
determines the total amount that you can ex-part on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 1986, and before November 19, 1996, you could
clude from your taxable income over the years.12b. have chosen to use either the General Rule or
the Simplified Method. Exclusion limited to cost. If your annuity
starting date is after 1986, the total amount of
annuity income that you can exclude over theSimplified MethodCost (Investment in the years as a recovery of the cost cannot exceed
Under the Simplified Method, you figure the your total cost. Any unrecovered cost at your (or
tax-free part of each annuity payment by divid-Contract) the last annuitant's) death is allowed as a mis-
ing your cost by the total number of anticipated cellaneous itemized deduction on the final return
monthly payments. For an annuity that is pay-Before you can figure how much, if any, of a of the decedent. This deduction is not subject to
able for the lives of the annuitants, this numberdistribution from your pension or annuity plan is the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.
is based on the annuitants' ages on the annuitytaxable, you must determine your cost (your Exclusion not limited to cost. If your an-starting date and is determined from a table. Forinvestment in the contract) in the pension or nuity starting date is before 1987, you can con-any other annuity, this number is the number ofannuity. Your total cost in the plan includes eve- tinue to take your monthly exclusion for as longmonthly annuity payments under the contract.rything that you paid. It also includes amounts as you receive your annuity. If you chose a jointyour employer paid that were taxable to you and survivor annuity, your survivor can continueWho must use the Simplified Method. Youwhen paid. Cost does not include any amounts to take the survivor's exclusion figured as of themust use the Simplified Method if your annuityyou deducted or excluded from income. annuity starting date. The total exclusion may bestarting date is after November 18, 1996, andFrom this total cost, subtract any refunds of more than your cost.you receive pension or annuity payments from apremiums, rebates, dividends, unrepaid loans, qualified employee plan, qualified employee an-or other tax-free amounts you received by the How to use the Simplified Method. Com-nuity, or a tax-sheltered annuity (403(b)) plan,later of the annuity starting date or the date on plete the Simplified Method Worksheet in Publi-unless you were at least 75 years old and enti-which you received your first payment. cation 575 to figure your taxable annuity fortled to annuity payments from a qualified planYour annuity starting date is the later of the 2007. If the annuity is payable only over your life,that are guaranteed for 5 years or more.first day of the first period for which you received use your age at the annuity starting date toa payment, or the date the plan's obligations Guaranteed payments. Your annuity contract determine the total number of expected monthlybecame fixed. provides guaranteed payments if a minimum payments for your annuity. For annuity starting
number of payments or a minimum amount (for dates beginning in 1998, if your annuity is pay-Designated Roth accounts. Your cost in
example, the amount of your investment) is pay- able over your life and the lives of other individu-these accounts is your designated Roth contri-
able even if you and any survivor annuitant do als, use the combined ages of you and thebutions that were included in your income as
not live to receive the minimum. If the minimum youngest survivor annuitant at the annuity start-wages subject to applicable withholding require-
amount is less than the total amount of the ing date. However, if your annuity starting datements.
payments you are to receive, barring death, dur- began before January 1, 1998, the total number
Foreign employment contributions. If you ing the first 5 years after payments begin (fig- of monthly annuity payments expected to be
worked in a foreign country and contributions ured by ignoring any payment increases), you received is based on the primary annuitant's age
were made to your retirement plan, special rules are entitled to less than 5 years of guaranteed at the annuity starting date.
apply in determining your cost. See Publication payments. Be sure to keep a copy of the com-575.
pleted worksheet; it will help you figureWho must use the General Rule. You must
your taxable annuity in later years.use the General Rule if you receive pension or
TIP
annuity payments from:
Example. Bill Smith, age 65, began receiv-• A nonqualified plan (such as a private an-Taxation of Periodic
ing retirement benefits in 2007, under a joint andnuity, a purchased commercial annuity, or
survivor annuity. Bill's annuity starting date isa nonqualified employee plan), orPayments
January 1, 2007. The benefits are to be paid for• A qualified plan if you are age 75 or older the joint lives of Bill and his wife Kathy, age 65.on your annuity starting date and your an-Fully taxable payments. Generally, if you did Bill had contributed $31,000 to a qualified plannuity payments are guaranteed for at leastnot pay any part of the cost of your employee and had received no distributions before the5 years.pension or annuity and your employer did not annuity starting date. Bill is to receive a retire-withhold part of the cost from your pay while you ment benefit of $1,200 a month, and Kathy is toAnnuity starting before November 19,worked, the amounts you receive each year are receive a monthly survivor benefit of $600 upon1996. If your annuity starting date is after Julyfully taxable. You must report them on your Bill's death.1, 1986, and before November 19, 1996, youincome tax return. Bill must use the Simplified Method to figurehad to use the General Rule for either circum- his taxable annuity because his payments arePartly taxable payments. If you paid part of stance described earlier. You also had to use it from a qualified plan and he is under age 75.the cost of your annuity, you are not taxed on the for any fixed-period annuity. If you did not have Because his annuity is payable over the lives ofpart of the annuity you receive that represents a to use the General Rule, you could have chosen more than one annuitant, he uses his andreturn of your cost. The rest of the amount you to use it. If your annuity starting date is before Kathy's combined ages and Table 2 at the bot-receive is generally taxable. Your annuity start- July 2, 1986, you had to use the General Rule tom of the worksheet in completing line 3 of theing date determines which method you must or unless you could use the Three-Year Rule. worksheet. His completed worksheet is shownmay use. If you had to use the General Rule (or chose in Worksheet 10-A.If you contributed to your pension or annuity to use it), you must continue to use it each year
plan, you figure the tax-free and the taxable Bill's tax-free monthly amount is $100that you recover your cost.
parts of your annuity payments under either the ($31,000 ÷ 310) as shown on line 4 of the work-
Simplified Method or the General Rule. If your Who cannot use the General Rule. You can- sheet. Upon Bill's death, if Bill has not recovered
annuity starting date is after November 18, not use the General Rule if you receive your the full $31,000 investment, Kathy will also ex-
1996, and your payments are from a qualified pension or annuity from a qualified plan and clude $100 from her $600 monthly payment.
plan, you must use the Simplified Method. Gen- none of the circumstances described in the pre- The full amount of any annuity payments re-
erally, you must use the General Rule only for ceding discussions apply to you. See Who must ceived after 310 payments are paid must be
nonqualified plans. use the Simplified Method, earlier. included in gross income.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 73

Worksheet 10-A. Simplified Method Worksheet for Bill Smith
Taxation of1. Enter the total pension or annuity payments received this year.
Also, add this amount to the total for Form 1040, line 16a, or Form Nonperiodic Payments1040A, line 12a ................................... . 1. 14,400
2. Enter your cost in the plan (contract) at the Nonperiodic distributions are also known as
annuity starting date plus any death benefit amounts not received as an annuity. They in-
exclusion* ......................... . 2. 31,000 clude all payments other than periodic payments
Note: If your annuity starting date was before and corrective distributions.
this year and you completed this worksheet
last year, skip line 3 and enter the amount from Corrective distributions of excess plan con-
line 4 of last year's worksheet on line 4 below. tributions. Generally, if the contributions
Otherwise, go to line 3. made for you during the year to certain retire-
ment plans exceed certain limits, the excess is3. Enter the appropriate number from Table 1
taxable to you. To correct an excess, your planbelow. But if your annuity starting date was
may distribute it to you (along with any incomeafter 1997 and the payments are for your life
earned on the excess). For information on planand that of your beneficiary, enter the
contribution limits and how to report correctiveappropriate number from Table 2 below ..... 3. 310
distributions of excess contributions, see Retire-4. Divide line 2 by the number on line 3 ....... 4. 100
ment Plan Contributions under Employee Com-5. Multiply line 4 by the number of months for
pensation in Publication 525.which this year's payments were made. If your
annuity starting date was before 1987, enter
Figuring the taxable amount of nonperiodicthis amount on line 8 below and skip lines 6, 7,
payments. How you figure the taxable10, and 11. Otherwise, go to line 6 ......... 5. 1,200
amount of a nonperiodic distribution depends on6. Enter any amounts previously recovered tax
whether it is made before the annuity startingfree in years after 1986. This is the amount
date or on or after the annuity starting date. Theshown on line 10 of your worksheet for last
annuity starting date is either the first day of theyear ............................. . 6. -0-
first period for which you receive an annuity7. Subtract line 6 from line 2 ............... 7. 31,000 payment under the contract or the date on which8. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 7 ...................... . 8. 1,200 the obligation under the contract becomes fixed,9. Taxable amount for year. Subtract line 8 from line 1. Enter the whichever is later. If it is made before the annuityresult, but not less than zero. Also, add this amount to the total for starting date, its tax treatment also depends onForm 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b ............... 9. 13,200 whether it is made under a qualified or nonquali-Note: If your Form 1099-R shows a larger taxable amount, use the fied plan and, if it is made under a nonqualifiedamount on line 9 instead. If you are a retired public safety officer, plan, whether it fully discharges the contract, issee Insurance Premiums for Retired Public Safety Officers in received under certain life insurance or endow-Publication 575 before entering an amount on your tax return. ment contracts, or is allocable to an investment
10. Was your annuity starting date before 1987? you made before August 14, 1982.
M Yes. STOP. Do not complete the rest of this worksheet. If you receive a nonperiodic payment fromM No. Add lines 6 and 8. This is the amount you have recovered your annuity contract on or after the annuitytax free through 2007. You will need this number if you need to fill starting date, you generally must include all ofout this worksheet next year .......................... . 10. 1,200 the payment in gross income.
11. Balance of cost to be recovered. Subtract line 10 from line 2. If If you receive a nonperiodic distributionzero, you will not have to complete this worksheet next year. The before the annuity starting date from a qualifiedpayments you receive next year will generally be fully taxable .... 11. 29,800 retirement plan, you generally can allocate only
part of it to the cost of the contract. You exclude
TABLE 1 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE from your gross income the part that you allo-
AND your annuity starting date wasÐ cate to the cost. You include the remainder in
IF the age at annuity before November 19, after November 18, your gross income.
starting date was... 1996, enter on line 3... 1996, enter on line 3... If you receive a nonperiodic distribution55 or under 300 360 before the annuity starting date from a plan other
56±60 260 310 than a qualified retirement plan, it is generally
61±65 240 260 allocated first to earnings (the taxable part) and
66±70 170 210 then to the cost of the contract (the tax-free
71 or older 120 160 part). This allocation rule applies, for example,
to a commercial annuity contract you bought
TABLE 2 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE directly from the issuer.
IF the combined ages For more information, see Figuring the Tax-
at annuity starting THEN enter able Amount, under Taxation of Nonperiodicdate were... on line 3... Payments, in Publication 575.
110 or under 410
111±120 360
Lump-Sum Distributions121±130 310
131±140 260 A lump-sum distribution is the distribution or141 or older 210 payment in 1 tax year of a plan participant's
entire balance from all of the employer's quali-* A death benefit exclusion (up to $5,000) applied to certain benefits received by employees who fied plans of one kind (for example, pension,died before August 21, 1996. profit-sharing, or stock bonus plans). A distribu-
tion from a nonqualified plan (such as a privatelyIf Bill and Kathy die before 310 payments are income tax return of the last to die. This deduc- purchased commercial annuity or a section 457made, a miscellaneous itemized deduction will tion is not subject to the 2%-of-adjusted deferred compensation plan of a state or localbe allowed for the unrecovered cost on the final gross-income limit. government or tax-exempt organization) cannot
qualify as a lump-sum distribution.
Page 74 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

The participant's entire balance from a plan • The plan participant's taxable costs of any • A tax-sheltered annuity plan (403(b) plan).
does not include certain forfeited amounts. It life insurance contract distributed, • An eligible state or local government sec-also does not include any deductible voluntary • Any employer contributions that were tax- tion 457 deferred compensation plan.employee contributions allowed by the plan after able to the plan participant, and1981 and before 1987. For more information See Rollovers to Roth IRAs under Rollovers in• Repayments of any loans that were tax-about distributions that do not qualify as Publication 575, for information on rollovers af-able to the plan participant.lump-sum distributions, see Distributions that do ter 2007 from a qualified retirement plan to anot qualify under Lump-Sum Distributions in You must reduce this cost by amounts previ- Roth IRA.Publication 575. ously distributed tax free.If you receive a lump-sum distribution from a Time for making rollover. You generally
Net unrealized appreciation (NUA). Thequalified employee plan or qualified employee must complete the rollover by the 60th day fol-
NUA in employer securities (box 6 of Formannuity and the plan participant was born before lowing the day on which you receive the distribu-
1099-R) received as part of a lump-sum distribu-January 2, 1936, you may be able to elect op- tion from your employer's plan. (This 60-day
tion is generally tax free until you sell or ex-tional methods of figuring the tax on the distribu- period is extended for the period during which
change the securities. (For more information,tion. The part from active participation in the plan the distribution is in a frozen deposit in a finan-
see Distributions of employer securities underbefore 1974 may qualify as capital gain subject cial institution.) For all rollovers to an IRA, you
Taxation of Nonperiodic Payments in Publica-to a 20% tax rate. The part from participation must irrevocably elect rollover treatment by writ-
tion 575.)after 1973 (and any part from participation ten notice to the trustee or issuer of the IRA.
before 1974 that you do not report as capital
The IRS may waive the 60-day require-gain) is ordinary income. You may be able to use
ment where the failure to do so wouldthe 10-year tax option, discussed later, to figure Capital Gain Treatment
be against equity or good conscience,tax on the ordinary income part.
TIP
such as in the event of a casualty, disaster, orCapital gain treatment applies only to the tax-Use Form 4972 to figure the separate tax on
other event beyond your reasonable control.able part of a lump-sum distribution resultinga lump-sum distribution using the optional meth-
from participation in the plan before 1974. Theods. The tax figured on Form 4972 is added to
amount treated as capital gain is taxed at a 20% Eligible rollover distributions. Generally, anthe regular tax figured on your other income.
rate. You can elect this treatment only once for eligible rollover distribution is any distribution ofThis may result in a smaller tax than you would
any plan participant, and only if the plan partici- all or the balance to your credit in a qualifiedpay by including the taxable amount of the distri-
pant was born before January 2, 1936. retirement plan. For information about excep-bution as ordinary income in figuring your regu-
tions to eligible rollover distributions, see Publi-Complete Part II of Form 4972 to choose thelar tax.
cation 575.20% capital gain election. For more information,
How to treat the distribution. If you receive a see Capital Gain Treatment under Lump-Sum Rollover of nontaxable amounts. You maylump-sum distribution, you may have the follow- Distributions in Publication 575. be able to roll over the nontaxable part of aing options for how you treat the taxable part.
distribution (such as your after-tax contributions)
• Report the part of the distribution from par- made to another qualified retirement plan that is10-Year Tax Optionticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if a qualified employee plan or a 403(b) plan, or to
you qualify) and the part from participation a traditional IRA. The transfer must be madeThe 10-year tax option is a special formula usedafter 1973 as ordinary income. either through a direct rollover to a qualified planto figure a separate tax on the ordinary income
or 403(b) plan that separately accounts for thepart of a lump-sum distribution. You pay the tax• Report the part of the distribution from par-
taxable and nontaxable parts of the rollover oronly once, for the year in which you receive theticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if
through a rollover to a traditional IRA.distribution, not over the next 10 years. You canyou qualify) and use the 10-year tax option
If you roll over only part of a distribution thatelect this treatment only once for any plan par-to figure the tax on the part from partici-
includes both taxable and nontaxable amounts,ticipant, and only if the plan participant was bornpation after 1973 (if you qualify).
the amount you roll over is treated as comingbefore January 2, 1936.• Use the 10-year tax option to figure the tax first from the taxable part of the distribution.The ordinary income part of the distribution ison the total taxable amount (if you qualify). the amount shown in box 2a of the Form 1099-R Designated Roth accounts. You can roll• Roll over all or part of the distribution. See given to you by the payer, minus the amount, if over an eligible rollover distribution from a desig-Rollovers, later. No tax is currently due on any, shown in box 3. You also can treat the nated Roth account only into another desig-the part rolled over. Report any part not capital gain part of the distribution (box 3 of nated Roth account or a Roth IRA. If you want torolled over as ordinary income. Form 1099-R) as ordinary income for the roll over the part of the distribution that is not10-year tax option if you do not choose capital• Report the entire taxable part of the distri- included in income, you must make a directgain treatment for that part.bution as ordinary income on your tax re- rollover of the entire distribution or you can roll
Complete Part III of Form 4972 to choose theturn. over the entire amount (or any portion) to a Roth
10-year tax option. You must use the special IRA. For more information on rollovers from des-
Tax Rate Schedule shown in the instructions forThe first three options are explained in the ignated Roth accounts, see Publication 575.
Part III to figure the tax. Publication 575 illus-following discussions.
trates how to complete Form 4972 to figure the Direct rollover option. You can choose to
separate tax.Electing optional lump-sum treatment. You have any part or all of an eligible rollover distri-
can choose to use the 10-year tax option or bution paid directly to another qualified plan (if
capital gain treatment only once after 1986 for permitted) or to a traditional IRA. If you decide
any plan participant. If you make this choice, you on a rollover, it is generally to your advantage to
cannot use either of these optional treatments choose this direct rollover option. Under thisRolloversfor any future distributions for the participant. option, the plan administrator would not withhold
tax from any part of the distribution that is di-If you withdraw cash or other assets from aTaxable and tax-free parts of the distribution. rectly paid to the other plan.qualified retirement plan in an eligible rolloverThe taxable part of a lump-sum distribution is the distribution, you can defer tax on the distribution Withholding tax. If you choose to have all oremployer's contributions and income earned on by rolling it over to another qualified retirement any part of the distribution paid to you, it isyour account. You may recover your cost in the plan or a traditional IRA. taxable in the year distributed unless you roll itlump sum and any net unrealized appreciation
For this purpose, the following plans are over to another qualified plan or to a traditional(NUA) in employer securities tax free.
qualified retirement plans. IRA within 60 days. The plan administrator mustCost. In general, your cost is the total of: withhold income tax of 20% from the amount of• A qualified employee plan.• The plan participant's nondeductible con- the distribution paid to you. (See Pensions and
• A qualified employee annuity.tributions to the plan, Annuities under Withholding in chapter 4.)
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 75

If you decide to roll over an amount age, in reasonable amounts over your life ex- the amount that can be excluded and the excep-
equal to the distribution before with- pectancy. These special additional taxes are the tion number shown in the Form 5329 instruc-
holding, your contribution to the new taxes on: tions.
CAUTION
!
plan or IRA must include other money (for exam- • Early distributions, and If distribution code ª1º is incorrectlyple, from savings or amounts borrowed) to re- shown on your Form 1099-R for a dis-• Excess accumulation (not receiving mini-place the amount withheld. tribution received when you were age
TIPmum distributions).The administrator must give you a written 591/2 or older, include that distribution on Form
explanation of your distribution options within a 5329. Enter exception number ª12º on line 2.These taxes are discussed in the following sec-
reasonable period of time before making an eli- tions. General exceptions. The tax does not ap-gible rollover distribution.
If you must pay either of these taxes, report ply to distributions that are:
Rollover by surviving spouse. You may be them on Form 5329. However, you do not have
• Made as part of a series of substantiallyable to roll over tax free all or part of a distribu- to file Form 5329 if you owe only the tax on early equal periodic payments (made at leasttion from a qualified retirement plan you receive distributions and your Form 1099-R correctly annually) for your life (or life expectancy)as the surviving spouse of a deceased em- shows a ª1º in box 7. Instead, enter 10% of the or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)ployee. The rollover rules apply to you as if you taxable part of the distribution on Form 1040, of you and your designated beneficiary (ifwere the employee. You can roll over a distribu- line 60 and write ªNoº under the heading ªOther from a qualified retirement plan, the pay-tion into a qualified retirement plan or a tradi- Taxesº to the left of line 60. ments must begin after your separationtional IRA. Even if you do not owe any of these taxes, from service),A distribution paid to a beneficiary other than you may have to complete Form 5329 and at-
the employee's surviving spouse is generally not tach it to your Form 1040. This applies if you • Made because you are totally and perma-
an eligible rollover distribution. However, see meet an exception to the tax on early distribu- nently disabled, or
Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary, next. tions but box 7 of your Form 1099-R does not • Made on or after the death of the planindicate an exception.Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary. If you participant or contract holder.
are a designated beneficiary (other than a sur-
Tax on Early Distributionsviving spouse) of a deceased employee, you Additional exceptions for qualified retire-
may be able to roll over tax free all or a portion of ment plans. The tax does not apply to distri-
Most distributions (both periodic and nonperi-a distribution you receive from an eligible retire- butions that are:
odic) from qualified retirement plans and non-ment plan of the employee. The distribution • From a qualified retirement plan (otherqualified annuity contracts made to you beforemust be a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer to than an IRA) after your separation fromyou reach age 591/2 are subject to an additionalyour IRA that was set up to receive the distribu- service in or after the year you reachedtax of 10%. This tax applies to the part of thetion. The transfer will be treated as an eligible age 55 (age 50 for qualified public safetydistribution that you must include in gross in-rollover distribution and the receiving plan will be employees),come.treated as an inherited IRA. For information on
For this purpose, a qualified retirement planinherited IRAs, see Publication 590. • From a qualified retirement plan (other
is: than an IRA) to an alternate payee under
Qualified domestic relations order (QDRO). a qualified domestic relations order,• A qualified employee plan,You may be able to roll over tax free all or part of
• From a qualified retirement plan to the ex-a distribution from a qualified retirement plan • A qualified employee annuity plan, tent you have deductible medical ex-that you receive under a QDRO. If you receive
• A tax-sheltered annuity plan, or penses (medical expenses that exceedthe distribution as an employee's spouse or for-
7.5% of your adjusted gross income),mer spouse (not as a nonspousal beneficiary), • An eligible state or local government sec- whether or not you itemize your deduc-the rollover rules apply to you as if you were the tion 457 deferred compensation plan (to tions for the year,employee. You can roll over the distribution from the extent that any distribution is attributa-
the plan into a traditional IRA or to another ble to amounts the plan received in a di- • From an employer plan under a written
eligible retirement plan. See Publication 575 for rect transfer or rollover from one of the election that provides a specific schedule
more information on benefits received under a other plans listed here or an IRA). for distribution of your entire interest if, as
QDRO. of March 1, 1986, you had separated from
service and had begun receiving pay-Retirement bonds. If you redeem a retire- 5% rate on certain early distributions from ments under the election,ment bond purchased under a qualified bond deferred annuity contracts. If an early with-
purchase plan, you can defer the tax on the • From an employee stock ownership plandrawal from a deferred annuity is otherwise sub-
amount received that exceeds your basis by for dividends on employer securities heldject to the 10% additional tax, a 5% rate may
rolling it over to an IRA as discussed in Publica- by the plan,apply instead. A 5% rate applies to distributions
tion 590 or qualified employer plan. under a written election providing a specific • From a qualified retirement plan due to anschedule for the distribution of your interest in IRS levy of the plan, orMore information. For more information on the contract if, as of March 1, 1986, you hadthe rules for rolling over distributions, see Publi- • From elective deferral accounts underbegun receiving payments under the election.cation 575. 401(k) or 403(b) plans or similar arrange-On line 4 of Form 5329, multiply the line 3
ments that are qualified reservist distribu-amount by 5% instead of 10%. Attach an expla-
tions.nation to your return.
Exceptions to tax. Certain early distributions Qualified reservist distributions. A quali-Special Additional
are excepted from the early distribution tax. If fied reservist distribution is not subject to the
the payer knows that an exception applies to additional tax on early distributions. A qualifiedTaxes
your early distribution, distribution code ª2,º ª3,º reservist distribution is a distribution (a) from
To discourage the use of pension funds for pur- or ª4º should be shown in box 7 of your Form elective deferrals under a section 401(k) or
poses other than normal retirement, the law im- 1099-R and you do not have to report the distri- 403(b) plan, (b) to an individual ordered or called
poses additional taxes on early distributions of bution on Form 5329. If an exception applies but to active duty (because he or she is a member of
those funds and on failures to withdraw the distribution code ª1º (early distribution, no a reserve component) for a period of more than
funds timely. Ordinarily, you will not be subject to known exception) is shown in box 7, you must 179 days or for an indefinite period, and (c)
these taxes if you roll over all early distributions file Form 5329. Enter the taxable amount of the made during the period beginning on the date of
you receive, as explained earlier, and begin distribution shown in box 2a of your Form the order or call and ending at the close of the
drawing out the funds at a normal retirement 1099-R on line 1 of Form 5329. On line 2, enter active duty period. You must have been ordered
Page 76 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

or called to active duty after September 11, plan, you must begin to receive distributions by In any case, if the annuity starting date is
2001, and before December 31, 2007. For more April 1 of the calendar year that follows the year after 1986, the total exclusion over the years
information, see Publication 575. in which you reach age 701/2, regardless of when cannot be more than the cost.
you retire. If you are the survivor of an employee, orAdditional exceptions for nonqualified an- former employee, who died before becomingnuity contracts. The tax does not apply to Required distributions. By the required be- entitled to any annuity payments, you must fig-distributions that are: ginning date, as explained earlier, you must ei- ure the taxable and tax-free parts of your annuity
ther:• From a deferred annuity contract to the payments using the method that applies as if
extent allocable to investment in the con- you were the employee.• Receive your entire interest in the plan (fortract before August 14, 1982, a tax-sheltered annuity, your entire benefit Estate tax deduction. If your annuity was aaccruing after 1986), or• From a deferred annuity contract under a joint and survivor annuity that was included inqualified personal injury settlement, • Begin receiving periodic distributions in the decedent's estate, an estate tax may have
annual amounts calculated to distribute• From a deferred annuity contract pur- been paid on it. You can deduct, as a miscella-
your entire interest (for a tax-sheltered an-chased by your employer upon termination neous itemized deduction, the part of the total
nuity, your entire benefit accruing afterof a qualified employee plan or qualified estate tax that was based on the annuity. This
1986) over your life or life expectancy oremployee annuity plan and held by your deduction is not subject to the
over the joint lives or joint life expectan-employer until your separation from serv- 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. The de-
cies of you and a designated beneficiaryice, or ceased annuitant must have died after the annu-
(or over a shorter period). ity starting date. (For details, see section• From an immediate annuity contract (a 1.691(d)-1 of the regulations.) This amount can-single premium contract providing sub- Additional information. For more informa- not be deducted in 1 year. It must be deducted instantially equal annuity payments that start tion on this rule, see Tax on Excess Accumula- equal amounts over your remaining life expec-within one year from the date of purchase tion in Publication 575. tancy.and are paid at least annually). If the decedent died before the annuity start-Required distributions not made. If the
ing date of a deferred annuity contract and youactual distributions to you in any year are less
receive a death benefit under that contract, thethan the required minimum distribution, you areTax on Excess amount you receive (either in a lump sum or assubject to an additional excise tax. The taxAccumulation periodic payments) in excess of the decedent'sequals 50% of the part of the required minimum
cost is included in your gross income as incomedistribution that was not distributed. You can getTo make sure that most of your retirement bene- in respect of a decedent for which you may bethis excise tax waived if you establish that thefits are paid to you during your lifetime, rather able to claim an estate tax deduction.shortfall in distributions was due to reasonablethan to your beneficiaries after your death, the See Publication 559, Survivors, Executors,error and that you are taking reasonable steps topayments that you receive from qualified retire- and Administrators, for more information on theremedy the shortfall. See the instructions forment plans must begin no later than on your estate tax deduction.Form 5329 for the procedure to follow if yourequired beginning date (defined next). The pay- believe you may qualify for a waiver of this tax.ments each year cannot be less than the re-
quired minimum distribution. State insurer delinquency proceedings.
You might not receive the minimum distributionRequired beginning date. Unless the rule for because assets are invested in a contract is-5% owners applies, you must begin to receive sued by an insurance company in state insurerdistributions from your qualified retirement plan delinquency proceedings. If your payments areby April 1 of the year that follows the later of: 11.reduced below the minimum due to these pro-
• The calendar year in which you reach age ceedings, you should contact your plan adminis-
701/2, or trator. Under certain conditions, you will not
have to pay the excise tax. Social Security• The calendar year in which you retire from
employment with the employer maintain- Form 5329. You must file a Form 5329 if
ing the plan. you owe a tax because you did not receive a and Equivalentminimum required distribution from your quali-However, your plan may require you to begin to fied retirement plan.receive distributions by April 1 of the year that
Railroadfollows the year in which you reach age 70 1/2,
even if you have not retired.
RetirementFor this purpose, a qualified retirement plan Survivorsincludes:
BenefitsIf you receive a survivor annuity because of the1. A qualified employee plan,
death of a retiree who had reported the annuity
2. A qualified employee annuity plan, under the Three-Year Rule and recovered all of
the cost tax free, include the total received in3. An eligible section 457 deferred compen- Introductionincome.sation plan, or
If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay- This chapter explains the federal income tax4. A tax-sheltered annuity plan (for benefits ments under the General Rule, you must apply rules for social security benefits and equivalentaccruing after 1986). the same exclusion percentage to your initial tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains the
survivor annuity payment called for in the con- following topics.Age 701/2. You reach age 701/2 on the date that tract. The resulting tax-free amount will thenis 6 calendar months after the date of your 70th • How to figure whether your benefits areremain fixed. Any increases in the survivor an-birthday. taxable.nuity are fully taxable.For example, if you are retired and your 70th If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay- • How to use the social security benefitsbirthday was on June 30, 2007, you were age ments under the Simplified Method, the part of worksheet (with examples).701/2 on December 30, 2007. If your 70th birth- each payment that is tax free is the same as the • How to report your taxable benefits.day was on July 1, 2007, you reached age 701/2
tax-free amount figured by the retiree at theon January 1, 2008. • How to treat repayments that are moreannuity starting date. This amount remains fixed
than the benefits you received during the5% owners. If you are a 5% owner of the even if the annuity payments are increased or
year.company maintaining your qualified retirement decreased. See Simplified Method, earlier.
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 77

Social security benefits include monthly retire- ❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request Worksheet 11-1.    You can use Worksheet
ment, survivor, and disability benefits. They do 11-1 to figure the amount of income to compare
not include supplemental security income (SSI) with your base amount. This is a quick way to
payments, which are not taxable. check whether some of your benefits may be
Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits taxable.
Are Any of Yourare the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroad
employee or beneficiary would have been enti- Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check if YourBenefits Taxable?tled to receive under the social security system. Benefits May be Taxable
They are commonly called the social security
To find out whether any of your benefits may be A. Enter the amount from box 5 of allequivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene-
your Forms SSA-1099 andtaxable, compare the base amount for your filingfits.
RRB-1099. Include the full amountstatus with the total of:If you received these benefits during 2007, of any lump-sum benefit paymentsyou should have received a Form SSA-1099, received in 2007, for 2007 and1. One-half of your benefits, plusSocial Security Benefit Statement, or Form earlier years. (If you received moreRRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire- 2. All your other income, including than one form, combine the
ment Board, (Form SSA-1042S, Social Security tax-exempt interest. amounts from box 5 and enter the
Benefit Statement, or Form RRB-1042S, State- total.) .................. A.When making this comparison, do not re-ment for Nonresident Alien Recipients of: Pay- Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stopduce your other income by any exclusions for: here; none of your benefits are taxable this year.ments by the Railroad Retirement Board, if you
are a nonresident alien). These forms show the • Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds, B. Enter one-half of the amount on
amounts received and repaid, and taxes with- line A ................... B.• Employer-provided adoption benefits,held for the year. You may receive more than
C. Enter your taxable pensions,one of these forms for the same year. You • Foreign earned income or foreign housing, wages, interest, dividends, andshould add the amounts shown on all forms you or other taxable income ......... C.receive for the year to determine the ªtotalº • Income earned by bona fide residents of D. Enter any tax-exempt interestamounts received and repaid, and taxes with- American Samoa or Puerto Rico. income (such as interest onheld for that year. See the Appendix at the end
municipal bonds) plus anyof Publication 915 for more information. exclusions from income (listedFiguring total income. To figure the total of earlier). ................. D.Note. When the term ªbenefitsº is used in one-half of your benefits plus your other income,
E. Add lines B, C, and D ........ E.this chapter, it applies to both social security use Worksheet 11-1 later in this discussion. If
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your basebenefits and the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad the total is more than your base amount, part of
amount for your filing status. If the amount on lineretirement benefits. your benefits may be taxable. E equals or is less than the base amount for yourIf you are married and file a joint return forWhat is not covered in this chapter. This filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this2007, you and your spouse must combine your year. If the amount on line E is more than yourchapter does not cover the tax rules for the incomes and your benefits to figure whether any base amount, some of your benefits may befollowing railroad retirement benefits. of your combined benefits are taxable. Even if taxable. You need to complete Worksheet 1 in
• Non-social security equivalent benefit your spouse did not receive any benefits, you Publication 915 (or the Social Security Benefits
(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits. Worksheet in your tax form instruction booklet).must add your spouse's income to yours to fig-
ure whether any of your benefits are taxable.• Tier 2 benefits.
If the only income you received during• Vested dual benefits. Example. You and your spouse (both over2007 was your social security or the 65) are filing a joint return for 2007 and you both• Supplemental annuity benefits. SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retire-
TIP received social security benefits during the year.ment benefits, your benefits generally are notFor information on these benefits, see Publica- In January 2008, you received a Formtaxable and you probably do not have to file ation 575, Pension and Annuity Income. SSA-1099 showing net benefits of $7,500 in boxreturn. If you have income in addition to your 5. Your spouse received a Form SSA-1099This chapter also does not cover the tax rules benefits, you may have to file a return even if showing net benefits of $3,500 in box 5. Youfor foreign social security benefits. These bene- none of your benefits are taxable. also received a taxable pension of $20,000 andfits are taxable as annuities, unless they are interest income of $500. You did not have anyBase amount. Your base amount is:exempt from U.S. tax or treated as a U.S. social tax-exempt interest income. Your benefits aresecurity benefit under a tax treaty. • $25,000 if you are single, head of house- not taxable for 2007 because your income, as
hold, or qualifying widow(er), figured in Worksheet 11-1 on the next page, is
Useful Items not more than your base amount ($32,000) for• $25,000 if you are married filing separatelyYou may want to see: married filing jointly.and lived apart from your spouse for all of
Even though none of your benefits are tax-2007,Publication able, you must file a return for 2007 because
• $32,000 if you are married filing jointly, or your taxable gross income ($20,500) exceeds❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income
the minimum filing requirement amount for your• $-0- if you are married filing separately❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements filing status.and lived with your spouse at any time(IRAs) during 2007.
❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
Forms (and Instructions)
❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals
Page 78 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

2. Situation (1) does not apply and you take
Filled-in Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check an exclusion for interest from qualified U.S.How To Reportif Your Benefits May be Taxable savings bonds (Form 8815), for adoption
benefits (Form 8839), for foreign earnedA. Enter the amount from box 5 of Your Benefits
income or housing (Form 2555 or Formall your Forms SSA-1099 and
RRB-1099. Include the full 2555-EZ), or for income earned in Ameri-If part of your benefits are taxable, you must useamount of any lump-sum benefit can Samoa (Form 4563) or Puerto Rico byForm 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot usepayments received in 2007, for bona fide residents. In this situation, youForm 1040EZ.2007 and earlier years. (If you must use Worksheet 1 in Publication 915received more than one form,
to figure your taxable benefits.Reporting on Form 1040. Report your netcombine the amounts from box 5
and enter the total.) ........ A. $ 11,000 benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Form 3. You received a lump-sum payment for anNote. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop SSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 20a and earlier year. In this situation, also completehere; none of your benefits are taxable this year. the taxable part on line 20b. If you are married Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub-filing separately and you lived apart from yourB. Enter one-half of the amount on lication 915. See Lump-sum election be-line A ................. B. 5,500 spouse for all of 2007, also enter ªDº to the right low.of the word ªbenefitsº on line 20a.C. Enter your taxable pensions,
wages, interest, dividends, and
other taxable income ....... C.  20,500 Reporting on Form 1040A. Report your net Lump-sum election. You must include the
benefits (the amount in box 5 of your FormD. Enter any tax-exempt interest taxable part of a lump-sum (retroactive) pay-SSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 14a andincome (such as interest on ment of benefits received in 2007 in your 2007the taxable part on line 14b. If you are marriedmunicipal bonds) plus any income, even if the payment includes benefitsexclusions from income (listed filing separately and you lived apart from your for an earlier year.earlier). ................ D. -0- spouse for all of 2007, also enter ªDº to the right
This type of lump-sum benefit paymentof the word ªbenefitsº on line 14a.E. Add lines B, C, and D ....... E. $26,000
should not be confused with theNote. Compare the amount on line E to your base
lump-sum death benefit that both theamount for your filing status. If the amount on line Benefits not taxable. If you are filing Form
TIP
SSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficiaries.E equals or is less than the base amount for your 1040EZ, do not report any benefits on your tax
filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this No part of the lump-sum death benefit is subjectreturn. If you are filing Form 1040 or Formyear. If the amount on line E is more than your to tax.1040A, report your net benefits (the amount inbase amount, some of your benefits may be
box 5 of your Form SSA-1099 or Form Generally, you use your 2007 income to fig-taxable. You then need to complete Worksheet 1
RRB-1099) on Form 1040, line 20a, or Form ure the taxable part of the total benefits receivedin Publication 915 (or the Social Security Benefits
Worksheet in your tax form instruction booklet). 1040A, line 14a. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line in 2007. However, you may be able to figure the
20b, or Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are married taxable part of a lump-sum payment for an ear-
filing separately and you lived apart from your lier year separately, using your income for theWho is taxed. The person who has the legal spouse for all of 2007, also enter ªDº to the right earlier year. You can elect this method if it low-right to receive the benefits must determine of the word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, or ers your taxable benefits.whether the benefits are taxable. For example, if Form 1040A, line 14a. Making the election. If you received ayou and your child receive benefits, but the
check for your child is made out in your name, lump-sum benefit payment in 2007 that includes
How Much Is Taxable?you must use only your part of the benefits to benefits for one or more earlier years, follow the
see whether any benefits are taxable to you. instructions in Publication 915 under Lump-SumIf part of your benefits are taxable, how much isOne-half of the part that belongs to your child Election to see whether making the election willtaxable depends on the total amount of yourmust be added to your child's other income to lower your taxable benefits. That discussionbenefits and other income. Generally, the highersee whether any of those benefits are taxable to also explains how to make the election.that total amount, the greater the taxable part ofyour child.
your benefits. Because the earlier year's taxable ben-
Repayment of benefits. Any repayment of efits are included in your 2007 income,
benefits you made during 2007 must be sub- no adjustment is made to the earlierMaximum taxable part. Generally, up to 50%
CAUTION
!
tracted from the gross benefits you received in year's return. Do not file an amended return forof your benefits will be taxable. However, up to
2007. It does not matter whether the repayment the earlier year.85% of your benefits can be taxable if either of
was for a benefit you received in 2007 or in an the following situations applies to you.
earlier year. If you repaid more than the gross • The total of one-half of your benefits andbenefits you received in 2007, see Repayments
all your other income is more thanMore Than Gross Benefits, later.
$34,000 ($44,000 if you are married filingYour gross benefits are shown in box 3 of Examples
jointly).Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099. Your repay-
ments are shown in box 4. The amount in box 5 The following are a few examples you can use• You are married filing separately and lived
shows your net benefits for 2007 (box 3 minus as a guide to figure the taxable part of yourwith your spouse at any time during 2007.
box 4). Use the amount in box 5 to figure benefits.
whether any of your benefits are taxable.
Which worksheet to use. A worksheet to fig- Example 1. George White is single and filesure your taxable benefits is in the instructions forTax withholding and estimated tax. You can Form 1040 for 2007. He received the followingchoose to have federal income tax withheld from your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You can use income in 2007:your social security benefits and/or the SSEB either that worksheet or Worksheet 1 in Publica-
portion of your tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. tion 915, unless any of the following situations Fully taxable pension ............. $18,600
If you choose to do this, you must complete a applies to you. Wages from part-time job ..........  9,400
Form W-4V. You can choose withholding at 7%, Taxable interest income ........... 990
1. You contributed to a traditional individual Total ....................... $28,99010%, 15%, or 25% of your total benefit payment.
retirement arrangement (IRA) and you orIf you do not choose to have income tax
George also received social security benefitsyour spouse is covered by a retirementwithheld, you may have to request additional
during 2007. The Form SSA-1099 he received inplan at work. In this situation, you mustwithholding from other income or pay estimated
January 2008 shows $5,980 in box 5. To figureuse the special worksheets in Appendix Btax during the year. For details, get Publication
of Publication 590 to figure both your IRA his taxable benefits, George completes the505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, or the
deduction and your taxable benefits. worksheet shown here.instructions for Form 1040-ES.
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 79

18.Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ......... 5,083 Note. If you are married filing separatelyWorksheet 1.
and you lived with your spouse at any time19.Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller ofFiguring Your Taxable Benefits
in 2007, skip lines 9 through 16; multiplyline 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount
line 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the result onon Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A,1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL
line 17. Then go to line 18.line 14b .................... . $2,990your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099.
10. Is the amount on line 9 less than theAlso enter this amount on Form 1040, line
amount on line 8?20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ........ $5,980
The amount on line 19 of George's worksheet2. Enter one-half of line 1 ........... . 2,990
No.
STOP None of your benefits areshows that $2,990 of his social security benefits3. Enter the total of the amounts from: taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b,Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 through is taxable. On line 20a of his Form 1040, George or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, and 21. enters his net benefits of $5,980. On line 20b, he married filing separately and you livedForm 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b, enters his taxable benefits of $2,990. apart from your spouse for all of 2007, be12b, and 13 ................. . 28,990 sure you entered ªDº to the right of the4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, orExample 2. Ray and Alice Hopkins file a1040 or 1040A, line 8b ........... -0- on Form 1040A, line 14a.joint return on Form 1040A for 2007. Ray is5. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ......retired and received a fully taxable pension ofexclusions/adjustments for: 11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly;$15,500. He also received social security bene-• Qualified U.S. savings bond $9,000 if single, head of household, interest (Form 8815, line 14), fits, and his Form SSA-1099 for 2007 shows net qualifying widow(er), or married filing• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line benefits of $5,600 in box 5. Alice worked during separately and you lived apart from your 30), spouse for all of 2007 ............ .the year and had wages of $14,000. She made a• Foreign earned income or housing 12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero ordeductible payment to her IRA account of (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or less, enter -0- ................. .$1,000. Ray and Alice have two savings ac- Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and 13. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 ...counts with a total of $250 in taxable interest• Certain income of bona fide 14. Enter one-half of line 13 .......... . residents of American income. They complete Worksheet 1 and find 15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .... Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) that none of Ray's social security benefits are 16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 is or Puerto Rico taxable. On line 3 of the worksheet, they enter zero, enter -0- ................ .Form 1040A filers: Enter the total of $29,750 ($15,500 + $14,000 + $250). On Form 17. Add lines 15 and 16 ............. .any exclusions for qualified U.S. 18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) .........1040A, they enter $5,600 on line 14a and -0- onsavings bond interest ( Form 8815, line
19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of lineline 14b.14) or for adoption benefits ( Form
17 or line 18. Also enter this amount on8839, line 30). ............... . -0-
Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, lineWorksheet 1.6. Add lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ........... . 31,980 14b ....................... .Figuring Your Taxable Benefits7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from
Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, and any
1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALLwrite-in adjustments you entered on the Example 3. Joe and Betty Johnson file ayour Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099.dotted line next to line 36.
joint return on Form 1040 for 2007. Joe is aAlso enter this amount on Form 1040, lineForm 1040A filers: Enter the amount
20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ........ $5,600 retired railroad worker and in 2007 received thefrom Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 ..... -0-
2. Enter one-half of line 1 ........... . 2,8008. Is the amount on line 7 less than the social security equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion
3. Enter the total of the amounts from:amount on line 6? of tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. Joe's Form
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 through RRB-1099 shows $10,000 in box 5. Betty is aNo.
STOP None of your social security benefits are 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, and 21. retired government worker and receives a fullytaxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b,1040A, line 14b. taxable pension of $38,000. They had $2,300 in12b, and 13 ................ . 29,750
Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ...... 31,980 taxable interest income plus interest of $200 on4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form
9. If you are: 1040 or 1040A, line 8b ........... -0- a qualified U.S. savings bond. The savings bond• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000 5. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any interest qualified for the exclusion. They figure• Single, head of household, qualifying exclusions/adjustments for: their taxable benefits by completing Worksheetwidow(er), or married filing separately • Qualified U.S. savings bond 1. On line 3 of the worksheet, they enter $40,300and you lived apart from your spouse  interest (Form 8815, line 14), ($38,000 + $2,300).for all of 2007, enter $25,000. ..... 25,000 • Adoption benefits (Form 8839, lineNote. If you are married filing separately  30), Worksheet 1.and you lived with your spouse at any time • Foreign earned income or housingin 2007, skip lines 9 through 16; multiply Figuring Your Taxable Benefits (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, orline 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the result on  Form 2555-EZ, line 18), andline 17. Then go to line 18. 1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL• Certain income of bona fide your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099.10.Is the amount on line 9 less than the  residents of American Also enter this amount on Form 1040,amount on line 8?  Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) line 20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a .... $10,000 or Puerto RicoNo.
STOP None of your benefits are 2. Enter one-half of line 1 ........... 5,000Form 1040A filers: Enter the total oftaxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, 3. Enter the total of the amounts from:any exclusion for qualified U.S. savingsor on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10bond interest (Form 8815, line 14) or formarried filing separately and you lived through 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19,adoption benefits ( Form 8839, line 30). -0-apart from your spouse for all of 2007, be and 21.6. Add lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ........... . 32,550sure you entered ªDº to the right of the Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b,7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount fromword ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, or 12b, and 13 ............... . 40,300Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, and anyon Form 1040A, line 14a. 4. Enter the amount, if any, from Formwrite-in adjustments you entered on theYes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ...... 6,980 1040 or 1040A, line 8b .......... -0-dotted line next to line 36.11.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; 5. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of anyForm 1040A filers: Enter the amount from$9,000 if single, head of household, exclusions/adjustments for:Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 ........ 1,000qualifying widow(er), or married filing • Qualified U.S. savings bond8. Is the amount on line 7 less than theseparately and you lived apart from your  interest (Form 8815, line 14),amount on line 6?spouse for all of 2007 ............ . 9,000 • Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line12.Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or No.
STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enter  30),less, enter -0- ................. . -0- -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line • Foreign earned income or housing13.Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 ... 6,980 14b.  (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or14.Enter one-half of line 13 .......... . 3,490 Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ...... 31,550  Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and
15.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .... 2,990 9. If you are: • Certain income of bona fide
16.Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 is  residents of American• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000zero, enter -0- ................. . -0-  Samoa (Form 4563, line 15)• Single, head of household, qualifying17.Add lines 15 and 16 ............. . 2,990  or Puerto Ricowidow(er), or married filing separately
and you lived apart from your spouse
for all of 2007, enter $25,000. ..... 32,000
Page 80 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Form 1040A filers: Enter the total of RRB, and you had to repay the employer or a. Figure the tax without the itemized de-
any exclusions for qualified U.S. insurance company for the disability payments, duction included on Schedule A, linesavings bond interest (Form 8815, line you can take an itemized deduction for the part 28.14) or for adoption benefits (Form
of the payments you included in gross income in8839, line 30). .............. . 200 b. For each year after 1983 for which partthe earlier year. If the amount you repay is more6. Add lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 .......... . 45,500 of the negative figure represents a re-than $3,000, you may be able to claim a tax7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from payment of benefits, refigure your tax-Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, and any credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit in able benefits as if your total benefits forwrite-in adjustments you entered on the the same way explained under Repayments the year were reduced by that part ofdotted line next to line 36. More Than Gross Benefits, later.Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount the negative figure. Then refigure the
from Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 .... -0- tax for that year.Legal expenses. You can usually deduct le-8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the gal expenses that you pay or incur to produce or c. Subtract the total of the refigured taxamount on line 6? collect taxable income or in connection with the amounts in (b) from the total of yourNo.
STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enter determination, collection, or refund of any tax. actual tax amounts.-0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line Legal expenses for collecting the taxable14b. d. Subtract the result in (c) from the resultpart of your benefits are deductible as a miscel-Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... 45,500 in (a).laneous itemized deduction on Schedule A9.  If you are:
(Form 1040), line 23.• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000 Compare the tax figured in methods (1) and• Single, head of household, qualifying (2). Your tax for 2007 is the smaller of the twowidow(er), or married filing Repayments More Than amounts. If method (1) results in less tax, takeseparately and you lived apart from
your spouse for all of 2007, enter the itemized deduction on Schedule A (FormGross Benefits
$25,000 ................ . 32,000 1040), line 28. If method (2) results in less tax,
Note. If you are married filing separately In some situations, your Form SSA-1099 or claim a credit for the amount from step 2(c)and you lived with your spouse at any Form RRB-1099 will show that the total benefits above on Form 1040, line 70, and enter ªI.R.C.time in 2007, skip lines 9 through 16; you repaid (box 4) are more than the gross 1341º in the margin to the left of line 70. If bothmultiply line 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the
benefits (box 3) you received. If this occurred, methods produce the same tax, deduct the re-result on line 17. Then go to line 18
your net benefits in box 5 will be a negative10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the payment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.
amount on line 8? figure (a figure in parentheses) and none of your
benefits will be taxable. Do not use a worksheet
No.
STOP None of your benefits are in this case. If you receive more than one form, ataxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line negative figure in box 5 of one form is used to20b, or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you
offset a positive figure in box 5 of another formare married filing separately and you
lived apart from your spouse for all of for that same year.
2007, be sure you entered ªDº to the right If you have any questions about this negative 12.of the word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line figure, contact your local SSA office or your local20a, or on Form 1040A, line 14a. RRB field office.Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... 13,500
11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; Joint return. If you and your spouse file a joint$9,000 if single, head of household, Other Incomereturn, and your Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099qualifying widow(er), or married filing
has a negative figure in box 5, but your spouse'sseparately and you lived apart from your
does not, subtract the amount in box 5 of yourspouse for all of 2007 ........... . 12,000
12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or form from the amount in box 5 of your spouse's
What's Newless, enter -0- ................ . 1,500 form. You do this to get your net benefits when
13. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 .. 12,000 figuring if your combined benefits are taxable.
14. Enter one-half of line 13 .......... 6,000 Qualified joint venture. A qualified joint ven-15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 ... 5,000 ture conducted by you and your spouse may notExample. John and Mary file a joint return16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 is for 2007. John received Form SSA-1099 show- be treated as a partnership if you file a jointzero, enter -0- ............... . 1,275
ing $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Form return for the tax year. See Partnership Income,17. Add lines 15 and 16 ............ . 6,275
SSA-1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500). later.18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ........ 8,500
John and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minus19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of
Expiration of relief granted for Hurricane Ka-line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount $500) as the amount of their net benefits when
on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, trina. The exclusion from income for the dis-figuring if any of their combined benefits areline 14b ................... . $6,275 charge of certain nonbusiness debt as a result oftaxable.
Hurricane Katrina expired.
Repayment of benefits received in an earlierMore than 50% of Joe's net benefits are tax- year. If the total amount shown in box 5 of allable because the income on line 8 of the work- of your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 is asheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. Joe and negative figure, you can take an itemized deduc-Betty enter $10,000 on Form 1040, line 20a, and Introductiontion for the part of this negative figure that repre-$6,275 on Form 1040, line 20b. sents benefits you included in gross income in You must include on your return all income you
an earlier year. receive in the form of money, property, and
services unless the tax law states that you doDeduction $3,000 or less. If this deduction not include them. Some items, however, areis $3,000 or less, it is subject to theDeductions Related to only partly excluded from income. This chapter2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
discusses many kinds of income and explainsto certain miscellaneous itemized deductions.Your Benefits whether they are taxable or nontaxable.Claim it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.
• Income that is taxable must be reportedDeduction more than $3,000. If this deduc-You may be entitled to deduct certain amounts on your tax return and is subject to tax.tion is more than $3,000, you should figure yourrelated to the benefits you receive.
tax two ways: • Income that is nontaxable may have to be
Disability payments. You may have received shown on your tax return but is not tax-1. Figure your tax for 2007 with the itemizeddisability payments from your employer or an able.deduction included on Schedule A, line 28.insurance company that you included as income
on your tax return in an earlier year. If you This chapter begins with discussions of the2. Figure your tax for 2007 in the following
received a lump-sum payment from SSA or steps. following income items.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 81

• Bartering. must include in your income the value of the mortgage when you dispose of the property, you
credit units that are added to your account, even may realize gain or loss up to the fair market• Canceled debts. though you may not actually receive goods or value of the property. To the extent the mort-
• Host or hostess. services from other members until a later tax gage discharge exceeds the fair market value of
year. the property, it is income from discharge of in-• Life insurance proceeds. debtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion
• Partnership income. Example 3. You own a small apartment under Excluded debt, later. Report any income
building. In return for 6 months rent-free use of from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusiness• S Corporation income. an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art debt that does not qualify for exclusion as other
• Recoveries (including state income tax re- she created. You must report as rental income income on Form 1040, line 21.
funds). on Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss If you are not personally liable for a mortgage
(Form 1040), the fair market value of the art- (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved of the• Rents from personal property. work, and the artist must report as income on mortgage when you dispose of the property
• Repayments. Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) the (such as through foreclosure or repossession),
fair rental value of the apartment. that relief is included in the amount you realize.• Royalties. You may have a taxable gain if the amount youForm 1099-B from barter exchange. If you• Unemployment benefits. realize exceeds your adjusted basis in the prop-exchanged property or services through a barter erty. Report any gain on nonbusiness property• Welfare and other public assistance bene- exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker as a capital gain.fits. and Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similar See Foreclosures and Repossessions instatement from the barter exchange should beThese discussions are followed by brief discus- Publication 544 for more information.sent to you by January 31, 2008. It should showsions of other income items arranged in alpha- the value of cash, property, services, credits, or Stockholder debt. If you are a stockholder inbetical order. scrip you received from exchanges during 2007. a corporation and the corporation cancels or
The IRS also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B. forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is aUseful Items constructive distribution that is generally divi-You may want to see: dend income to you. For more information, see
Publication 542, Corporations.Publication If you are a stockholder in a corporation andCanceled Debts
you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
tion, you generally do not realize income. This isGenerally, if a debt you owe is canceled or❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of because the canceled debt is considered as aforgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, youAssets contribution to the capital of the corporationmust include the canceled amount in your in-
equal to the amount of debt principal that youcome. You have no income from the canceled❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
canceled.debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt
includes any indebtedness for which you are Repayment of canceled debt. If you includedliable or which attaches to property you hold. a canceled amount in your income and later payIf the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the the debt, you may be able to file a claim forcanceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is aBartering refund for the year the amount was included inbusiness debt, report the amount on Schedule C income. You can file a claim on Form 1040X ifor Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on ScheduleBartering is an exchange of property or services. the statute of limitations for filing a claim is stillF, Profit or Loss From Farming (Form 1040), ifYou must include in your income, at the time open. The statute of limitations generally doesthe debt is farm debt and you are a farmer).received, the fair market value of property or not end until 3 years after the due date of yourservices you receive in bartering. If you ex- Form 1099-C. If a Federal Government original return.change services with another person and you agency, financial institution, or credit unionboth have agreed ahead of time as to the value cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 or Exceptionsof the services, that value will be accepted as more, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella-fair market value unless the value can be shown tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt is There are several exceptions to the inclusion ofto be otherwise. shown in box 2. canceled debt in income. These are explainedGenerally, you report this income on Sched-
next.Interest included in canceled debt. If anyule C, Profit or Loss From Business, or Schedule
interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofC-EZ, Net Profit From Business (Form 1040). Student loans. Certain student loans containcanceled debt in box 2, the amount of interestHowever, if the barter involves an exchange of a provision that all or part of the debt incurred toalso will be shown in box 3. Whether or not yousomething other than services, such as in Ex- attend the qualified educational institution will bemust include the interest portion of the canceledample 3 below, you may have to use another canceled if you work for a certain period of timedebt in your income depends on whether theform or schedule instead. in certain professions for any of a broad class ofinterest would be deductible if you paid it. See employers.Deductible debt, under Exceptions, later.Example 1. You are a self-employed attor- You do not have income if your student loanIf the interest would not be deductible (suchney who performs legal services for a client, a is canceled after you agreed to this provisionas interest on a personal loan), include in yoursmall corporation. The corporation gives you and then performed the services required. Toincome the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. Ifshares of its stock as payment for your services. qualify, the loan must have been made by:the interest would be deductible (such as on aYou must include the fair market value of the
business loan), include in your income the netshares in your income on Schedule C or Sched- 1. The Federal Government, a state or localamount of the canceled debt (the amount shownule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receive government, or an instrumentality, agency,in box 2 less the interest amount shown in boxthem. or subdivision thereof,3).
2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporationExample 2. You are self-employed and a Discounted mortgage loan. If your financial that has assumed control of a state,member of a barter club. The club uses ªcredit institution offers a discount for the early payment county, or municipal hospital, and whoseunitsº as a means of exchange. It adds credit of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis- employees are considered public employ-units to your account for goods or services you count is canceled debt. You must include the ees under state law, orprovide to members, which you can use to canceled amount in your income.purchase goods or services offered by other 3. An educational institution
members of the barter club. The club subtracts Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-
credit units from your account when you receive tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgage a. Under an agreement with an entity de-
goods or services from other members. You (recourse debt), and you are relieved of the scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the
Page 82 Chapter 12 Other Income

funds to the institution to make the loan, miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to a lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only if
or the 2% of AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), the proceeds are more than the cost of the
but only up to the amount of income you receive policy. To determine your cost, subtract anyb. As part of a program of the institution for giving the party. amount that you previously received under thedesigned to encourage students to For more information about the 50% limit for contract and excluded from your income fromserve in occupations or areas with un- meal and entertainment expenses, see 50% the total premiums (or other consideration) paidmet needs and under which the serv- Limit in Publication 463, Travel, Entertainment, for the contract. Include the part of the lump sumices provided are for or under the Gift, and Car Expenses. payment that is more than your cost in yourdirection of a governmental unit or a income.tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-
tion.
Accelerated DeathLife InsuranceSection 501(c)(3) organizations are defined Benefitsin Publication 525.
ProceedsA loan to refinance a qualified student loan Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-also will qualify if it was made by an educational efits under a life insurance contract or viaticalLife insurance proceeds paid to you because ofinstitution or a tax-exempt 501(a) organization settlement before the insured's death are ex-the death of the insured person are not taxableunder its program designed as described in cluded from income if the insured is terminally orunless the policy was turned over to you for a(3)(b) above. chronically ill.price. This is true even if the proceeds were paidEducation loan repayment assistance. under an accident or health insurance policy orEducation loan repayments made to you by the Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign-an endowment contract.National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment ment of any part of the death benefit under a life
Proceeds not received in installments. IfProgram (NHSC Loan Repayment Program) or insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum ora state education loan repayment program eligi- vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person
other than at regular intervals, include in yourble for funds under the Public Health Service Act who regularly engages in the business of buying
income only the benefits that are more than theare not taxable if you agree to provide primary or taking assignment of life insurance contracts
amount payable to you at the time of the insuredhealth services in health professional shortage on the lives of insured individuals who are termi-
person's death. If the benefit payable at death isareas. nally or chronically ill and who meets the require-
not specified, you include in your income the ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the InternalDeductible debt. You do not have income benefit payments that are more than the present Revenue Code.from the cancellation of a debt if your payment of value of the payments at the time of death.the debt would be deductible. This exception
Exclusion for terminal illness.   AcceleratedProceeds received in installments. If you re-applies only if you use the cash method of ac-
death benefits are fully excludable if the insuredceive life insurance proceeds in installments,counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of
is a terminally ill individual. This is a person whoyou can exclude part of each installment fromPublication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.
has been certified by a physician as having anyour income.Price reduced after purchase. Generally, if illness or physical condition that can reasonablyTo determine the excluded part, divide thethe seller reduces the amount of debt you owe be expected to result in death within 24 monthsamount held by the insurance company (gener-for property you purchased, you do not have from the date of the certification.ally the total lump sum payable at the death ofincome from the reduction. The reduction of the the insured person) by the number of install-debt is treated as a purchase price adjustment Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insuredments to be paid. Include anything over thisand reduces your basis in the property. is a chronically ill individual who is not terminallyexcluded part in your income as interest.
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basisExcluded debt. Do not include a canceled Surviving spouse. If your spouse died of costs incurred for qualified long-term caredebt in your gross income in the following situa- before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro- services are fully excludable. Accelerated deathtions. ceeds paid to you because of the death of your benefits paid on a per diem or other periodicspouse are received in installments, you can• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case basis are excludable up to a limit. This limitexclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi- applies to the total of the accelerated deathcluded in the installments. If you remarry, youcation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. benefits and any periodic payments receivedcan continue to take the exclusion. from long-term care insurance contracts. For• The debt is canceled when you are insol-
information on the limit and the definitions ofMore information. For more information, seevent. However, you cannot exclude any
chronically ill individual, qualified long-term careLife Insurance Proceeds in Publication 525.amount of canceled debt that is more than
services, and long-term care insurance con-the amount by which you are insolvent. Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren- tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con-See Publication 908. der a life insurance policy for cash, you must tracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits in
• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can- include in income any proceeds that are more Publication 525.
celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 than the cost of the life insurance policy. In
of Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide. general, your cost (or investment in the contract) Exception. The exclusion does not apply to
is the total of premiums that you paid for the life any amount paid to a person (other than the• The debt is qualified real property busi- insurance policy, less any refunded premiums, insured) who has an insurable interest in the lifeness debt. See chapter 5 of Publication rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were of the insured because the insured:334. not included in your income.
• Is a director, officer, or employee of the• The cancellation is intended as a gift.  You should receive a Form 1099-R showing
person, orthe total proceeds and the taxable part. Report
these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Form • Has a financial interest in the person's
1040 or lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. business.
Host or Hostess Endowment Contract Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-
ated death benefits made on a per diem or otherIf you host a party at which sales are made, any Proceeds
periodic basis, you must file Form 8853, Archergift you receive for giving the party is a payment
MSAs and Long-term Care Insurance Con-for helping a direct seller make sales. You must An endowment contract is a policy under which
tracts, with your return. You do not have to filereport it as income at its fair market value. you are paid a specified amount of money on a
Form 8853 to exclude accelerated death bene-Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub- certain date unless you die before that date, in
fits paid on the basis of actual expenses in-ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment which case, the money is paid to your desig-
curred.expenses. These expenses are deductible as nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid in
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 83

Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) for Recovery and expense in same year. If thePublic Safety Officer Killed your records. Do not attach it to your refund or other recovery and the expense occur
in the Line of Duty Form 1040. in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-
RECORDS
duction or credit and is not reported as income.For more information on S corporations andIf you are a survivor of a public safety officer who their shareholders, see Instructions for Formwas killed in the line of duty, you may be able to Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receive1120S.exclude from income certain amounts you re- a refund or other recovery that is for amounts
ceive. you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must
   For this purpose, the term public safety allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovered
officer includes law enforcement officers, amount between the years in which you paid it.
firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad and Recoveries This allocation is necessary to determine the
ambulance crew members. For more informa- amount of recovery from any earlier years and to
tion, see Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, A recovery is a return of an amount you de- determine the amount, if any, of your allowable
and Administrators. ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The deduction for this item for the current year. For
most common recoveries are refunds, reim- information on how to compute the allocation,
bursements, and rebates of deductions itemized see Recoveries in Publication 525.
on Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may have
recoveries of non-itemized deductions (such asPartnership Income Itemized Deductionpayments on previously deducted bad debts)
and recoveries of items for which you previously RecoveriesA partnership generally is not a taxable entity. claimed a tax credit.The income, gains, losses, deductions, and If you recover any amount that you deducted incredits of a partnership are passed through to Tax benefit rule. You must include a recovery an earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), youthe partners based on each partner's distributive in your income in the year you receive it up to the generally must include the full amount of theshare of these items. amount by which the deduction or credit you recovery in your income in the year you receive
took for the recovered amount reduced your tax it.Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). Although a part- in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-nership generally pays no tax, it must file an Where to report. Enter your state or local in-crease to an amount carried over to the currentinformation return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of come tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and theyear that resulted from the deduction or credit isPartnership Income, and send Schedule K-1 total of all other recoveries as other income onconsidered to have reduced your tax in the ear-(Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, the Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form 1040Alier year. For more information, see Publicationpartnership will send each partner a copy of the or Form 1040EZ.525.Partner's Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form
1065) to help each partner report his or her Federal income tax refund. Refunds of fed- Standard deduction limit. You generally areshare of the partnership's income, deductions, eral income taxes are not included in your in- allowed to claim the standard deduction if you docredits, and tax preference items. come because they are never allowed as a not itemize your deductions. Only your itemized
Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) for deduction from income. deductions that are more than your standard
your records. Do not attach it to your deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-
State tax refund. If you received a state orForm 1040. less you are required to itemize your deduc-
RECORDS
local income tax refund (or credit or offset) in tions). If your total deductions on the earlier yearFor more information on partnerships, see 2007, you generally must include it in income if return were not more than your income for thatPublication 541, Partnerships. you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The year, include in your income this year the lesser
payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov- of:Qualified joint venture. If you and your ernment Payments, to you by January 31, 2008.spouse materially participate as the only mem- • Your recoveries, orThe IRS also will receive a copy of the Formbers of a jointly owned and operated business, 1099-G. Use the State and Local Income Tax • The amount by which your itemized de-and you file a joint return for the tax year, you Refund worksheet in the 2007 Form 1040 in- ductions exceeded the standard deduc-can make a joint election to be taxed as a quali- structions for line 10 to figure the amount (if any) tion.fied joint venture instead of a partnership. To to include in your income. See Publication 525make this election, you must divide all items of for when you must use another worksheet.income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit be- Example. For 2006, you filed a joint return.After 2003, you could choose to deduct for atween you and your spouse in accordance with Your taxable income was $60,000 and you weretax year either:your respective interests in the venture. Each of not entitled to any tax credits. Your standard
you must file a separate Schedule C or Sched- • State and local income taxes, or deduction was $10,300, and you had itemized
ule C-EZ (Form 1040). deductions of $12,000. In 2007, you received• State and local general sales taxes. the following recoveries for amounts deducted
on your 2006 return:For 2007, the maximum refund that you may
have to include in income is limited to the excess Medical expenses .............. $200S Corporation Income of the tax you chose to deduct for that year over State and local income tax refund .... 400the tax you did not choose to deduct for that Refund of mortgage interest ........ 325In general, an S corporation does not pay tax on year. For examples, see Publication 525.
its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc- Total recoveries ................ $925
tions, and credits of the corporation are passed Mortgage interest refund. If you received a
None of the recoveries were more than the de-through to the shareholders based on each refund or credit in 2007 of mortgage interest paid
ductions taken for 2006. The difference betweenshareholder's pro rata share. in an earlier year, the amount should be shown
the state and local income tax you deducted andin box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interest
your local general sales tax was more thanSchedule K-1 (Form 1120S). An S corpora- Statement. Do not subtract the refund amount
$400.tion must file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. from the interest you paid in 2007. You may
Income Tax Return for an S Corporation, and Your total recoveries are less than thehave to include it in your income under the rules
send Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) to each amount by which your itemized deductions ex-explained in the following discussions.
shareholder. In addition, the S corporation will ceeded the standard deduction ($12,000 −
send each shareholder a copy of the Share- Interest on recovery. Interest on any of the 10,300 = $1,700), so you must include your total
holder's Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form amounts you recover must be reported as inter- recoveries in your income for 2007. Report the
1120S) to help each shareholder report his or est income in the year received. For example, state and local income tax refund of $400 on
her share of the S corporation's income, losses, report any interest you received on state or local Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your
credits, and deductions. income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a. recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21.
Page 84 Chapter 12 Other Income

Standard deduction for earlier years. To de- Reporting business income and expenses. deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,
termine if amounts recovered in 2007 must be If you are in the business of renting personal enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.
included in your income, you must know the property, report your income and expenses on Method 2. Figure your tax for 2007 claimingstandard deduction for your filing status for the Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The a credit for the repaid amount. Follow theseyear the deduction was claimed. Standard de- form instructions have information on how to steps.duction amounts for 2006, 2005, and 2004, are complete them.
in Publication 525. 1. Figure your tax for 2007 without deductingReporting nonbusiness income. If you are the repaid amount.not in the business of renting personal property,Example. You filed a joint return for 2006
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yearreport your rental income on Form 1040, line 21.with taxable income of $45,000. Your itemized
without including in income the amountList the type and amount of the income on thedeductions were $10,650. The standard deduc-
you repaid in 2007.dotted line next to line 21.tion that you could have claimed was $10,300. In
2007, you recovered $2,100 of your 2006 item- 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownReporting nonbusiness expenses. If youized deductions. None of the recoveries were on your return for the earlier year. This isrent personal property for profit, include yourmore than the actual deductions for 2006. In- the credit.rental expenses in the total amount you enter onclude $350 of the recoveries in your 2007 in-
Form 1040, line 36. Also enter the amount and 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forcome. This is the smaller of your recoveries
ªPPRº on the dotted line next to line 36. 2007 figured without the deduction (Step($2,100) or the amount by which your itemized
If you do not rent personal property for profit, 1).deductions were more than the standard deduc-
your deductions are limited and you cannot re-tion ($10,650 − 10,300 = $350). If method 1 results in less tax, deduct theport a loss to offset other income. See  Activity amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,not for profit, under Other Income, later.Recovery limited to deduction. You do not claim the credit figured in (3) above on Form
include in your income any amount of your re- 1040, line 70, and enter ªI.R.C. 1341º in the
covery that is more than the amount you de- column to the right of line 70.
ducted in the earlier year. The amount you An example of this computation can be found
include in your income is limited to the smaller Repayments in Publication 525.
of:
If you had to repay an amount that you included Repaid social security benefits. If you re-• The amount deducted on Schedule A in your income in an earlier year, you may be paid social security benefits, see Repayment of(Form 1040), or able to deduct the amount repaid from your benefits in chapter 11.• The amount recovered. income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you
may be able to take a credit against your tax forExample. During 2006 you paid $1,700 for the year in which you repaid it. Generally, youmedical expenses. From this amount you sub- Royaltiescan claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred ingross income. Your actual medical expense de- Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,your trade or business or in a for-profit transac-duction was $200. In 2007, you received a $500 and mineral properties are taxable as ordinarytion.reimbursement from your medical insurance for income.your 2006 expenses. The only amount of the Type of deduction. The type of deduction you You generally report royalties in Part I of$500 reimbursement that must be included in are allowed in the year of repayment depends Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you holdyour income for 2007 is $200Ðthe amount ac- on the type of income you included in the earlier an operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are intually deducted. year. You generally deduct the repayment on business as a self-employed writer, inventor,
the same form or schedule on which you previ- artist, etc., report your income and expenses onOther recoveries. See Recoveries in Publica- ously reported it as income. For example, if you Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040).tion 525 if: reported it as self-employment income, deduct it
as a business expense on Schedule C or Sched-• You have recoveries of items other than Copyrights and patents. Royalties from
ule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Formitemized deductions, or copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works,
1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deduct and similar property, or from patents on inven-• You received a recovery for an item for it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). If tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to usewhich you claimed a tax credit (other than you reported it as wages, unemployment com- your work over a specified period of time. Royal-investment credit or foreign tax credit) in a pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deduct ties generally are based on the number of unitsprior year. it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction on sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a
Schedule A (Form 1040). performance, or machines sold.
Repayment of $3,000 or less. If the amount Oil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income fromyou repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amountRents from Personal your income in the year you repaid it. If you must you receive when natural resources are ex-deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction, tracted from your property. The royalties areProperty enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23. based on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and
are paid to you by a person or company whoRepayment over $3,000. If the amount youIf you rent out personal property, such as equip- leases the property from you.repaid was more than $3,000, you can deductment or vehicles, how you report your income
the repayment (as explained under Type of de- Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco-and expenses is generally determined by:
duction, earlier). However, you can choose in- nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi- stead to take a tax credit for the year of wells, you can recover your investment throughness, and repayment if you included the income under a the depletion allowance. For information on this
• Whether or not the rental activity is con- claim of right. This means that at the time you subject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535.
ducted for profit. included the income, it appeared that you had an Coal and iron ore. Under certain circum-unrestricted right to it. If you qualify for thisGenerally, if your primary purpose is income or stances, you can treat amounts you receivechoice, figure your tax under both methods andprofit and you are involved in the rental activity from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-compare the results. Use the method (deductionwith continuity and regularity, your rental activity ments from the sale of a capital asset, ratheror credit) that results in less tax.is a business. See Publication 535, Business than as royalty income. For information about
Expenses, for details on deducting expenses for Method 1. Figure your tax for 2007 claiming gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,
both business and not-for-profit activities. a deduction for the repaid amount. If you must see Publication 544.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 85

Sale of property interest. If you sell your Governmental program. If you contribute than your total payments into the fund. Report
to a governmental unemployment compensa- the taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,
tion program and your contributions are not de-the amount you receive is considered payment Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you asductible, amounts you receive under thefor the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty an unemployed member of a union from regularprogram are not included as unemploymentincome. Under certain circumstances, the sale union dues are included in your income on Formcompensation until you recover your contribu-is subject to capital gain or loss treatment on 1040, line 21. However, if you contribute to ations. If you deducted all of your contributions toSchedule D (Form 1040). For more information special union fund and your payments to thethe program, the entire amount you receiveon selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3 fund are not deductible, the unemployment ben-under the program is included in your income.of Publication 544. efits you receive from the fund are includible in
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, Repayment of unemployment compensa- your income only to the extent they are more
or a net profit interest in a mineral property for tion. If you repaid in 2007 unemployment than your contributions.
the life of the property, you have made a lease or compensation you received in 2007, subtract
Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re-a sublease, and any cash you receive for the the amount you repaid from the total amount you
ceive from your employer during periods of un-assignment of other interests in the property is received and enter the difference on line 19 of
employment, under a union agreement thatordinary income subject to a depletion allow- Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of
guarantees you full pay during the year, areance. Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your
taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 ofentry enter ªRepaidº and the amount you repaid.Part of future production sold. If you own Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of FormIf you repaid unemployment compensation inmineral property but sell part of the future pro- 1040EZ.2007 that you included in income in an earlierduction, you generally treat the money you re- year, you can deduct the amount repaid on State employees. Payments similar to aceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if you itemize state's unemployment compensation may beloan from the buyer. Do not include it in your deductions. If the amount is more than $3,000, made by the state to its employees who are notincome or take depletion based on it. see  Repayments, earlier. covered by the state's unemployment compen-When production begins, you include all the sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-Tax withholding. You can choose to haveproceeds in your income, deduct all the produc- able, do not report them as unemploymentfederal income tax withheld from your unem-tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that compensation. Report these payments on Formployment compensation. To make this choice,amount to arrive at your taxable income from the 1040, line 21.complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholdingproperty.
Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax will
be withheld at 10% of your payment.
If you do not choose to have tax with-
Welfare and Otherheld from your unemployment com-Unemployment pensation, you may be liable for
CAUTION
!
Public Assistanceestimated tax. For more information on esti-Benefits mated tax, see chapter 4.
BenefitsThe tax treatment of unemployment benefits you Supplemental unemployment benefits.receive depends on the type of program paying Benefits received from an employer-financed Do not include in your income governmentalthe benefits. fund (to which the employees did not contribute) benefit payments from a public welfare fund
are not unemployment compensation. They are based upon need, such as payments due to
Unemployment compensation. You must in- taxable as wages and are subject to withholding blindness. Payments from a state fund for the
clude in your income all unemployment compen- for income tax. They may be subject to social victims of crime should not be included in the
sation you receive. You should receive a Form security and Medicare taxes. For more informa- victims' incomes if they are in the nature of
1099-G, Certain Government Payments, show- tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefits welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-
ing the amount paid to you. Generally, you enter in section 5 of Publication 15-A, Employer's penses that are reimbursed by such a fund. You
unemployment compensation on line 19 of Form Supplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay- must include in your income any welfare pay-
1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or ments that are compensation for services or that
1040EZ. on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. are obtained fraudulently.
Types of unemployment compensation. Repayment of benefits. You may have to Alternative trade adjustment assistance
Unemployment compensation generally in- repay some of your supplemental unemploy- (ATAA) payments. Payments you receive
cludes any amount received under an unem- ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment from a state agency under the Demonstration
ployment compensation law of the United States allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis-
or of a state. It includes the following benefits. repay supplemental unemployment benefits in tance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in-
the same year you receive them, reduce the cluded in your income. The state must send you• Benefits paid by a state or the District of total benefits by the amount you repay. If you Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount youColumbia from the Federal Unemployment repay the benefits in a later year, you must should include in income. The amount should beTrust Fund. include the full amount of the benefits received reported on Form 1040, line 21.
• State unemployment insurance benefits. in your income for the year you received them.
Persons with disabilities. If you have a disa-Deduct the repayment in the later year as an• Railroad unemployment compensation bility, you must include in income compensationadjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (Youbenefits. you receive for services you perform unless thecannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In- compensation is otherwise excluded. However,• Disability payments from a government clude the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, and you do not include in income the value of goods,program paid as a substitute for unem- enter ªSub-Pay TRAº and the amount on the services, and cash that you receive, not in returnployment compensation. (Amounts re- dotted line next to line 36. If the amount you for your services, but for your training and reha-ceived as workers' compensation for repay in a later year is more than $3,000, you bilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-injuries or illness are not unemployment may be able to take a credit against your tax for ble amounts include payments for transportationcompensation. See chapter 5 for more in- the later year instead of deducting the amount and attendant care, such as interpreter servicesformation.) repaid. For more information on this, see Repay- for the deaf, reader services for the blind, andments, earlier.• Trade readjustment allowances under the services to help mentally retarded persons do
Trade Act of 1974. their work.Private unemployment fund. Unemploy-
• Unemployment assistance under the Dis- ment benefit payments from a private (nonun- Disaster relief grants. Do not include
aster Relief and Emergency Assistance ion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute are post-disaster grants received under the Disaster
Act. taxable only if the amounts you receive are more Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in your
Page 86 Chapter 12 Other Income

income if the grant payments are made to help state and local governments based on the provi- Alimony. Include in your income on Form
you meet necessary expenses or serious needs sions of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief 1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-
for medical, dental, housing, personal property, and Emergency Assistance Act or the National ceive. Amounts you receive for child support are
transportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de- Flood Insurance Act. not income to you. Alimony and child support
duct casualty losses or medical expenses that You cannot increase the basis or adjusted payments are discussed in chapter 18.
are specifically reimbursed by these disaster basis of your property for improvements made Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in yourrelief grants. If you have deducted a casualty with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments. income.loss for the loss of your personal residence and Mortgage assistance payments. Paymentsyou later receive a disaster relief grant for the Campaign contributions. These contribu-made under section 235 of the National Housingloss of the same residence, you may have to tions are not income to a candidate unless theyAct for mortgage assistance are not included ininclude part or all of the grant in your taxable are diverted to his or her personal use. To bethe homeowner's income. Interest paid for theincome. See Recoveries, earlier. Unemploy- exempt from tax, the contributions must behomeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-ment assistance payments under the Act are spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fundgram cannot be deducted.taxable unemployment compensation. See Un- for use in future campaigns. However, interest
employment compensation under Unemploy- earned on bank deposits, dividends received onMedicare. Medicare benefits received underment Benefits, earlier. contributed securities, and net gains realized ontitle XVIII of the Social Security Act are not
sales of contributed securities are taxable andincludible in the gross income of the individualsDisaster relief payments. You can exclude must be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In-for whom they are paid. This includes basic (partfrom income any amount you receive that is a come Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza-A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged))qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis- tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to anand supplementary (part B (Supplementaryaster relief payment is an amount paid to you: office account must be included in the office-Medical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).
holder's income on Form 1040, line 21, in the1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance year transferred.essary personal, family, living, or funeral benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments underexpenses that result from a qualified disas- Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive fromsection 202 of title II of the Social Security Actter, a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy isare not includible in the gross income of the
not income, but you must reduce your basis byindividuals to whom they are paid. This applies2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
the amount of the rebate.to old-age insurance benefits, and insuranceessary expenses incurred for the repair or
benefits for wives, husbands, children, widows,rehabilitation of your home or repair or re- Example. You buy a new car for $9,000widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, asplacement of its contents to the extent it is cash and receive a $400 rebate check from thewell as the lump-sum death payment.due to a qualified disaster, manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you.
3. By a person engaged in the furnishing or Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Food Your basis in the car is $8,600. This is your basis
sale of transportation as a common carrier benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro- on which you figure gain or loss if you sell the
because of the death or personal physical gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre- car, and depreciation if you use it for business.
injuries incurred as a result of a qualified pare and serve free meals for the program,
Casualty insurance and other reimburse-disaster, or include in your income as wages the cash pay
ments. You generally should not report theseyou receive, even if you are also eligible for food4. By a federal, state, or local government, or reimbursements on your return, unless you arebenefits.agency, or instrumentality in connection figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft.
with a qualified disaster in order to pro- Payments to reduce cost of winter energy. See Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and
mote the general welfare. Payments made by a state to qualified people to Thefts, for more information.
reduce their cost of winter energy use are notYou can exclude this amount only to the extent Child support payments. You should not re-taxable.any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur- port these payments on your return. See Publi-ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not apply cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals,if you were a participant or conspirator in a for more information.terrorist action or his or her representative.
Court awards and damages. To determine ifA qualified disaster is: Other Income
settlement amounts you receive by compromise• A disaster which results from a terrorist or or judgment must be included in your income,The following brief discussions are arranged inmilitary action, you must consider the item that the settlementalphabetical order. Income items that are dis-
replaces. The character of the income as ordi-• A Presidentially declared disaster, or cussed in greater detail in another publication
nary income or capital gain depends on theinclude a reference to that publication.• A disaster which results from an accident nature of the underlying claim. Include the fol-involving a common carrier, or from any Activity not for profit. You must include on lowing as ordinary income.other event, which is determined to be cat- your return income from an activity from which
astrophic by the Secretary of the Treasury 1. Interest on any award.you do not expect to make a profit. An example
or his or her delegate. of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you 2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profitsoperate mostly for recreation and pleasure. in most cases.For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster is Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc-
qualified if it is determined by an applicable 3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It doestions for expenses related to the activity are
federal, state, or local authority to warrant assis- not matter if they relate to a physical injurylimited. They cannot total more than the income
tance from the federal, state, or local govern- or physical sickness.you report and can be taken only if you itemize
ment, agency, or instrumentality. deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). See 4. Amounts received in settlement of pensionNot-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica- rights (if you did not contribute to the plan).Disaster mitigation payments. You also can tion 535 for information on whether an activity isexclude from income any amount you receive 5. Damages forconsidered carried on for a profit.that is a qualified disaster mitigation payment.
Like qualified disaster relief payments, qualified Alaska Permanent Fund dividend. If you re- a. Patent or copyright infringement,
disaster mitigation payments are also most com- ceived a payment from Alaska's mineral income b. Breach of contract, ormonly paid to you in the period immediately fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report
following damage to property as a result of a it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 of c. Interference with business operations.
natural disaster. However, disaster mitigation Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The
payments are grants you use to mitigate (reduce state of Alaska sends each recipient a document 6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
the severity of) potential damage from future that shows the amount of the payment with the tress received to satisfy a claim under Title
natural disasters. They are paid to you through check. The amount also is reported to IRS. VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 87

7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin- Dwelling unit. This includes a house, apart- are amounts you receive for services you per-
gent fees) where the underlying recovery ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi- form as:
is included in gross income. lar property. If a building or structure contains • A corporate director,both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustDo not include in your income compensatory • An executor, administrator, or personalbe properly allocated.damages for personal physical injury or physical representative of an estate,sickness (whether received in a lump sum or Estate and trust income.     An estate or trust, • A manager of a trade or business you op-installments). unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal erated before declaring Chapter 11 bank-income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estateEmotional distress. Emotional distress it- ruptcy,or trust, you may be taxed on your share of itsself is not a physical injury or physical sickness,
income distributed or required to be distributed • A notary public, orbut damages you receive for emotional distress
to you. However, there is never a double tax.due to a physical injury or sickness are treated • An election precinct official.Estates and trusts file their returns on Formas received for the physical injury or sickness.
1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates andDo not include them in your income. Nonemployee compensation. If you areTrusts, and your share of the income is reportedIf the emotional distress is due to a personal not an employee and the fees for your servicesto you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041).injury that is not due to a physical injury or from the same payer total $600 or more for thesickness (for example, employment discrimina- Current income required to be distributed. year, you may receive a Form 1099-MISC. Yoution or injury to reputation), you must include the If you are the beneficiary of an estate or trust may need to report your fees asdamages in your income, except for any dam- that must distribute all of its current income, you self-employment income. See Self-Employedages you receive for medical care due to that must report your share of the distributable net Persons, in chapter 1, for a discussion of whenemotional distress. Emotional distress includes income, whether or not you actually received it. you are considered self-employed.physical symptoms that result from emotional
Current income not required to be distrib- Corporate director. Corporate directordistress, such as headaches, insomnia, and
uted.  If you are the beneficiary of an estate or fees are self-employment income. Report thesestomach disorders.
trust and the fiduciary has the choice of whether payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZDeduction for costs involved in unlawful to distribute all or part of the current income, you (Form 1040).discrimination suits. You may be able to de- must report: Personal representatives. All personalduct attorney fees and court costs paid to re-
• All income that is required to be distributed representatives must include in their gross in-cover a judgment or settlement for a claim of
to you, whether or not it is actually distrib- come fees paid to them from an estate. If youunlawful discrimination under various provisions
uted, plus are not in the trade or business of being anof federal, state, and local law listed in Internal
executor (for instance, you are the executor of aRevenue Code section 62(e), a claim against • All other amounts actually paid or credited friend's or relative's estate), report these fees onthe United States government, or a claim under to you, Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade orsection 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act.
up to the amount of your share of distributable business of being an executor, report these feesFor more information, see Publication 525.
net income. as self-employment income on Schedule C or
Credit card insurance. Generally, if you re- Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is notHow to report. Treat each item of incomeceive benefits under a credit card disability or includible in income if it is waived.the same way that the estate or trust would treatunemployment insurance plan, the benefits are it. For example, if a trust's dividend income is Manager of trade or business for bank-taxable to you. These plans make the minimum distributed to you, you report the distribution as ruptcy estate. Include in your income all pay-monthly payment on your credit card account if dividend income on your return. The same rule ments received from your bankruptcy estate foryou cannot make the payment due to injury, applies to distributions of tax-exempt interest managing or operating a trade or business thatillness, disability, or unemployment. Report on and capital gains. you operated before you filed for bankruptcy.Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits you
Report this income on Form 1040, line 21.The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tellreceived during the year that is more than the
you the type of items making up your share ofamount of the premiums you paid during the Notary public.  Report payments for thesethe estate or trust income and any credits youyear. services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZare allowed on your individual income tax return. (Form 1040). These payments are not subject toDown payment assistance. If you purchase self-employment tax. (See the separate instruc-Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-a home and receive assistance from a nonprofit tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details.)ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.corporation to make the down payment, that
Election precinct official. You should re-assistance is not included in your income. If the Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantor
ceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-corporation qualifies as a tax-exempt charitable trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-
ices performed as an election official or electionorganization, the assistance is treated as a gift ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over
worker. Report these payments on line 7 ofand is included in your basis of the house. If the the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferred
Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formcorporation does not qualify, the assistance is property to the trust.) This rule applies if the
1040EZ.treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchase property (or income from the property) put into
price and is not included in your basis. the trust will or may revert (be returned) to the Foster care providers. Payments you re-grantor or the grantor's spouse. ceive from a state, political subdivision, or aEmployment agency fees. If you get a job Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the qualified foster care placement agency for pro-through an employment agency, and the fee is grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at viding care to qualified foster individuals in yourpaid by your employer, the fee is not includible in the date of transfer) at more than 5% of the home generally are not included in your income.your income if you are not liable for it. However, value of the transferred property. However, you must include in your income pay-if you pay it and your employer reimburses you
ments received for the care of more than 5for it, it is includible in your income. Expenses paid by another. If your personal individuals age 19 or older and certain diffi-expenses are paid for by another person, suchEnergy conservation subsidies. You can culty-of-care payments.as a corporation, the payment may be taxable toexclude from gross income any subsidy pro- A qualified foster individual is a person who:you depending upon your relationship with thatvided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili- person and the nature of the payment. But if the 1. Is living in a foster family home, andties for the purchase or installation of an energy payment makes up for a loss caused by thatconservation measure for a dwelling unit. 2. Was placed there byperson, and only restores you to the position you
Energy conservation measure. This in- were in before the loss, the payment is not a. An agency of a state or one of its politi-cludes installations or modifications that are pri- includible in your income. cal subdivisions, ormarily designed to reduce consumption of
electricity or natural gas, or improve the man- Fees for services. Include all fees for your b. A qualified foster care placement
agement of energy demand. services in your income. Examples of these fees agency.
Page 88 Chapter 12 Other Income

Difficulty-of-care payments. These are not included in your income. However, if prop- Interest on qualified savings bonds. You
additional payments that are designated by the may be able to exclude from income the interesterty you receive this way later produces income
payer as compensation for providing the addi- from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem ifsuch as interest, dividends, or rents, that income
tional care that is required for physically, men- you pay qualified higher educational expensesis taxable to you. If property is given to a trust
tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified foster in the same year. For more information on thisand the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-
individuals. A state must determine that the ad- exclusion, see Education Savings Bond Pro-tributed to you, that income is also taxable to
ditional compensation is needed, and the care gram under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 7.you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the
for which the payments are made must be pro- income from the property, that income is taxable Job interview expenses. If a prospective em-vided in your home. to you. ployer asks you to appear for an interview andYou must include in your income diffi- Inherited pension or IRA. If you inherited a either pays you an allowance or reimburses youculty-of-care payments received for more than: pension or an individual retirement arrangement for your transportation and other travel ex-
• 10 qualified foster individuals under age (IRA), you may have to include part of the inher- penses, the amount you receive is generally not
19, or ited amount in your income. See chapter 10 if taxable. You include in income only the amount
you inherited a pension. See chapter 17 if you you receive that is more than your actual ex-• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or inherited an IRA. penses.older.
Jury duty.   Jury duty pay you receive must beHobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notMaintaining space in home. If you are paid included in your income on Form 1040, line 21. Ifdeductible from other income. A hobby is anto maintain space in your home for emergency you must give the pay to your employer becauseactivity from which you do not expect to make afoster care, you must include the payment in your employer continues to pay your salaryprofit. See Activity not for profit, earlier.your income. while you serve on the jury, you can deduct the
If you collect stamps, coins, or other amount turned over to your employer as anReporting taxable payments.  If you re- items as a hobby for recreation and adjustment to your income. Enter the amountceive payments that you must include in your pleasure, and you sell any of the items,
CAUTION
! you repay your employer on Form 1040, line 36.income, you are in business as a foster care your gain is taxable as a capital gain. (See Enter ªJury Payº and the amount on the dottedprovider and you are self-employed. Report the chapter 16.) However, if you sell items from your line next to line 36.payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ collection at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss.(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Business Kickbacks.   You must include kickbacks, sideUse of Your Home (Including Use by Daycare commissions, push money, or similar paymentsHolocaust victims restitution. RestitutionProviders), to help you determine the amount you receive in your income on Form 1040, linepayments you receive as a Holocaust victim (oryou can deduct for the use of your home. 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formthe heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest
1040), if from your self-employment activity.Found property. If you find and keep property earned on the payments, including interest
that does not belong to you that has been lost or earned on amounts held in certain escrow ac-
Example. You sell cars and help arrangeabandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to you counts or funds, are not taxable. You also do not
car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers payat its fair market value in the first year it is your include them in any computations in which you
back part of their commissions to you for refer-undisputed possession. would ordinarily add excludable income to your
ring customers to them. You must include theadjusted gross income, such as the computationFree tour. If you received a free tour from a kickbacks in your income.to determine the taxable part of social securitytravel agency for organizing a group of tourists, benefits. If the payments are made in property, Medical savings accounts (MSAs). Youyou must include its value in your income. Re- your basis in the property is its fair market value generally do not include in income amounts youport the fair market value of the tour on Form when you receive it. withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade or Excludable restitution payments are pay- Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay forbusiness of organizing tours. You cannot deduct ments or distributions made by any country or qualified medical expenses. Generally, qualifiedyour expenses in serving as the voluntary leader any other entity because of persecution of an medical expenses are those you can deduct onof the group at the group's request. If you organ- individual on the basis of race, religion, physical Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions.ize tours as a trade or business, report the tour's or mental disability, or sexual orientation by Nazi For more information about qualified medicalvalue on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form Germany, any other Axis regime, or any other expenses, see chapter 21. For more information1040). Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whether about Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage
the payments are made under a law or as aGambling winnings. You must include your MSAs, see Publication 969, Health Savings Ac-
result of a legal action. They include compensa-gambling winnings in income on Form 1040, line counts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.
tion or reparation for property losses resulting21. If you itemize your deductions on Schedule Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in afrom Nazi persecution, including proceedsA (Form 1040), you can deduct gambling losses lucky number drawing, television or radio quizunder insurance policies issued before and dur-you had during the year, but only up to the program, beauty contest, or other event, youing World War II by European insurance compa-amount of your winnings. See chapter 28 for must include it in your income. For example, ifnies.information on recordkeeping. you win a $50 prize in a photography contest,
Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lotter- you must report this income on Form 1040, lineIllegal income. Illegal income, such as money
ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi- 21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not includefrom dealing illegal drugs, must be included in
tion to cash winnings, you must include in your its value in your income.your income on Form 1040, line 21, or on
income the fair market value of bonds, cars, Prizes and awards in goods or services mustSchedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) if
houses, and other noncash prizes. be included in your income at their fair marketfrom your self-employment activity.
value.If you win a state lottery prize payable Indian fishing rights. If you are a member ofin installments, see Publication 525 for Employee awards or bonuses. Casha qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rightsmore information. awards or bonuses given to you by your em-
TIPsecured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of ployer for good work or suggestions generallyCongress as of March 17, 1988, do not includeForm W-2G. You may have received a must be included in your income as wages.in your income amounts you receive from activi-Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show- However, certain noncash employee achieve-ties related to those fishing rights. The income ising the amount of your gambling winnings and ment awards can be excluded from income. Seenot subject to income tax, self-employment tax,any tax taken out of them. Include the amount Bonuses and awards in chapter 5.or employment taxes.from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include the Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If youamount shown in box 2 on Form 1040, line 64, Interest on frozen deposits. In general, you were awarded a prize in recognition of accom-as federal income tax withheld. exclude from your income the amount of interest plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-
earned on a frozen deposit. See  Interest incomeGifts and inheritances. Generally, property tistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you
on frozen deposits in chapter 7.you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance is generally must include the value of the prize in
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 89

your income. However, you do not include this Sale of home. You may be able to exclude your income. These allowances are not consid-
prize in your income if you meet all of the follow- from income all or part of any gain from the sale ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
ing requirements. or exchange of a personal residence. See chap- Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestter 15.• You were selected without any action on are not scholarships or fellowships if you do not
your part to enter the contest or proceed- Sale of personal items. If you sold an item have to use the prizes for educational purposes.
ing. you owned for personal use, such as a car, You must include these amounts in your income
refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you use• You are not required to perform substan- silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain. the amounts for educational purposes.tial future services as a condition to receiv- Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-ing the prize or award. Stolen property. If you steal property, younot deduct a loss. must report its fair market value in your income• The prize or award is transferred by the However, if you sold an item you held for in the year you steal it unless in the same year,payer directly to a governmental unit or investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins, you return it to its rightful owner.tax-exempt charitable organization as des- or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain
ignated by you. Transporting school children. Do not in-and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.
clude in your income a school board mileageSee Publication 525 for more information about Example. You sold a painting on an online allowance for taking children to and from schoolthe conditions that apply to the transfer. auction website for $100. You bought the paint- if you are not in the business of taking children to
ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Report school. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-Qualified tuition programs (QTPs). A quali- your gain as a capital gain on Schedule D (Form ing this transportation.fied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro- 1040).gram) is a program set up to allow you to either Union benefits and dues. Amounts deducted
prepay or contribute to an account established Scholarships and fellowships. A candidate from your pay for union dues, assessments,
for paying a student's qualified higher education for a degree can exclude amounts received as a contributions, or other payments to a union can-
expenses at an eligible educational institution. A qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified not be excluded from your income.
program can be established and maintained by scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re- You may be able to deduct some of these
a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state, ceive that is for: payments as a miscellaneous deduction subject
or an eligible educational institution. to the 2% of AGI limit if they are related to your• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend anThe part of a distribution representing the job and if you itemize deductions on Schedule Aeducational institution, oramount paid or contributed to a QTP is not (Form 1040). For more information, see  Union
• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-included in income. This is a return of the invest- Dues and Expenses in chapter 28.
quired for courses at the educational insti-ment in the program. Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits paidtution.The beneficiary generally does not include in to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,income any earnings distributed from a QTP if Amounts used for room and board do not qualify including both cash and the fair market value ofthe total distribution is less than or equal to for the exclusion. See Publication 970 for more other property, are usually included in your in-adjusted qualified higher education expenses. information on qualified scholarships and fellow- come as compensation. You can exclude theseSee Publication 970 for more information. ship grants. benefits from your income only when the facts
Railroad retirement annuities. The following clearly show that the union intended them asPayment for services. Generally, you musttypes of payments are treated as pension or gifts to you.include in income the part of any scholarship orannuity income and are taxable under the rules fellowship that represents payment for past, Utility rebates. If you are a customer of anexplained in chapter 11. present, or future teaching, research, or other electric utility company and you participate in the
services. This applies even if all candidates for a• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are utility's energy conservation program, you may
degree must perform the services to receive themore than the social security equivalent receive on your monthly electric bill either:
degree.benefit. • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-For information about the rules that apply to• Tier 2 benefits. tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), ora tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to
• Vested dual benefits. employees and their families by an educational • A nonrefundable credit against the
institution, see Publication 970. purchase price of the electricity.
Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing VA payments. Allowances paid by the De- The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-
information, include it in your income. partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in able credit is not included in your income.
Page 90 Chapter 12 Other Income

Part Three.
The four chapters in this part discuss investment gains and losses, includingGains and how to figure your basis in property. A gain from selling or trading stocks,
bonds, or other investment property may be taxed or it may be tax free, atLosses least in part. A loss may or may not be deductible. These chapters also
discuss gains from selling property you personally use Ð including the special
rules for selling your home. Nonbusiness casualty and theft losses are dis-
cussed in chapter 25 in Part Five.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of the buildings. Allocate the cost basis according
Assets to the respective fair market values (FMVs) of
the land and buildings at the time of purchase.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses13. Figure the basis of each asset by multiplying the
❏ 551 Basis of Assets lump sum by a fraction. The numerator is the
FMV of that asset and the denominator is the❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions FMV of the whole property at the time of
Basis of ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property purchase.
If you are not certain of the FMVs of the
land and buildings, you can allocateProperty
the basis according to their assessed
TIP
values for real estate tax purposes.Cost Basis
Fair market value (FMV). FMV is the priceIntroduction The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. at which the property would change hands be-The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtThis chapter discusses how to figure your basis tween a willing buyer and a willing seller, neitherobligations, other property, or services. Yourin property. It is divided into the following sec- having to buy or sell, and both having reasona-cost also includes amounts you pay for the fol-tions. ble knowledge of all the necessary facts. Saleslowing items: of similar property on or about the same date• Cost basis.
may be helpful in figuring the FMV of the prop-• Sales tax,
• Adjusted basis. erty.• Freight,
• Basis other than cost. Assumption of mortgage. If you buy prop-• Installation and testing,
erty and assume (or buy the property subject to)Your basis is the amount of your investment in • Excise taxes, an existing mortgage on the property, your basisproperty for tax purposes. Use the basis to figure includes the amount you pay for the property• Legal and accounting fees (when theygain or loss on the sale, exchange, or other plus the amount to be paid on the mortgage.must be capitalized),disposition of property. Also use it to figure de-
ductions for depreciation, amortization, deple- • Revenue stamps, Settlement costs. Your basis includes thetion, and casualty losses. settlement fees and closing costs you paid for• Recording fees, andIf you use property for both business or in- buying the property. (A fee for buying property isvestment purposes and for personal purposes, • Real estate taxes (if you assume liability a cost that must be paid even if you buy theyou must allocate the basis based on the use. for the seller). property for cash.) Do not include fees and costsOnly the basis allocated to the business or in- for getting a loan on the property in your basis.In addition, the basis of real estate and businessvestment use of the property can be depreci- The following are some of the settlementassets may include other items.ated. fees or closing costs you can include in the basis
Your original basis in property is adjusted of your property.Loans with low or no interest.  If you buy(increased or decreased) by certain events. For property on a time-payment plan that charges • Abstract fees (abstract of title fees).example, if you make improvements to the prop- little or no interest, the basis of your property iserty, increase your basis. If you take deductions • Charges for installing utility services.your stated purchase price minus any amountfor depreciation or casualty losses, or claim cer- considered to be unstated interest. You gener- • Legal fees (including fees for the titletain credits, reduce your basis. ally have unstated interest if your interest rate is search and preparation of the sales con-less than the applicable federal rate.Keep accurate records of all items that tract and deed).For more information, see Unstated Interestaffect the basis of your property. For
• Recording fees.and Original Issue Discount (OID) in Publicationmore information on keeping records,
RECORDS
537.see chapter 1. • Survey fees.
• Transfer taxes.Real PropertyUseful Items • Owner's title insurance.You may want to see: Real property, also called real estate, is land and • Any amounts the seller owes that yougenerally anything built on, growing on, or at-Publication agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-tached to land. est, recording or mortgage fees, chargesIf you buy real property, certain fees and❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe for improvements or repairs, and salesother expenses you pay are part of your costBenefits commissions.basis in the property.❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Settlement costs do not include amountsLump sum purchase. If you buy buildings❏ 535 Business Expenses placed in escrow for the future payment of itemsand the land on which they stand for a lump
such as taxes and insurance.❏ 537 Installment Sales sum, allocate the cost basis among the land and
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 91

The following are some of the settlement Table 13-1. Examples of Adjustments to Basis
fees and closing costs you cannot include in the
basis of property. Increases to Basis Decreases to Basis
• Casualty insurance premiums. • Capital improvements: • Exclusion from income of
• Rent for occupancy of the property before Putting an addition on your home  subsidies for energy conservation
closing. Replacing an entire roof  measures
Paving your driveway• Charges for utilities or other services re-
Installing central air conditioning • Casualty or theft loss deductionslated to occupancy of the property before
Rewiring your home  and insurance reimbursementsclosing.
• Charges connected with getting a loan, • Assessments for local improvements:such as points (discount points, loan origi- Water connectionsnation fees), mortgage insurance premi- Extending utility service lines to the • Postponed gain from the sale of a homeums, loan assumption fees, cost of a propertycredit report, and fees for an appraisal re-
Sidewalks • Alternative motor vehicle creditquired by a lender.
(Form 8910)
• Fees for refinancing a mortgage. Roads
• Alternative fuel vehicle refueling
property credit (Form 8911)Real estate taxes. If you pay real estate taxes
the seller owed on real property you bought, and
• Residential energy credits (Form 5695)the seller did not reimburse you, treat those
taxes as part of your basis. You cannot deduct
them as an expense. • Casualty losses: • Depreciation and section 179 deduction
If you reimburse the seller for taxes the seller Restoring damaged property
paid for you, you can usually deduct that amount • Nontaxable corporate distributions
as an expense in the year of purchase. Do not • Legal fees:
include that amount in the basis of your property. Cost of defending and perfecting a title • Certain canceled debt excluded from
If you did not reimburse the seller, you must Fees for getting a reduction of an  income
reduce your basis by the amount of those taxes. assessment
Points. If you pay points to get a loan (includ- • Zoning costs • Easementsing a mortgage, second mortgage, line of credit,
or a home equity loan), do not add the points to
• Adoption tax benefitsthe basis of the related property. Generally, you
deduct the points over the term of the loan. For
more information on how to deduct points, see
basement, adding another bathroom or bed- You must increase your basis in the propertychapter 23.
room, putting up a fence, putting in new plumb- by the amount you spend on repairs that restore
Points on home mortgage. Special rules ing or wiring, installing a new roof, or paving your the property to its pre-casualty condition.
may apply to points you and the seller pay when driveway. For more information on casualty and theft
you get a mortgage to buy your main home. If losses, see chapter 25.Assessments for local improvements.certain requirements are met, you can deduct
Add to the basis of property assessments for Depreciation and section 179 deduction.the points in full for the year in which they are
improvements such as streets and sidewalks if Decrease the basis of your qualifying businesspaid. Reduce the basis of your home by any
they increase the value of the property as- property by any section 179 deduction you takeseller-paid points.
sessed. Do not deduct them as taxes. However, and the depreciation you deducted, or could
you can deduct as taxes assessments for main- have deducted (including any special deprecia-
tenance or repairs, or for meeting interest tion allowance), on your tax returns under the
charges related to the improvements. method of depreciation you selected.
Adjusted Basis For more information about depreciation and
Example. Your city changes the street in the section 179 deduction, see Publication 946Before figuring gain or loss on a sale, exchange, front of your store into an enclosed pedestrian and the Instructions for Form 4562.or other disposition of property or figuring allow- mall and assesses you and other affected prop-able depreciation, depletion, or amortization, erty owners for the cost of the conversion. Add Example. You owned a duplex used asyou must usually make certain adjustments (in- the assessment to your property's basis. In this rental property that cost you $40,000, of whichcreases and decreases) to the cost of the prop- example, the assessment is a depreciable as- $35,000 was allocated to the building anderty. The result is the adjusted basis. set. $5,000 to the land. You added an improvement
to the duplex that cost $10,000. In February last
year, the duplex was damaged by fire. Up to thatIncreases to Basis Decreases to Basis time, you had been allowed depreciation of
$23,000. You sold some salvaged material forIncrease the basis of any property by all items Decrease the basis of any property by all items $1,300 and collected $19,700 from your insur-properly added to a capital account. Examples that represent a return of capital for the period ance company. You deducted a casualty loss ofof items that increase basis are shown in Table during which you held the property. Examples of $1,000 on your income tax return for last year.13-1. These include the items discussed below. items that decrease basis are shown in Table You spent $19,000 of the insurance proceeds13-1. These include the items discussed below.Improvements. Add to your basis in property for restoration of the duplex, which was com-
the cost of improvements having a useful life of Casualty and theft losses. If you have a cas- pleted this year. You must use the duplex's
more than 1 year, that increase the value of the ualty or theft loss, decrease the basis in your adjusted basis after the restoration to determine
property, lengthen its life, or adapt it to a differ- property by any insurance proceeds or other depreciation for the rest of the property's recov-
ent use. For example, improvements include reimbursement and by any deductible loss not ery period. Figure the adjusted basis of the du-
putting a recreation room in your unfinished covered by insurance. plex as follows:
Page 92 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Original cost of duplex ......... $35,000 property at the time it is transferred to you, less You realized a gain of $5,000 ($31,000 −
Addition to duplex ............ 10,000 any amount you paid for it. Property is substan- $26,000). You bought replacement property
Total cost of duplex ........... $45,000 tially vested when it is transferable or when it is similar in use to the converted property for
Minus: Depreciation .......... 23,000 not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture (you $29,000. You recognize a gain of $2,000
Adjusted basis before casualty .... $22,000 do not have a good chance of losing it). For ($31,000 − $29,000), the unspent part of the
Minus: Insurance more information, see Restricted Property in payment from the state. Your unrecognized gain
proceeds ...... $19,700 Publication 525. is $3,000, the difference between the $5,000Deducted casualty realized gain and the $2,000 recognized gain.Bargain purchases. A bargain purchase isloss .......... 1,000 The basis of the replacement property is figureda purchase of an item for less than its FMV. If, asSalvage proceeds  1,300  22,000 as follows:compensation for services, you buy goods orAdjusted basis after casualty ..... $-0-
Add: Cost of restoring duplex ..... 19,000 other property at less than FMV, include the Cost of replacement property ...... $29,000Adjusted basis after restoration $19,000 difference between the purchase price and the Minus: Gain not recognized ....... 3,000property's FMV in your income. Your basis in the Basis of replacement property ... $26,000property is its FMV (your purchase price plus theNote. Your basis in the land is its original amount you include in income).cost of $5,000. Allocating the basis. If you buy more thanIf the difference between your purchase one piece of replacement property, allocate yourEasements. The amount you receive for price and the FMV is a qualified employee dis- basis among the properties based on their re-granting an easement is generally considered to count, do not include the difference in income. spective costs.be proceeds from the sale of an interest in real However, your basis in the property is still its
property. It reduces the basis of the affected part FMV. See Employee Discounts in Publication Basis for depreciation. Special rules apply in
of the property. If the amount received is more 15-B. determining and depreciating the basis of
than the basis of the part of the property affected MACRS property acquired in an involuntary con-
by the easement, reduce your basis in that part version. For information, see What Is the BasisTaxable Exchangesto zero and treat the excess as a recognized of Your Depreciable Property? in chapter 1 of
gain. Publication 946.A taxable exchange is one in which the gain isIf the gain is on a capital asset, see chapter taxable or the loss is deductible. A taxable gain16 for information about how to report it. If the or deductible loss also is known as a recognized Nontaxable Exchangesgain is on property used in a trade or business, gain or loss. If you receive property in exchangesee Publication 544 for information about how to for other property in a taxable exchange, the A nontaxable exchange is an exchange in whichreport it. basis of the property you receive is usually its you are not taxed on any gain and you cannot
FMV at the time of the exchange.Exclusion of subsidies for energy conserva- deduct any loss. If you receive property in a
tion measures. You can exclude from gross nontaxable exchange, its basis is generally the
income any subsidy you received from a public same as the basis of the property you trans-Involuntary Conversionsutility company for the purchase or installation of ferred. See Nontaxable Trades in chapter 14.
an energy conservation measure for a dwelling If you receive replacement property as a result
unit. Reduce the basis of the property for which of an involuntary conversion, such as a casualty,
you received the subsidy by the excluded Like-Kind Exchangestheft, or condemnation, figure the basis of the
amount. For more information about this sub- replacement property using the basis of the con- The exchange of property for the same kind ofsidy, see chapter 12. verted property. property is the most common type of nontaxablePostponed gain from sale of home. If you exchange. To qualify as a like-kind exchange,Similar or related property. If you receivepostponed gain from the sale of your main home the property traded and the property receivedreplacement property similar or related in serv-under rules in effect before May 7, 1997, you must be both of the following.ice or use to the converted property, the replace-must reduce the basis of the home you acquired ment property's basis is the same as the • Qualifying property.as a replacement by the amount of the post- converted property's basis on the date of theponed gain. For more information on the rules • Like-kind property.conversion, with the following adjustments.for the sale of a home, see chapter 15.
The basis of the property you receive is gener-1. Decrease the basis by the following.
ally the same as the adjusted basis of the prop-
a. Any loss you recognize on the involun- erty you gave up. If you trade property in a
tary conversion.Basis Other Than Cost like-kind exchange and also pay money, the
basis of the property received is the adjustedb. Any money you receive that you do not
There are many times when you cannot use cost basis of the property you gave up increased byspend on similar property.
as basis. In these cases, the fair market value or the money you paid.
the adjusted basis of the property can be used. 2. Increase the basis by the following. Qualifying property. In a like-kind exchange,Fair market value (FMV) and adjusted basis you must hold for investment or for productivea. Any gain you recognize on the involun-were discussed earlier. use in your trade or business both the propertytary conversion.
you give up and the property you receive.
Property Received b. Any cost of acquiring the replacement
Like-kind property. There must be an ex-property.for Services change of like-kind property. Like-kind proper-
ties are properties of the same nature orIf you receive property for your services, include Money or property not similar or related.  If character, even if they differ in grade or quality.its FMV in income. The amount you include in you receive money or property not similar or The exchange of real estate for real estate andincome becomes your basis. If the services related in service or use to the converted prop- personal property for similar personal propertywere performed for a price agreed on before- erty, and you buy replacement property similar are exchanges of like-kind property.hand, it will be accepted as the FMV of the or related in service or use to the convertedproperty if there is no evidence to the contrary. Example. You trade in an old truck used inproperty, the basis of the replacement property
Restricted property. If you receive prop- your business with an adjusted basis of $1,700is its cost decreased by the gain not recognized
erty for your services and the property is subject for a new one costing $6,800. The dealer allowson the conversion.
to certain restrictions, your basis in the property you $2,000 on the old truck, and you pay $4,800.
is its FMV when it becomes substantially vested. Example. The state condemned your prop- This is a like-kind exchange. The basis of the
However, this rule does not apply if you make an erty. The adjusted basis of the property was new truck is $6,500 (the adjusted basis of the old
election to include in income the FMV of the $26,000 and the state paid you $31,000 for it. one, $1,700, plus the amount you paid, $4,800).
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 93

If you sell your old truck to a third party for the adjusted basis and holding period of the purposes after reduction by any annual exclu-
$2,000 instead of trading it in and then buy a property as of the date of the transfer. sion and marital or charitable deduction that
new one from the dealer, you have a taxable For more information about the transfer of applies to the gift. For information on the gift tax,
gain of $300 on the sale (the $2,000 sale price property from a spouse, see chapter 14. see Publication 950, Introduction to Estate and
minus the $1,700 adjusted basis). The basis of Gift Taxes.
the new truck is the price you pay the dealer. Property Received
Example. In 2007, you received a gift ofPartially nontaxable exchanges. A partially as a Gift property from your mother that had an FMV ofnontaxable exchange is an exchange in which
$50,000. Her adjusted basis was $20,000. Theyou receive unlike property or money in addition To figure the basis of property you receive as a amount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasto like-kind property. The basis of the property gift, you must know its adjusted basis to the $38,000 ($50,000 minus the $12,000 annualyou receive is the same as the adjusted basis of donor just before it was given to you, its FMV at exclusion). She paid a gift tax of $9,000 on thethe property you gave up, with the following the time it was given to you, and any gift tax paid property. Your basis is $27,110, figured as fol-adjustments. on it. lows:
1. Decrease the basis by the following FMV less than donor's adjusted basis. If theamounts. Fair market value .............. $50,000FMV of the property at the time of the gift is less Minus: Adjusted basis ........... −20,000than the donor's adjusted basis, your basis de-a. Any money you receive. Net increase in value ........... $30,000pends on whether you have a gain or a loss
b. Any loss you recognize on the ex- when you dispose of the property. Your basis for Gift tax paid ................. $9,000change. figuring gain is the same as the donor's adjusted Multiplied by ($30,000 ÷ $38,000) ... × .79basis plus or minus any required adjustments to Gift tax due to net increase in value $7,1102. Increase the basis by the following basis while you held the property. Your basis for Adjusted basis of property to youramounts. figuring loss is its FMV when you received the mother ..................... +20,000
gift plus or minus any required adjustments to Your basis in the property ....... $27,110a. Any additional costs you incur. basis while you held the property. See Adjusted
Basis, earlier.b. Any gain you recognize on the ex-
Note.  If you received a gift before 1977,change.
your basis in the gift (the donor's adjusted basis)Example. You received an acre of land as a
includes any gift tax paid on it. However, yourgift. At the time of the gift, the land had an FMVIf the other party to the exchange assumes
basis cannot exceed the FMV of the gift at theof $8,000. The donor's adjusted basis wasyour liabilities, treat the debt assumption as
time it was given to you.$10,000. After you received the property, nomoney you received in the exchange.
events occurred to increase or decrease yourAllocation of basis. If you receive like-kind basis. If you later sell the property for $12,000, Inherited Propertyand unlike properties in the exchange, allocate you will have a $2,000 gain because you mustthe basis first to the unlike property, other than use the donor's adjusted basis at the time of the Your basis in property you inherit from a dece-money, up to its FMV on the date of the ex- gift ($10,000) as your basis to figure gain. If you dent is generally one of the following.change. The rest is the basis of the like-kind sell the property for $7,000, you will have aproperty. • The FMV of the property at the date of the$1,000 loss because you must use the FMV at
decedent's death.the time of the gift ($8,000) as your basis toMore information. See Like-Kind Exchanges
figure loss.in chapter 1 of Publication 544 for more informa- • The FMV on the alternate valuation date if
If the sales price is between $8,000 andtion. the personal representative for the estate$10,000, you have neither gain nor loss. elects to use alternate valuation.Basis for depreciation. Special rules apply in
Business property. If you hold the gift asdetermining and depreciating the basis of • The value under the special-use valuationbusiness property, your basis for figuring anyMACRS property acquired in a like-kind ex- method for real property used in farmingdepreciation, depletion, or amortization deduc-change. For information, see What Is the Basis or a closely held business if elected fortions is the same as the donor's adjusted basisof Your Depreciable Property? in chapter 1 of estate tax purposes.plus or minus any required adjustments to basisPublication 946.
• The decedent's adjusted basis in land towhile you hold the property.
the extent of the value excluded from theProperty Transferred FMV equal to or greater than donor's ad- decedent's taxable estate as a qualified
justed basis. If the FMV of the property isFrom a Spouse conservation easement.
equal to or greater than the donor's adjusted
The basis of property transferred to you or trans- basis, your basis is the donor's adjusted basis at If a federal estate tax return does not have to
ferred in trust for your benefit by your spouse is the time you received the gift. Increase your be filed, your basis in the inherited property is its
the same as your spouse's adjusted basis. The basis by all or part of any gift tax paid, depending appraised value at the date of death for state
same rule applies to a transfer by your former on the date of the gift, explained later. inheritance or transmission taxes.
spouse that is incident to divorce. However, for Also, for figuring gain or loss from a sale or For more information, see the instructions toproperty transferred in trust, adjust your basis other disposition or for figuring depreciation, de- Form 706, United States Estate (and Genera-for any gain recognized by your spouse or for- pletion, or amortization deductions on business tion-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return.mer spouse if the liabilities assumed, plus the property, you must increase or decrease your
liabilities to which the property is subject, are basis (the donor's adjusted basis) by any re- Community property. In community propertymore than the adjusted basis of the property quired adjustments to basis while you held the states (Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana,transferred. property. See Adjusted Basis, earlier. Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and  If you received a gift during the tax year,
Wisconsin), husband and wife are each usuallyIf the property transferred to you is a series increase your basis in the gift (the donor's ad-
considered to own half the community property.E, series EE, or series I U.S. savings bond, the justed basis) by the part of the gift tax paid on it
When either spouse dies, the total value of thetransferor must include in income the interest due to the net increase in value of the gift. Figure
community property, even the part belonging toaccrued to the date of transfer. Your basis in the the increase by multiplying the gift tax paid by a
the surviving spouse, generally becomes thebond immediately after the transfer is equal to fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the net
basis of the entire property. For this rule tothe transferor's basis increased by the interest increase in value of the gift and the denominator
apply, at least half the value of the communityincome includible in the transferor's income. For is the amount of the gift.
property interest must be includible in the dece-more information on these bonds, see chapter 7. The net increase in value of the gift is the
dent's gross estate, whether or not the estateAt the time of the transfer, the transferor FMV of the gift minus the donor's adjusted basis.
must file a return.must give you the records needed to determine The amount of the gift is its value for gift tax
Page 94 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Example. You and your spouse owned the change in the property's use, as discussed deduct the premium on a tax-exempt bond, you
earlier under Adjusted Basis. must amortize the premium each year and re-community property that had a basis of $80,000.
duce your basis in the bond by the amortizedWhen your spouse died, half the FMV of the
Example. Assume the same facts as in the amount.community interest was includible in your
previous example, except that you sell the prop-spouse's estate. The FMV of the community
Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-erty at a loss after being allowed depreciationinterest was $100,000. The basis of your half of
ments. You must increase your basis in andeductions of $37,500. In this case, you wouldthe property after the death of your spouse is
OID debt instrument by the OID you include instart with the FMV on the date of the change to$50,000 (half of the $100,000 FMV). The basis
income for that instrument. See Original Issuerental use ($180,000), because it is less than theof the other half to your spouse's heirs is also
Discount (OID) in chapter 7 and Publicationadjusted basis of $203,000 ($178,000 +$50,000.
1212, Guide To Original Issue Discount (OID)$25,000 (land)) on that date. Reduce thatFor more information about community prop-
Instruments.amount ($180,000) by the depreciation deduc-erty, see Publication 555, Community Property.
tions ($37,500). The basis for loss is $142,500 Tax-exempt obligations. OID on($180,000 − $37,500). tax-exempt obligations is generally not taxable.Property Changed From
However, when you dispose of a tax-exempt
Personal to Business or obligation issued after September 3, 1982, andStocks and Bonds
acquired after March 1, 1984, you must accrueRental Use The basis of stocks or bonds you buy generally OID on the obligation to determine its adjusted
is the purchase price plus any costs of purchase, basis. The accrued OID is added to the basis ofIf you hold property for personal use and then
such as commissions and recording or transfer the obligation to determine your gain or loss.change it to business use or use it to produce
fees. If you get stocks or bonds other than by See chapter 4 of Publication 550.rent, you can begin to depreciate the property at
purchase, your basis is usually determined bythe time of the change. To do so, you must figure
the FMV or the previous owner's adjusted basis,its basis for depreciation. An example of chang-
as discussed earlier.ing property held for personal use to business or
You must adjust the basis of stocks for cer-rental use would be renting out your former
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-personal residence.
ple, if you receive additional stock from
nontaxable stock dividends or stock splits, re-Basis for depreciation. The basis for depre- 14.
duce your basis for each share of stock by divid-ciation is the lesser of the following amounts.
ing the adjusted basis of the old stock by the
• The FMV of the property on the date of the number of shares of old and new stock. This rule
change. applies only when the additional stock received Sale of Property
is identical to the stock held. Also reduce your• Your adjusted basis on the date of the
basis when you receive nontaxable distribu-change.
tions. They are a return of capital.
What's New for 2007
Example. Several years ago, you paid Example. In 2005 you bought 100 shares of
$160,000 to have your house built on a lot that XYZ stock for $1,000 or $10 a share. In 2006 Capital asset treatment for self-created mu-cost $25,000. You paid $20,000 for permanent you bought 100 shares of XYZ stock for $1,600 sical works. Musical compositions and copy-improvements to the house and claimed a or $16 a share. In 2007 XYZ declared a 2-for-1 rights in musical works are generally not capital$2,000 casualty loss deduction for damage to stock split. You now have 200 shares of stock assets. However, you can elect to treat thosethe house before changing the property to rental with a basis of $5 a share and 200 shares with a types of property as capital assets. See Capitaluse last year. Because land is not depreciable, basis of $8 a share. Asset Treatment for Self-Created Musicalyou include only the cost of the house when Works later.Other basis. There are other ways to figurefiguring the basis for depreciation.
the basis of stocks or bonds depending on howYour adjusted basis in the house when you
you acquired them. For detailed information, seechanged its use was $178,000 ($160,000 +
Stocks and Bonds under Basis of Investment$20,000 − $2,000). On the same date, your
ReminderProperty in chapter 4 of Publication 550.property had an FMV of $180,000, of which
$15,000 was for the land and $165,000 was for Identifying stocks or bonds sold. If you canthe house. The basis for figuring depreciation on Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen whoadequately identify the shares of stock or thethe house is its FMV on the date of the change sells property located outside the United States,bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other($165,000) because it is less than your adjusted you must report all gains and losses from thebasis of the particular shares of stocks or bonds.basis ($178,000). sale of that property on your tax return unless itIf you buy and sell securities at various times in is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether youvarying quantities and you cannot adequatelySale of property. If you later sell or dispose of reside inside or outside the United States andidentify the shares you sell, the basis of theproperty changed to business or rental use, the whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from thesecurities you sell is the basis of the securitiesbasis you use will depend on whether you are payer.you acquired first. For more information aboutfiguring gain or loss. identifying securities you sell, see Stocks and
Gain. The basis for figuring a gain is your Bonds under Basis of Investment Property in
adjusted basis in the property when you sell the chapter 4 of Publication 550.
property. Introduction
Mutual fund shares. If you sell mutual fund
This chapter discusses the tax consequences ofshares you acquired at various times and pricesExample. Assume the same facts as in the selling or trading investment property. It explainsand left on deposit in an account kept by aprevious example except that you sell the prop- the following.custodian or agent, you can elect to use anerty at a gain after being allowed depreciation
average basis. For more information, see Publi-deductions of $37,500. Your adjusted basis for • What a sale or trade is.
cation 564.figuring gain is $165,500 ($178,000 + $25,000 • Figuring gain or loss.(land) − $37,500). Bond premium. If you buy a taxable bond at a • Nontaxable trades.Loss. Figure the basis for a loss starting premium and elect to amortize the premium,
with the smaller of your adjusted basis or the reduce the basis of the bond by the amortized • Related party transactions.
FMV of the property at the time of the change to premium you deduct each year. See Bond Pre- • Capital gains or losses.business or rental use. Then make adjustments mium Amortization in chapter 3 of Publication
(increases and decreases) for the period after • Capital assets and noncapital assets.550 for more information. Although you cannot
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 95

• Holding period. A sale is generally a transfer of property for your return for the year the security became
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to worthless. You must file it within 7 years from the• Rollover of gain from publicly traded se- pay money. date your original return for that year had to becurities. A trade is a transfer of property for other filed, or 2 years from the date you paid the tax,
property or services and may be taxed in the whichever is later. For more information about
Other property transactions. Certain trans- same way as a sale. filing a claim, see Amended Returns and Claims
fers of property are not discussed here. They are for Refund in chapter 1.Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transactiondiscussed in other IRS publications. These in- is not a trade when you voluntarily sell propertyclude the following. How To Figurefor cash and immediately buy similar property to
• Sales of a main home, covered in chapter replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa- Gain or Loss15. rate transactions. But see Like-kind exchanges
under Nontaxable Trades, later. You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of• Installment sales, covered in Publication
property by comparing the amount you realize537, Installment Sales. Redemption of stock. A redemption of stock
with the adjusted basis of the property.is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the• Transactions involving business property, capital gain or loss provisions unless the re- Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale orcovered in Publication 544, Sales and demption is a dividend or other distribution on trade is more than the adjusted basis of theOther Dispositions of Assets. stock. property you transfer, the difference is a gain.
• Transfers of property at death, covered in Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property youPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend, transfer is more than the amount you realize, theAdministrators. or other distribution depends on the circum- difference is a loss.stances in each case. Both direct and indirect• Dispositions of an interest in a passive ac- Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of prop-ownership of stock will be considered. The re-tivity, covered in Publication 925, Passive erty is your original cost or other original basisdemption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if:Activity and At-Risk Rules. properly adjusted (increased or decreased) for• The redemption is not essentially certain items. See chapter 13 for more informa-equivalent to a dividend (see chapter 8),Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex- tion about determining the adjusted basis ofpenses (Including Capital Gains and Losses), property.• There is a substantially disproportionateprovides a more detailed discussion about sales redemption of stock, Amount realized. The amount you realizeand trades of investment property. Publication
• There is a complete redemption of all the from a sale or trade of property is everything you550 includes information about the rules cover-
stock of the corporation owned by the receive for the property. This includes theing nonbusiness bad debts, straddles, section
shareholder, or money you receive plus the fair market value of1256 contracts, puts and calls, commodity fu-
any property or services you receive. If youtures, short sales, and wash sales. It also dis- • The redemption is a distribution in partial received a note or other debt instrument for thecusses investment-related expenses. liquidation of a corporation. property, see How To Figure Gain or Loss in
chapter 4 of Publication 550 to figure the amountUseful Items Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re- realized.You may want to see: demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their If you finance the buyer's purchase of your
maturity is generally treated as a sale or trade. property and the debt instrument does not pro-Publication vide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedSurrender of stock. A surrender of stock by a❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses interest that you must report as ordinary incomedominant shareholder who retains control of the will reduce the amount realized from the sale.corporation is treated as a contribution to capital❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions For more information, see Publication 537.rather than as an immediate loss deductible
from taxable income. The surrendering share-Form (and Instructions) Fair market value. Fair market value is the
holder must reallocate his or her basis in the price at which the property would change hands❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains surrendered shares to the shares he or she between a buyer and a seller, neither beingand Losses retains. forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable
❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges knowledge of all the relevant facts.Worthless securities. Stocks, stock rights,
and bonds (other than those held for sale by a Example. You trade A Company stock withsecurities dealer) that became worthless during an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Companythe tax year are treated as though they were stock with a fair market value of $10,000, whichsold on the last day of the tax year. This affectsSales and Trades is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000whether your capital loss is long-term or ($10,000 − $7,000).short-term. See Holding Period, later.If you sold property such as stocks, bonds, or If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make Debt paid off. A debt against the property,certain commodities through a broker during the payments on a negotiable promissory note that or against you, that is paid off as a part of theyear, you should receive, for each sale, a Form you issued for stock that became worthless, you transaction, or that is assumed by the buyer,1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex- can deduct these payments as losses in the must be included in the amount realized. This ischange Transactions, or an equivalent state- years you actually make the payments. Do not true even if neither you nor the buyer is person-ment from the broker. You should receive the deduct them in the year the stock became worth- ally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell orstatement by January 31 of the next year. It will less. trade property that is subject to a nonrecourseshow the gross proceeds from the sale. The IRS loan, the amount you realize generally includeswill also get a copy of Form 1099-B from the How to report loss. Report worthless se- the full amount of the note assumed by the buyerbroker. curities on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or even if the amount of the note is more than theline 8, whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d),Use Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state- fair market value of the property.enter ªWorthless.º Enter the amount of your lossment received from your broker) to complete
in parentheses in column (f).Schedule D (Form 1040). Example. You sell stock that you had
Filing a claim for refund. If you do not pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.
claim a loss for a worthless security on your Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyerWhat Is a Sale or Trade?
original return for the year it becomes worthless, pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in
This section explains what is a sale or trade. It you can file a claim for a credit or refund due to cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000
also explains certain transactions and events the loss. You must use Form 1040X, Amended + $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 −
that are treated as sales or trades. U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to amend $6,000).
Page 96 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Payment of cash. If you trade property and a. The 180th day after the date on which Property for stock of a controlled corpora-
cash for other property, the amount you realize you transfer the property given up in the tion. If you transfer property to a corporation
is the fair market value of the property you re- trade, or solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,
ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- and immediately after the trade you are in con-b. The due date, including extensions, fortracting the cash you pay plus the adjusted basis trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will notyour tax return for the year in which theof the property you trade in from the amount you recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies bothtransfer of the property given up occurs.realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-
gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a erty to a corporation. It does not apply if theIf you trade property with a related party in aloss. corporation is an investment company.like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.
For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-See Related Party Transactions, later in thisNo gain or loss. You may have to use a basis ration, you or your group of transferors mustchapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544for figuring gain that is different from the basis own, immediately after the exchange, at leastfor more information on exchanges of businessused for figuring loss. In this case, you may have 80% of the total combined voting power of allproperty and special rules for exchanges usingneither a gain nor a loss. See Basis Other Than classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%qualified intermediaries or involving multipleCost in chapter 13. of the outstanding shares of each class of non-properties.
voting stock of the corporation.
Partly nontaxable exchange. If you receiveNontaxable Trades If this provision applies to you, you may have
money or unlike property in addition to like prop- to attach to your return a complete statement of
This section discusses trades that generally do erty, and the above six conditions are met, you all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details,
not result in a taxable gain or deductible loss. have a partly nontaxable trade. You are taxed on see Regulations section 1.351-3.
For more information on nontaxable trades, see any gain you realize, but only up to the amount Additional information. For more informa-chapter 1 of Publication 544. of the money and the fair market value of the tion on trades of stock, see Nontaxable Tradesunlike property you receive. You cannot deduct in chapter 4 of Publication 550.Like-kind exchanges. If you trade business a loss.or investment property for other business or
Like property and unlike property trans-investment property of a like kind, you do not Insurance policies and annuities. You will
ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-pay tax on any gain or deduct any loss until you not have a recognized gain or loss if the insured
tion to the like property, you must recognize gainsell or dispose of the property you receive. To be or annuitant is the same under both contracts
or loss on the unlike property you give up. Thenontaxable, a trade must meet all six of the and you trade:
gain or loss is the difference between the ad-following conditions. • A life insurance contract for another lifejusted basis of the unlike property and its fair
insurance contract or for an endowment or1. The property must be business or invest- market value.
annuity contract,ment property. You must hold both the
Like property and money transferred. Ifproperty you trade and the property you • An endowment contract for an annuityconditions (1) ± (6) are met, you have a nontax-receive for productive use in your trade or contract or for another endowment con-able trade even if you pay money in addition tobusiness or for investment. Neither prop- tract that provides for regular paymentsthe like property.erty may be property used for personal beginning at a date not later than the be-purposes, such as your home or family ginning date under the old contract, orBasis of property received. To figure the ba-car. sis of the property received, see Nontaxable • An annuity contract for another annuity2. The property must not be held primarily for Exchanges in chapter 13. contract.sale. The property you trade and the prop-
How to report. You must report the trade oferty you receive must not be property you You also may not have to recognize gain orlike property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-sell to customers, such as merchandise. loss on an exchange of a portion of an annuitynized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it on contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-3. The property must not be stocks, bonds, Schedule D (Form 1040), or on Form 4797, nue Ruling 2003-76 and Notice 2003-51 in Inter-notes, choses in action, certificates of trust Sales of Business Property, whichever applies. nal Revenue Bulletin 2003-33. This bulletin isor beneficial interest, or other securities or For information on using Form 4797, see available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb03-33.evidences of indebtedness or interest, in- chapter 4 of Publication 544. pdf.cluding partnership interests. However,
you can have a nontaxable trade of corpo- Corporate stocks. The following trades of Exchanges of contracts not included in this
rate stocks under a different rule, as dis- corporate stocks generally do not result in a list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-
cussed later. taxable gain or a deductible loss. ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-
tract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.4. There must be a trade of like property. The Corporate reorganizations. In some in-
trade of real estate for real estate, or per- stances, a company will give you common stock Demutualization of life insurance compa-
sonal property for similar personal prop- for preferred stock, preferred stock for common nies. If you received stock in exchange for
erty, is a trade of like property. The trade stock, or stock in one corporation for stock in your equity interest as a policyholder or an annu-
of an apartment house for a store building, another corporation. If this is a result of a itant, you generally will not have a recognized
or a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlled gain or loss. See Demutualization of Life Insur-
trade of like property. The trade of a piece corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor- ance Companies in Publication 550.
of machinery for a store building is not a porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-
trade of like property. Real property lo- zation, you do not recognize gain or loss. U.S. Treasury notes or bonds. You can trade
cated in the United States and real prop- certain issues of U.S. Treasury obligations forStock for stock of the same corporation.erty located outside the United States are other issues designated by the Secretary of theYou can exchange common stock for commonnot like property. Also, personal property Treasury, with no gain or loss recognized on thestock or preferred stock for preferred stock in theused predominantly within the United trade.same corporation without having a recognizedStates and personal property used gain or loss. This is true for a trade between twopredominantly outside the United States stockholders as well as a trade between a stock- Transfers Betweenare not like property. holder and the corporation. Spouses5. The property to be received must be identi- Convertible stocks and bonds. You gen-fied in writing within 45 days after the date Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on aerally will not have a recognized gain or loss ifyou transfer the property given up in the transfer of property from an individual to (or inyou convert bonds into stock or preferred stocktrade. trust for the benefit of) a spouse, or if incident tointo common stock of the same corporation ac-
a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition6. The property to be received must be re- cording to a conversion privilege in the terms of
rule does not apply in the following situations.ceived by the earlier of: the bond or the preferred stock certificate.
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 97

• The recipient spouse or former spouse is • A tax-exempt charitable or educational or- Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by
a nonresident alien. or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trustganization that is directly or indirectly con-
is considered owned proportionately by or for itstrolled, in any manner or by any method,• Property is transferred in trust. Gain must shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.by you or by a member of your family,be recognized to the extent the amount of whether or not this control is legally en-the liabilities assumed by the trust, plus Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownforceable.any liabilities on the property, exceed the the stock that is directly or indirectly owned by or
adjusted basis of the property. for his or her family. Family includes only broth-
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,For other situations, see Publication 550. property is not deductible if the transaction is spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.
directly or indirectly between the following re-Any transfer of property to a spouse or former Rule 3. An individual owning, other than bylated parties.spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation istreated by the recipient as a gift and is not • A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary considered to own the stock that is directly orconsidered a sale or exchange. The recipient's and beneficiary, of any trust. indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.basis in the property will be the same as the
• Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or theadjusted basis of the giver immediately before Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock
fiduciary and beneficiary of two differentthe transfer. This carryover basis rule applies constructively owned by a person under rule 1 is
trusts, if the same person is the grantor ofwhether the adjusted basis of the transferred treated as actually owned by that person. But
both trusts.property is less than, equal to, or greater than stock constructively owned by an individual
either its fair market value at the time of transfer under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by• A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whichor any consideration paid by the recipient. This that individual for again applying either rule 2 ormore than 50% in value of the outstandingrule applies for purposes of determining loss as rule 3 to make another person the constructivestock is directly or indirectly owned by orwell as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer owner of the stock.for the trust, or by or for the grantor of thein trust increases the basis. trust. Property received from a related party. IfA transfer of property is incident to a divorce
you sell or trade at a gain property that youif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date • A corporation and a partnership if the
acquired from a related party, you recognize theon which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is same persons own more than 50% in
gain only to the extent it is more than the lossrelated to the ending of the marriage. value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
previously disallowed to the related party. Thisporation and more than 50% of the capital
rule applies only if you are the original transfereeinterest, or the profits interest, in the part-Related Party Transactions and you acquired the property by purchase ornership.
exchange. This rule does not apply if the relatedSpecial rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- • Two S corporations if the same persons party's loss was disallowed because of the washerty between related parties. own more than 50% in value of the out- sale rules described in chapter 4 of Publication
standing stock of each corporation. 550 under Wash Sales.Gain on sale or trade of depreciable prop- If you sell or trade at a loss property that you• Two corporations, one of which is an Serty. Your gain from the sale or trade of prop- acquired from a related party, you cannot recog-corporation, if the same persons ownerty to a related party may be ordinary income, nize the loss that was not allowed to the relatedmore than 50% in value of the outstandingrather than capital gain, if the property can be party.stock of each corporation.depreciated by the party receiving it. See chap-
ter 3 of Publication 544 for more information. • An executor and a beneficiary of an estate Example 1. Your brother sells you stock for
(except in the case of a sale or trade to $7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother
Like-kind exchanges. Generally, if you trade satisfy a pecuniary bequest). cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell
business or investment property for other busi- the same stock to an unrelated party for• Two corporations that are members of theness or investment property of a like kind, no $10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-same controlled group. (Under certaingain or loss is recognized. See Like-kind ex- able gain is $500 Ð the $2,900 gain minus theconditions, however, these losses are notchanges earlier under Nontaxable Trades. $2,400 loss not allowed to your brother.disallowed but must be deferred.)This rule also applies to trades of property
between related parties, defined next under Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the• Two partnerships if the same personsLosses on sales or trades of property. However, stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%if either you or the related party disposes of the nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minusof the capital interests or the profit inter-like property within 2 years after the trade, you $6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that wasests in both partnerships.both must report any gain or loss not recognized not allowed to your brother.
on the original trade on your return filed for the Multiple property sales or trades. If youyear in which the later disposition occurs. sell or trade to a related party a number of blocks
of stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, youLosses on sales or trades of property. You must figure the gain or loss separately for each Capital Gainscannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of block of stock or piece of property. The gain onproperty, other than a distribution in complete each item may be taxable. However, you cannot and Lossesliquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannotdirectly or indirectly between you and the follow- reduce gains from the sales of any of these This section discusses the tax treatment ofing related parties. items by losses on the sales of any of the other gains and losses from different types of invest-
• Members of your family. This includes only items. ment transactions.    
your brothers and sisters, half-brothers Indirect transactions. You cannot deduct Character of gain or loss. You need to clas-and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par- your loss on the sale of stock through your sify your gains and losses as either ordinary orents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de- broker if, under a prearranged plan, a related capital gains or losses. You then need to classifyscendants (children, grandchildren, etc.). party buys the same stock you had owned. This your capital gains and losses as either short• A partnership in which you directly or indi- does not apply to a trade between related par- term or long term. If you have long-term gainsrectly own more than 50% of the capital ties through an exchange that is purely coinci- and losses, you must identify your 28% rateinterest or the profits interest. dental and is not prearranged. gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,
you must also identify any unrecaptured sectionConstructive ownership of stock. In de-• A corporation in which you directly or indi-
1250 gain.termining whether a person directly or indirectlyrectly own more than 50% in value of the
owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-outstanding stock. (See Constructive own- The correct classification and identification
tion, the following rules apply.ership of stock, later.) helps you figure the limit on capital losses and
Page 98 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

the correct tax on capital gains. Reporting capi- for services rendered or from the sale of originally issued at a discount or bought at a
tal gains and losses is explained in chapter 16. property described in (1). discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-
plained in the following discussions.6. U.S. Government publications that you re-
Capital or Ordinary ceived from the government for free or for Short-term government obligations. Treat
less than the normal sales price, or that gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-Gain or Loss you acquired under circumstances entitling ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-
you to the basis of someone who received gations) as ordinary income up to your ratableIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss
the publications for free or for less than the share of the acquisition discount. This treatmentfrom a transaction, it may be either a capital gain
normal sales price. applies to obligations that have a fixed maturityor loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on
date not more than 1 year from the date of issue.the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of 7. Certain commodities derivative financial in- Acquisition discount is the stated redemptiona capital asset (defined next) results in a capital struments held by commodities derivatives price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset dealers. tion.generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De- 8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans- However, do not treat these gains as incomepending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on action is clearly identified as a hedging to the extent you previously included the dis-a sale or trade of property used in a trade or transaction before the close of the day on count in income. See Discount on Short-Termbusiness may be treated as either capital or which it was acquired, originated, or en- Obligations in chapter 1 of Publication 550.ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In tered into.some situations, part of your gain or loss may be Short-term nongovernment obligations.
a capital gain or loss and part may be an ordi- 9. Supplies of a type you regularly use or Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-
nary gain or loss. consume in the ordinary course of your gations as ordinary income up to your ratable
trade or business. share of original issue discount (OID). This treat-
ment applies to obligations that have a fixedCapital Assets and
maturity date of not more than 1 year from the
Noncapital Assets date of issue.Investment Property However, to the extent you previously in-For the most part, everything you own and use cluded the discount in income, you do not haveInvestment property is a capital asset. Any gainfor personal purposes, pleasure, or investment to include it in income again. See Discount onor loss from its sale or trade is generally a capitalis a capital asset. Some examples are: Short-Term Obligations in chapter 1 of Publica-gain or loss.
tion 550.• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-
Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.count, Tax-exempt state and local governmentThese are capital assets except when they are bonds. If these bonds were originally issued• A house owned and used by you and your held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss you at a discount before September 4, 1982, or youfamily, have from their sale or trade generally is a capi- acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat yourtal gain or loss.• Household furnishings, part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure
your gain or loss on the sale or trade of theseStocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of these• A car used for pleasure or commuting, bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part(including stock received as a dividend) are cap-
of the OID.• Coin or stamp collections, ital assets except when held for sale by a securi-
If the bonds were issued after September 3,ties dealer. However, if you own small business• Gems and jewelry, and 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-stock, see Losses on Section 1244 (Small Busi-
crease the adjusted basis by your part of theness) Stock and Losses on Small Business In-• Gold, silver, or any other metal.
OID to figure gain or loss. For more informationvestment Company Stock in chapter 4 of
on the basis of these bonds, see DiscountedPublication 550.Any property you own is a capital asset, ex- Debt Instruments in chapter 4 of Publicationcept the following noncapital assets. 550.
Any gain from market discount is usually1. Property held mainly for sale to customers Personal Use Property
taxable on disposition or redemption ofor property that will physically become a
tax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bondsProperty held for personal use only, rather thanpart of the merchandise that is for sale to
before May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis-for investment, is a capital asset, and you mustcustomers. 
count is capital gain. If you bought the bondsreport a gain from its sale as a capital gain.2. Depreciable property used in your trade or after April 30, 1993, the gain is ordinary income.However, you cannot deduct a loss from sellingbusiness, even if fully depreciated. You figure the market discount by sub-personal use property.
tracting the price you paid for the bond from the3. Real property used in your trade or busi-
sum of the original issue price of the bond andness. 
the amount of accumulated OID from the date ofCapital Asset Treatment for4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artistic issue that represented interest to any earlierSelf-Created Musical Workscomposition, a letter or memorandum, or holders. For more information, see Market Dis-similar propertyÐ count Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550.You can elect to treat musical compositions and
A loss on the sale or other disposition of acopyrights in musical works as capital assets ifa. Created by your personal efforts, tax-exempt state or local government bond isyou sell or exchange them in tax years begin-
b. Prepared or produced for you (in the deductible as a capital loss.ning after May 17, 2006, and:
case of a letter, memorandum, or simi- Redeemed before maturity. If a state or• Your personal efforts created the property,lar property), or local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980,or
c. Acquired under circumstances (for ex- is redeemed before it matures, the OID is not• You acquired the property under circum-ample, by gift) entitling you to the basis taxable to you.stances (for example, by gift) entitling youof the person who created the property If a state or local bond issued after June 8,to the basis of the person who created theor for whom it was prepared or pro- 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part ofproperty or for whom it was prepared orduced. the OID that is earned while you hold the bond isproduced. not taxable to you. However, you must report theFor an exception to this rule, see Capital unearned part of the OID as a capital gain.Asset Treatment for Self-Created Musical
Discounted Debt InstrumentsWorks later. Example. On July 1, 1996, the date of is-
5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption, sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond
the ordinary course of a trade or business or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument for $800. The face amount of the bond was
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 99

$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time loss on its sale or retirement is generally capital any capital gain or loss was a short-term or
the bond was issued, the issuer had no intention gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap- long-term capital gain or loss.
of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was plies if the obligation is a loan between individu- Long term or short term. If you hold invest-callable at its face amount beginning 10 years als and all of the following requirements are met. ment property more than 1 year, any capital gainafter the issue date. • The lender is not in the business of lend- or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If youThe issuer redeemed the bond at the end of ing money. hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gain11 years (July 1, 2007) for its face amount of or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.• The amount of the loan, plus the amount$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The To determine how long you held the invest-of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000OID earned during the time you held the bond, ment property, begin counting on the date afteror less.$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual the day you acquired the property. The day youinterest also is not taxable. However, you must • Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin- disposed of the property is part of your holdingreport the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a cipal purposes of the loan. period.capital gain.
If the exception applies, or the obligation wasLong-term debt instruments issued after Example. If you bought investment property
issued before March 2, 1984, you do not include1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July on February 5, 2006, and sold it on February 5,
the OID in your income currently. When you sell2, 1982, if a government instrument). If you 2007, your holding period is not more than 1
or redeem the obligation, the part of your gainsell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these year and you have a short-term capital gain or
that is not more than your accrued share of thedebt instruments, the part of your gain that is not loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2007, your
OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest ofmore than your ratable share of the OID at the holding period is more than 1 year and you will
the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on thetime of the sale or redemption is ordinary in- have a long-term capital gain or loss.
sale or redemption is capital loss.come. The rest of the gain is capital gain. If,
Securities traded on established market.however, there was an intention to call the debt
For securities traded on an established securi-instrument before maturity, all of your gain that is
ties market, your holding period begins the daynot more than the entire OID is treated as ordi- Deposit in Insolvent or Bankrupt
after the trade date you bought the securities,nary income at the time of the sale. This treat- Financial Institution and ends on the trade date you sold them.ment of taxable gain also applies to corporate
If you lose money you have on deposit in ainstruments issued after May 27, 1969, under a Do not confuse the trade date with thequalified financial institution that becomes insol-written commitment that was binding on May 27, settlement date, which is the date byvent or bankrupt, you may be able to deduct1969, and at all times thereafter. which the stock must be delivered and
CAUTION
!your loss in one of three ways. payment must be made.Long-term debt instruments issued after
• Ordinary loss.May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-
ernment instrument). If you hold one of these Example. You are a cash method, calendar• Casualty loss.debt instruments, you must include a part of the year taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-
• Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capitalOID in your gross income each year that you cember 29, 2007. According to the rules of the
loss).own the instrument. Your basis in that debt in- stock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery
strument is increased by the amount of OID that of the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on
you have included in your gross income. See January 4, 2008. You received payment of theFor more information, see Deposit in InsolventOriginal Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 7 for sales price on that same day. Report your gainor Bankrupt Financial Institution, in chapter 4 ofinformation about the OID that you must report on your 2007 return, even though you receivedPublication 550.on your tax return. the payment in 2008. The gain is long term or
If you sell or trade the debt instrument before short term depending on whether you held theSale of Annuitymaturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if stock more than 1 year. Your holding period
at the time the instrument was originally issued ended on December 29. If you had sold theThe part of any gain on the sale of an annuitythere was an intention to call it before its matur- stock at a loss, you would also report it on yourcontract before its maturity date that is based onity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the 2007 return.interest accumulated on the contract is ordinaryextent of the entire OID reduced by any amounts income. Automatic investment service. In determin-of OID previously includible in your income. In
ing your holding period for shares bought by thethis case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain.
bank or other agent, full shares are considered
Losses on Section 1244 (SmallMarket discount bonds. If the debt instru- bought first and any fractional shares are con-
ment has market discount and you chose to Business) Stock sidered bought last. Your holding period starts
include the discount in income as it accrued, on the day after the bank's purchase date. If a You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thanincrease your basis in the debt instrument by the share was bought over more than one purchaseas a capital loss, your loss on the sale, trade, oraccrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on date, your holding period for that share is a splitworthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report theits disposition. If you did not choose to include holding period. A part of the share is consideredloss on Form 4797, line 10.the discount in income as it accrued, you must to have been bought on each date that stock
report gain as ordinary interest income up to the Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capital was bought by the bank with the proceeds of
instrument's accrued market discount. The rest gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands. available funds.
of the gain is capital gain. See Market Discount Report the gain on Schedule D (Form 1040). Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investmentBonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550. See Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) property in a trade for other investment propertyA different rule applies to market discount Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550. and your basis for the new property is deter-bonds issued before July 19, 1984, and pur-
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in thechased by you before May 1, 1993. See Market
old property, your holding period for the newdiscount bonds under Discounted Debt Instru- Losses on Small Business property begins on the day following the datements in chapter 4 of Publication 550. Investment Company Stock you acquired the old property.Retirement of debt instrument. Any
See Losses on Small Business Investmentamount that you receive on the retirement of a Property received as a gift. If you receive aCompany Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.debt instrument is treated in the same way as if gift of property and your basis is determined by
you had sold or traded that instrument. the donor's adjusted basis, your holding period
is considered to have started on the same dayHolding Period
Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligation the donor's holding period started.
of an individual that was issued with OID after If you sold or traded investment property, you If your basis is determined by the fair market
March 1, 1984, you generally must include the must determine your holding period for the prop- value of the property, your holding period starts
OID in your income currently, and your gain or erty. Your holding period determines whether on the day after the date of the gift.
Page 100 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Inherited property. If you inherit investment parentheses in column (f). Use a separate line This means that if you buy certain replacement
property, your capital gain or loss on any later for each bad debt. property and make the choice described in this
disposition of that property is treated as a For each bad debt, attach a statement to section, you postpone part or all of your gain.
long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re- your return that contains: You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis
gardless of how long you actually held the prop- of the replacement property as described in Ba-• A description of the debt, including theerty. sis of replacement property, later. Thisamount, and the date it became due, postpones your gain until the year you dispose
Real property bought. To figure how long • The name of the debtor, and any business of the replacement property.
you have held real property bought under an or family relationship between you and the You qualify to make this choice if you meet
unconditional contract, begin counting on the debtor, all the following tests.
day after you received title to it or on the day • The efforts you made to collect the debt, • You sell publicly traded securities at aafter you took possession of it and assumed the and gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-burdens and privileges of ownership, whichever ties traded on an established securitieshappened first. However, taking delivery or pos- • Why you decided the debt was worthless. market.session of real property under an option agree- For example, you could show that the bor-
ment is not enough to start the holding period. rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le- • Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.
The holding period cannot start until there is an gal action to collect would probably not • During the 60-day period beginning on theactual contract of sale. The holding period of the result in payment of any part of the debt. date of the sale, you buy replacementseller cannot end before that time. property. This replacement property mustFiling a claim for refund.  If you do not be either common stock or a partnershipStock dividends. The holding period for stock deduct a bad debt on your original return for the interest in a specialized small business in-you received as a taxable stock dividend begins year it becomes worthless, you can file a claim vestment company (SSBIC). This is anyon the date of distribution. for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do partnership or corporation licensed by theThe holding period for new stock you re- this, use Form 1040X to amend your return for Small Business Administration under sec-ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins on the year the debt became worthless. You must tion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest-the same day as the holding period of the old file it within 7 years from the date your original ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13,stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired in return for that year had to be filed, or 2 years 1993.a ªspin-off,º which is a distribution of stock or from the date you paid the tax, whichever is
securities in a controlled corporation. later. For more information about filing a claim,
see Amended Returns and Claims for Refund in Amount of gain recognized. If you make the
Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding period chapter 1. choice described in this section, you must rec-
for nontaxable stock rights begins on the same ognize gain only up to the following amount.Additional information. For more informa-day as the holding period of the underlying tion, see Nonbusiness Bad Debts in Publication • The amount realized on the sale, minusstock. The holding period for stock acquired 550. For information on business bad debts, seethrough the exercise of stock rights begins on • The cost of any common stock or partner-chapter 10 of Publication 535, Business Ex-the date the right was exercised. ship interest in an SSBIC that you boughtpenses. during the 60-day period beginning on the
date of sale (and did not previously takeNonbusiness Bad Debts Wash Sales into account on an earlier sale of publicly
traded securities).If someone owes you money that you cannot You cannot deduct losses from sales or tradescollect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to of stock or securities in a wash sale.deduct the amount owed to you when you figure If this amount is less than the amount of yourA wash sale occurs when you sell or tradeyour tax for the year the debt becomes worth- gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,stock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysless. subject to the limit described next. If this amountbefore or after the sale you:Bad debts that did not come from operating is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,
your trade or business are nonbusiness bad • Buy substantially identical stock or securi- you must recognize the full amount of your gain.
debts and are deductible as short-term capital ties, Limit on gain postponed. The amount oflosses. To be deductible, nonbusiness bad • Acquire substantially identical stock or se- gain you can postpone each year is limited to thedebts must be totally worthless. You cannot de- curities in a fully taxable trade, or smaller of:duct a partly worthless nonbusiness debt.
• Acquire a contract or option to buy sub- • $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and
Genuine debt required. A debt must be gen- stantially identical stock or securities. file a separate return), or
uine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is genuine if
• $500,000 ($250,000 if you are marriedit arises from a debtor-creditor relationship If your loss was disallowed because of the and file a separate return), minus thebased on a valid and enforceable obligation to wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to the amount of gain you postponed for all ear-repay a fixed or determinable sum of money. cost of the new stock or securities. The result is lier years.your basis in the new stock or securities. This
Basis in bad debt required. To deduct a bad adjustment postpones the loss deduction until
debt, you must have a basis in it Ð that is, you the disposition of the new stock or securities. Basis of replacement property. You mustmust have already included the amount in your For more information, see Wash Sales, in subtract the amount of postponed gain from theincome or loaned out your cash. For example, chapter 4 of Publication 550. basis of your replacement property.you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for
How to report and postpone gain.  Seecourt-ordered child support not paid to you by
Rollover of Gain From chapter 4 of Publication 550 for details on how toyour former spouse. If you are a cash method
report and postpone the gain.taxpayer (as most individuals are), you generally Publicly Traded Securities
cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid
salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends, You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain
and similar items. gains from the sale of publicly traded securities.
How to report bad debts.  Deduct nonbusi-
ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on
Schedule D (Form 1040).
On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the name
of the debtor and ªstatement attachedº in col-
umn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 101

main home is the one in which you live most of adjacent to it, you may be able to exclude the
the time. gain from the sale under certain circumstances.
See Publication 523 for more information.If you sold your main home in 2007, you may
15. be able to exclude from income any gain up to a
Example. You sell the land on which yourlimit of $250,000 ($500,000 on a joint return in
main home is located. You buy another piece ofmost cases). See Excluding the Gain, later. If
land and move your house to it. This sale is notyou can exclude all of the gain, you do not need
Selling Your considered a sale of your main home, and youto report the sale on your tax return.
cannot exclude any gain on the sale of the land.If you have gain that cannot be excluded, it is
taxable. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040).Home More than one home. If you have more thanYou may also have to include Form 4797, Sales
one home, you can exclude gain only from theof Business Property. See Reporting the Sale,
sale of your main home. You must include inlater.
income gain from the sale of any other home. IfIf you have a loss on the sale, you cannotWhat's New you have two homes and live in both of them,deduct it on your return.
your main home is ordinarily the one you live inThe following are main topics in this chapter.New rule for employees of the intelligence most of the time.
• Figuring gain or loss.community. If you are an employee of the
intelligence community, you may be able to ex- Example 1. You own and live in a house in• Basis.clude from income a gain from selling your main the city. You also own a beach house, which you
• Excluding the gain.home, even if you did not live in it for the required use during summer months. The house in the
2 years during the 5-year period ending on the city is your main home.• Ownership and use tests.
date of sale. This choice applies to any sale of a
• Reporting the sale. Example 2. You own a house, but you live inmain home after December 20, 2006. For more
another house that you rent. The rented house isinformation, see Members of the uniformed Other topics include the following.
your main home.services or Foreign Service or employees of the
• Business use or rental of home.intelligence community, later.
Property used partly as your main home. If• Recapturing a federal mortgage subsidy. you use only part of the property as your main
home, the rules discussed in this chapter apply
only to the gain or loss on the sale of that part ofUseful ItemsReminders the property. For details, see Business Use orYou may want to see: Rental of Home, later.
Gulf Opportunity Zone Act of 2005 (Act). Publication
This Act provides tax relief for persons affected
by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. Under ❏ 523 Selling Your Home
this Act, the rules for recapture of a federal Figuring Gain or Loss❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Timemortgage subsidy have changed if you received Homeownersa qualified home improvement loan (QHIL) To figure the gain or loss on the sale of your
funded by a qualified mortgage bond that is a main home, you must know the selling price, theForm (and Instructions)qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone Bond or a QHIL amount realized, and the adjusted basis. Sub-
for an owner-occupied home in the Gulf Oppor- ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains tract the adjusted basis from the amount real-
tunity Zone (GO Zone), Rita GO Zone, or Wilma and Losses ized to get your gain or loss.
GO Zone. For more information, see Recaptur- ❏ 8822 Change of Addressing (Paying Back) a Federal Mortgage Subsidy, Selling price
later. − Selling expenses❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage
Subsidy Amount realizedCredits affecting the basis of a home. If you
claimed the nonbusiness energy property credit
Amount realizedor the residential energy efficient property credit,
− Adjusted basisyou must decrease the basis of your home by
the amount of the credit claimed. See Adjusted Main Home Gain or loss
Basis, later. For more information about these
credits, see also Form 5695, Residential Energy This section explains the term ªmain home.º
Credits. Usually, the home you live in most of the time is Selling Price
your main home and can be a:Change of address. If you change your mail- The selling price is the total amount you receive• House,ing address, be sure to notify the IRS using for your home. It includes money; all notes,Form 8822, Change of Address. Mail it to the mortgages, or other debts assumed by the• Houseboat,Internal Revenue Service Center for your old buyer as part of the sale; and the fair market• Mobile home,address. (Addresses for the Service Centers are value of any other property or any services youon the back of the form.) receive.• Cooperative apartment, or
Home sold with undeducted points. If you • Condominium. Payment by employer. You may have to sellhave not deducted all the points you paid to your home because of a job transfer. If yoursecure a mortgage on your old home, you may To exclude gain under the rules of this chap- employer pays you for a loss on the sale or forbe able to deduct the remaining points in the ter, you generally must have owned and lived in your selling expenses, do not include the pay-year of the sale. See Mortgage ending early the property as your main home for at least 2 ment as part of the selling price. Your employerunder Points in chapter 23. years during the 5-year period ending on the will include it as wages in box 1 of your Form
date of sale. W-2 and you will include it on Form 1040, line 7.
Land. If you sell the land on which your main Option to buy. If you grant an option to buy
home is located, but not the house itself, you your home and the option is exercised, add theIntroduction cannot exclude any gain you have from the sale amount you receive for the option to the selling
This chapter explains the tax rules that apply of the land. However, if you sell vacant land price of your home. If the option is not exercised,
when you sell your main home. Generally, your used as part of your main home and that is you must report the amount as ordinary income
Page 102 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

in the year the option expires. Report this Other Dispositions Determining Basisamount on Form 1040, line 21.
The following rules apply to foreclosures and You need to know your basis in your home toForm 1099-S. If you received Form 1099-S, repossessions, abandonments, trades, trans- determine any gain or loss when you sell it. YourProceeds From Real Estate Transactions, box 2 fers to a spouse, and involuntary conversions basis in your home is determined by how you got(gross proceeds) should show the total amount (such as when your home is destroyed or con- the home. Your basis is its cost if you bought it oryou received for your home. demned). built it. If you got it in some other way (inheri-However, box 2 will not include the fair mar- tance, gift, etc.), its basis is either its fair marketket value of any property other than cash or value when you got it or the adjusted basis of theForeclosure or repossession. If your homenotes, or any services, you received or will re- person you got it from. See Publication 523 for awas foreclosed on or repossessed, you have aceive. Instead, box 4 will be checked to indicate discussion of basis other than cost.sale.your receipt or expected receipt of these items. While you owned your home, you may haveYou figure the gain or loss from the sale inIf you can exclude the entire gain, the person made adjustments (increases or decreases) togenerally the same way as gain or loss from anyresponsible for closing the sale generally will not your home's basis. The result of these adjust-sale. But the selling price of your home used tohave to report it on Form 1099-S. If you do not ments is your home's adjusted basis, which isfigure the amount of your gain or loss depends,receive Form 1099-S, use sale documents and used to figure gain or loss on the sale of yourin part, on whether you were personally liable forother records to figure the total amount you home. See Adjusted Basis, later.repaying the debt secured by the home. Seereceived for your home. You can find more information on basis andPublication 523 for more information.
adjusted basis in chapter 13 of this publicationForm 1099-A and Form 1099-C. Generally,Amount Realized and in Publication 523.you will receive Form 1099-A, Acquisition or
Abandonment of Secured Property, from yourThe amount realized is the selling price minus
lender if your home is transferred in a foreclo-selling expenses. Cost As Basissure. This form will have the information you
Selling expenses. Selling expenses include: need to determine the amount of your gain or The cost of property is the amount you pay for it
loss and any ordinary income from cancellation in cash, debt obligations, other property, or serv-• Commissions,
of debt. If your debt is canceled, you may re- ices.• Advertising fees, ceive Form 1099-C, Cancellation of Debt.
Purchase. If you buy your home, your basis is• Legal fees, and its cost to you. This includes the purchase priceAbandonment. If you abandon your home, and certain settlement or closing costs. Gener-• Loan charges paid by the seller, such as you may have ordinary income. If the aban- ally, your purchase price includes your downloan placement fees or ªpoints.º doned home secures a debt for which you are payment and any debt, such as a first or secondpersonally liable and the debt is canceled, you mortgage or notes you gave the seller in pay-have ordinary income equal to the amount of the ment for the home. If you build, or contract toAdjusted Basis canceled debt. See Publication 523 for more build, a new home, your purchase price caninformation.While you owned your home, you may have include costs of construction, as discussed in
made adjustments (increases or decreases) to Publication 523.Trading homes. If you trade your old home forthe basis. This adjusted basis must be deter- Settlement fees or closing costs. When youanother home, treat the trade as a sale and amined before you can figure gain or loss on the bought your home, you may have paid settle-purchase.sale of your home. For information on how to ment fees or closing costs in addition to thefigure your home's adjusted basis, see Deter- contract price of the property. You can include inExample. You owned and lived in a homemining Basis, later. your basis some of the settlement fees andwith an adjusted basis of $41,000. A real estate
closing costs you paid for buying the home. Youdealer accepted your old home as a trade-in and
Amount of Gain or Loss cannot include in your basis the fees and costsallowed you $50,000 toward a new home priced
for getting a mortgage loan. A fee paid for buyingat $80,000. This is treated as a sale of your oldTo figure the amount of gain or loss, compare the home is any fee you would have had to payhome for $50,000 with a gain of $9,000 ($50,000the amount realized to the adjusted basis. even if you paid cash for the home (that is,± $41,000).
without the need for financing).If the dealer had allowed you $27,000 andGain on sale. If the amount realized is more Chapter 13 lists some of the settlement feesassumed your unpaid mortgage of $23,000 onthan the adjusted basis, the difference is a gain and closing costs that you can include in theyour old home, your sales price would still beand, except for any part you can exclude, gener- basis of property, including your home. It also$50,000 (the $27,000 trade-in allowed plus theally is taxable. lists some settlement costs that cannot be in-$23,000 mortgage assumed).
cluded in basis. Also see Publication 523 forLoss on sale. If the amount realized is less
additional items.than the adjusted basis, the difference is a loss. Transfer to spouse. If you transfer your home
A loss on the sale of your main home cannot be to your spouse, or to your former spouse inci-
deducted. dent to your divorce, you generally have no gain
Adjusted Basisor loss. This is true even if you receive cash orJointly owned home. If you and your spouse other consideration for the home. Therefore, the Adjusted basis is your basis increased or de-sell your jointly owned home and file a joint rules in this chapter do not apply. creased by certain amounts.return, you figure your gain or loss as one tax-
More information. If you need more infor-payer. Increases to basis. These include any:mation, see Transfer to spouse in PublicationSeparate returns. If you file separate re- 523 and Property Settlements in Publication • Additions and other improvements thatturns, each of you must figure your own gain or 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. have a useful life of more than 1 year,loss according to your ownership interest in the
home. Your ownership interest is determined by • Special assessments for local improve-Destruction or condemnation. You have astate law. ments, andsale when your home is destroyed or con-
Joint owners not married. If you and a demned and you receive other property or • Amounts you spent after a casualty to re-
joint owner other than your spouse sell your money in payment, such as insurance or a con- store damaged property.
jointly owned home, each of you must figure demnation award. You may be able to exclude
your own gain or loss according to your owner- all or part of any gain from the destruction or Decreases to basis. These include any:ship interest in the home. Each of you applies condemnation of your home as explained later
the rules discussed in this chapter on an individ- in the discussion about a home that was de- • Gain you postponed from the sale of a
ual basis. stroyed or condemned under Special Situations. previous home before May 7, 1997,
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 103

• General sales taxes claimed as an item- leaks or plastering, and replacing broken win- requirements listed in the discussion of the spe-
dow panes are examples of repairs. cial rules for joint returns, later, under Marriedized deduction on Schedule A (Form
Persons.1040) that were imposed on the purchase Recordkeeping.  You should keepof personal property, such as a houseboat records to prove your home's adjustedused as your home or a mobile home, Ownership and Use Testsbasis. Ordinarily, you must keep rec-
RECORDS
ords for 3 years after the due date for filing your• Deductible casualty losses,
To claim the exclusion, you must meet the own-return for the tax year in which you sold your• Insurance payments you received or ex- ership and use tests. This means that during thehome. But if you sold a home before May 7,pect to receive for casualty losses, 5-year period ending on the date of the sale, you1997, and postponed tax on any gain, the basis
must have:of that home affects the basis of the new home• Payments you received for granting an
you bought. Keep records proving the basis ofeasement or right-of-way, • Owned the home for at least 2 years (theboth homes as long as they are needed for tax ownership test), and• Depreciation allowed or allowable if you purposes.used your home for business or rental pur- • Lived in the home as your main home forThe records you should keep include:poses, at least 2 years (the use test).
• Proof of the home's purchase price and• Residential energy credit (generally al- purchase expenses,lowed from 1977 through 1987) claimed Exception. If you owned and lived in the prop-
for the cost of energy improvements that • Receipts and other records for all improve- erty as your main home for less than 2 years,
you added to the basis of your home, ments, additions, and other items that af- you can still claim an exclusion in some cases.
fect the home's adjusted basis, The maximum amount you may be able to ex-• Nonbusiness energy property credit (al- clude will be reduced. See Reduced Maximumlowed beginning in 2006) claimed for mak- • Any worksheets you used to figure the ad- Exclusion, later.justed basis of the home you sold, theing certain energy saving improvements
gain or loss on the sale, the exclusion, andthat you added to the basis of your home, Example 1Ðhome owned and occupiedthe taxable gain,• Residential energy efficient property credit for 3 years. Amanda bought and moved into
• Any Form 2119, Sale of Your Home, that(allowed beginning in 2006) claimed for her main home in September 2004. She sold the
you filed to postpone gain from the sale ofmaking certain energy saving improve- home at a gain on September 15, 2007. During
a previous home before May 7, 1997, and the 5-year period ending on the date of salements that you added to the basis of your
(September 16, 2002 ± September 15, 2007),home, • Any worksheets you used to prepare Form she owned and lived in the home for 3 years.2119, such as the Adjusted Basis of Home• Adoption credit you claimed for improve- She meets the ownership and use tests.Sold Worksheet or the Capital Improve-ments added to the basis of your home,
ments Worksheet from the Form 2119 in- Example 2Ðownership test met but use• Nontaxable payments from an adoption structions. test not met. Dan bought a home in 2001.assistance program of your employer that
After living in it for 6 months, he moved out. Heyou used for improvements you added to
never lived in the home again and sold it at athe basis of your home,
gain on June 28, 2007. He owned the home• Energy conservation subsidy excluded during the entire 5-year period ending on thefrom your gross income because you re- Excluding the Gain date of sale (June 29, 2002 ± June 28, 2007).ceived it (directly or indirectly) from a pub- However, he did not live in it for the required 2lic utility after 1992 to buy or install any You may qualify to exclude from your income all years. He meets the ownership test but not the
energy conservation measure. An energy or part of any gain from the sale of your main use test. He cannot exclude any part of his gain
conservation measure is an installation or home. This means that, if you qualify, you will on the sale, unless he qualified for a reduced
modification that is primarily designed ei- not have to pay tax on the gain up to the limit maximum exclusion (explained later).
ther to reduce consumption of electricity or described under Maximum Exclusion, next. To
natural gas or to improve the management qualify, you must meet the ownership and use
of energy demand for a home, and tests described later. Period of Ownership and Use
• District of Columbia first-time homebuyer You can choose not to take the exclusion by The required 2 years of ownership and use dur-credit (allowed on the purchase of a princi- including the gain from the sale in your gross ing the 5-year period ending on the date of thepal residence in the District of Columbia income on your tax return for the year of the sale do not have to be continuous.beginning on August 5, 1997). sale.  You meet the tests if you can show that you
owned and lived in the property as your mainIf you have any amount of taxable gain home for either 24 full months or 730 days (365Improvements. These add to the value of from the sale of your home, you may × 2) during the 5-year period ending on the dateyour home, prolong its useful life, or adapt it to have to increase your withholding or
CAUTION
! of sale.new uses. You add the cost of additions and make estimated tax payments. See Publication
other improvements to the basis of your prop- 505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax.
erty. Temporary absence. Short temporary ab-
sences for vacations or other seasonal ab-Maximum ExclusionExamples. Putting a recreation room or an- sences, even if you rent out the property during
other bathroom in your unfinished basement, the absences, are counted as periods of use.You can exclude up to $250,000 of the gain onputting up a new fence, putting in new plumbing The following examples assume that the re-the sale of your main home if all of the followingor wiring, putting on a new roof, or paving your duced maximum exclusion (discussed later)are true.unpaved driveway are improvements. An addi- does not apply to the sales.
tion to your house, such as a new deck, a sun- • You meet the ownership test.
room, or a new garage, is also an improvement. Example 1. David Johnson, who is single,• You meet the use test. bought and moved into his home on February 1,
Repairs. These maintain your home in good 2005. Each year during 2005 and 2006, David• During the 2-year period ending on the
condition but do not add to its value or prolong left his home for a 2-month summer vacation.date of the sale, you did not exclude gain
its life. You do not add their cost to the basis of David sold the house on March 1, 2007. Al-from the sale of another home.
your property. though the total time David used his home is
You may be able to exclude up to $500,000 of less than 2 years (21 months), he may exclude
Examples. Repainting your house inside or the gain on the sale of your main home if you are any gain up to $250,000. The 2-month vacations
outside, fixing your gutters or floors, repairing married and file a joint return and meet the are short temporary absences and are counted
Page 104 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

as periods of use in determining whether David Example. David bought and moved into a • Both you and your spouse meet the use
test.home in 1999. He lived in it as his main home forused the home for the required 2 years.
21/2 years. For the next 6 years, he did not live in • During the 2-year period ending on theExample 2. Professor Paul Beard, who is it because he was on qualified official extended date of the sale, neither you nor yoursingle, bought and moved into a house on Au- duty with the Army. He then sold the home at a spouse excluded gain from the sale of an-gust 28, 2004. He lived in it as his main home gain in 2007. To meet the use test, David other home.chooses to suspend the 5-year test period forcontinuously until January 5, 2006, when he
If either spouse does not satisfy all these re-the 6 years he was on qualified official extendedwent abroad for a 1-year sabbatical leave. On
quirements, the maximum exclusion that can beduty. This means he can disregard those 6February 6, 2007, 1 month after returning from
claimed by the couple is the total of the maxi-years. Therefore, David's 5-year test period con-the leave, Paul sold the house at a gain. Be-
mum exclusions that each spouse would qualifysists of the 5 years before he went on qualifiedcause his leave was not a short temporary ab-
for if not married and the amounts were figuredofficial extended duty. He meets the ownershipsence, he cannot include the period of leave to
separately. For this purpose, each spouse isand use tests because he owned and lived in themeet the 2-year use test. He cannot exclude any
treated as owning the property during the periodhome for 21/2 years during this test period.part of his gain, because he did not use the
that either spouse owned the property.residence for the required 2 years. Period of suspension. The period of sus-
pension cannot last more than 10 years. To- Example 1 Ð one spouse sells a home.Ownership and use tests met at different gether, the 10-year suspension period and the Emily sells her home in June 2007. She marriestimes. You can meet the ownership and use 5-year test period can be as long as, but no Jamie later in the year. She meets the owner-tests during different 2-year periods. However, more than, 15 years. You cannot suspend the ship and use tests, but Jamie does not. Emilyyou must meet both tests during the 5-year pe- 5-year period for more than one property at a can exclude up to $250,000 of gain on a sepa-riod ending on the date of the sale. time. You can revoke your choice to suspend the rate or joint return for 2007. The $500,000 maxi-
5-year period at any time. mum exclusion for certain joint returns does notExample. In 1998, Helen Jones lived in a For more information about the suspension apply because Jamie does not meet the userented apartment. The apartment building was of the 5-year test period, see Members of the test.later changed to a condominium, and she uniformed services or Foreign Service or em-bought her apartment on December 3, 2004. In ployees of the intelligence community in Publi- Example 2 Ð each spouse sells a home.2005, Helen became ill and on April 14 of that cation 523. The facts are the same as in Example 1 exceptyear she moved to her daughter's home. On July that Jamie also sells a home in 2007 before he12, 2007, while still living in her daughter's Exception for individuals with a disability. marries Emily. He meets the ownership and usehome, she sold her apartment. There is an exception to the use test if, during tests on his home, but Emily does not. Emily and
Helen can exclude gain on the sale of her the 5-year period before the sale of your home: Jamie can each exclude up to $250,000 of gain.
apartment because she met the ownership and The $500,000 maximum exclusion for certain• You become physically or mentally unableuse tests during the 5-year period from July 13, joint returns does not apply because Emily andto care for yourself, and2002, to July 12, 2007, the date she sold the Jamie do not jointly meet the use test for the
apartment. She owned her apartment from De- • You owned and lived in your home as your same home.
cember 3, 2004, to July 12, 2007 (more than 2 main home for a total of at least 1 year.
years). She lived in the apartment from July 13, Death of spouse before sale. If your spouseUnder this exception, you are considered to live2002 (the beginning of the 5-year period), to died and you did not remarry before the date ofin your home during any time that you own theApril 14, 2005 (more than 2 years). sale, you are considered to have owned andhome and live in a facility (including a nursing lived in the property as your main home duringThe time Helen lived in her daughter's home home) that is licensed by a state or political any period of time when your spouse owned andduring the 5-year period can be counted as a subdivision to care for persons in your condition. lived in it as a main home.period of ownership, and the time she lived in
If you meet this exception to the use test, youher rented apartment during the 5-year period
Home transferred from spouse. If yourstill have to meet the 2-out-of-5-year ownershipcan be counted as a period of use.
home was transferred to you by your spouse (ortest to claim the exclusion.
former spouse if the transfer was incident toCooperative apartment. If you sold stock in a
divorce), you are considered to have owned itPrevious home destroyed or condemned.cooperative housing corporation, the ownership
during any period of time when your spouseFor the ownership and use tests, you add theand use tests are met if, during the 5-year period owned it.time you owned and lived in a previous homeending on the date of sale, you:
that was destroyed or condemned to the time• Owned the stock for at least 2 years, and Use of home after divorce. You are consid-you owned and lived in the home on whose sale
ered to have used property as your main homewhich you wish to exclude gain. This rule applies• Lived in the house or apartment that the during any period when:if any part of the basis of the home you soldstock entitles you to occupy as your main
depended on the basis of the destroyed or con-home for at least 2 years. • You owned it, and
demned home. Otherwise, you must have
• Your spouse or former spouse is allowedowned and lived in the same home for 2 of the 5Members of the uniformed services or For- to live in it under a divorce or separationyears before the sale to qualify for the exclusion.eign Service or employees of the intelligence instrument and uses it as his or her main
community. You can choose to have the home.
5-year test period for ownership and use sus- Married Personspended during any period you or your spouse
serve on ªqualified official extended dutyº as a Reduced MaximumIf you and your spouse file a joint return for the
member of the uniformed services or Foreign year of sale, you can exclude gain if either ExclusionService of the United States or as an employee spouse meets the ownership and use tests. (But
of the intelligence community. This means that see Special rules for joint returns, next.) You can claim an exclusion, but the maximum
you may be able to meet the 2-year use test amount of gain you can exclude will be reduced
even if, because of your service, you did not Special rules for joint returns. You can ex- if either of the following is true.
actually live in your home for at least the re- clude up to $500,000 of the gain on the sale of
quired 2 years during the 5-year period ending 1. You did not meet the ownership and useyour main home if all of the following are true.
tests, but the reason you sold the homeon the date of sale.
• You are married and file a joint return for was:If this helps you qualify to exclude gain, you the year.can choose to have the 5-year test period sus- a. A change in place of employment,pended by filing a return for the year of sale that • Either you or your spouse meets the own-
ership test.does not include the gain. b. Health, or
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 105

Five Year Used as Used asc. Unforeseen circumstances (as defined If you used the home for business or to
Period  Home  Rental produce rental income, you may have to uselater).
Form 4797 to report the sale of the business or 1/31/02 ±2. Your exclusion would have been disal- rental part (or the sale of the entire property if5/31/03 16 months
used entirely for business or rental). See Busi-lowed because of the rule described in
 6/1/03 ± ness Use or Rental of Home in Publication 523More Than One Home Sold During 2-Year 3/31/05  22 months and the instructions for Form 4797.Period, later, except that the reason you
sold the home was:  4/1/05 ± Installment sale. Some sales are made under1/30/07 22 months arrangements that provide for part or all of thea. A change in place of employment, 38 months 22 months selling price to be paid in a later year. Theseb. Health, or Amy can exclude gain up to $250,000. However, sales are called ªinstallment sales.º If you fi-
she cannot exclude the part of the gain equal to nance the buyer's purchase of your home your-c. Unforeseen circumstances (as defined
the depreciation she claimed or could have self, instead of having the buyer get a loan ornext).
claimed for renting the house, as explained after mortgage from a bank, you probably have an
Example 2. installment sale. You may be able to report theUse Worksheet 3 in Publication 523 to figure
part of the gain you cannot exclude on the in-your reduced maximum exclusion.
Example 2. William owned and used a stallment basis.
house as his main home from 2001 through Use Form 6252, Installment Sale Income, toUnforeseen circumstances. The sale of your
2004. On January 1, 2005, he moved to another report the sale. Enter your exclusion on line 15main home is because of an unforeseen circum-
state. He rented his house from that date until of Form 6252.stance if your primary reason for the sale is the
April 30, 2007, when he sold it. During the 5-yearoccurrence of an event that you could not rea- Seller-financed mortgage. If you sell yourperiod ending on the date of sale (May 1, 2002 ±sonably have anticipated before buying and oc- home and hold a note, mortgage, or other finan-April 30, 2007), William owned and lived in thecupying your main home. For more information cial agreement, the payments you receive gen-house for 32 months (more than 2 years). Heon unforeseen circumstances, see Publication erally consist of both interest and principal. Youmust report the sale on Form 4797. He can523. must separately report as interest income theexclude gain up to $250,000. However, he can- interest you receive as part of each payment. Ifnot exclude the part of the gain equal to the the buyer of your home uses the property as aMore Than One Home Sold depreciation he claimed or could have claimed main or second home, you must also report thefor renting the house, as explained next.During 2-Year Period name, address, and social security number
(SSN) of the buyer on line 1 of either Schedule BDepreciation after May 6, 1997. If you wereYou generally cannot exclude gain on the sale of (Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A). Theentitled to take depreciation deductions be-your home if, during the 2-year period ending on buyer must give you his or her SSN and youcause you used your home for business pur-the date of the sale, you sold another home at a must give the buyer your SSN. Failure to meetposes or as rental property, you cannot excludegain and excluded all or part of that gain. If you these requirements may result in a $50 penaltythe part of your gain equal to any depreciationcannot exclude the gain, you must include it in for each failure. If you or the buyer does notallowed or allowable as a deduction for periodsyour income. have and is not eligible to get an SSN, seeafter May 6, 1997. If you can show by adequate
Social Security Number in chapter 1.records or other evidence that the depreciationException. You still can claim an exclusion, allowed was less than the amount allowable, thebut the maximum amount of gain you can ex- More information. For more information onamount you cannot exclude is the amount al-clude will be reduced if the reason you sold the installment sales, see Publication 537, Install-lowed. See Publication 544 for more informa-home was: ment Sales.tion.
• A change in place of employment,
Property used partly for business or rental.
• Health, or If you used property partly as a home and partly
for business or to produce rental income, see Special Situations• Unforeseen circumstances (as defined
Publication 523.earlier).
The situations that follow may affect your exclu-
For more information about this exception, see sion.
More Than One Home Sold During 2-Year Pe- Sale of home acquired in like-kind exchange.riod in Publication 523. You cannot claim the exclusion if:Reporting the Sale
• You acquired your home in a like-kind ex-
change (also known as a section 1031 ex-
change); or your basis in your home is
Business Use or determined by reference to the basis of
the home in the hands of the person whoDo not report the 2007 sale of your main home
acquired the property in a like-kind ex-Rental of Home on your tax return unless:
change (for example, you received the
• You have a gain and you do not qualify to home from that person as a gift), andYou may be able to exclude gain from the sale of exclude all of it, ora home that you have used for business or to • You sold the home during the 5-year pe-
riod beginning with the date your homeproduce rental income. But you must meet the • You have a gain and you choose not to
was acquired in the like-kind exchange.ownership and use tests. exclude it.
Gain from a like-kind exchange is not taxable.
Example 1. On May 29, 2001, Amy bought  If you have any taxable gain on the sale of This means that gain will not be recognized until
a house. She moved in on that date and lived in your main home that cannot be excluded, report you sell the property you receive. To defer gain
from a like-kind exchange, you must have ex-it until May 31, 2003, when she moved out of the the entire gain realized on Schedule D (Form
changed business or investment property forhouse and put it up for rent. The house was 1040). Report it in column (f) of line 1 or line 8 of
business or investment property of a like kind.rented from June 1, 2003, to March 31, 2005. Schedule D, as short term or long term capital For more information about like-kind ex-Amy moved back into the house on April 1, gain depending on how long you owned the changes, see Publication 544, Sales and Other2005, and lived there until she sold it on January home. If you qualify for an exclusion, show it on Dispositions of Assets.30, 2007. During the 5-year period ending on the the line directly below the line on which you
date of the sale (January 31, 2002 ± January report the gain. Write ªSection 121 exclusionº in Home relinquished in a like-kind exchange.
30, 2007), Amy owned and lived in the house for column (a) of that line and show the amount of If you use your main home partly for business or
more than 2 years as shown in the following the exclusion in column (f) as a loss (in paren- rental purposes and then exchange the home
table. theses). for another property, see Publication 523.
Page 106 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Expatriates. You cannot claim the exclusion if income for your family size for that year
the expatriation tax applies to you. The expatria- (related to the income requirements a per-
tion tax applies to U.S. citizens who have re- son must meet to qualify for the federally
nounced their citizenship (and long-term subsidized program). 16.
residents who have ended their residency). For
more information about the expatriation tax, see When recapture does not apply. The recap-chapter 4 of Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for ture does not apply if any of the following situa-Aliens. Reporting Gainstions apply to you.
Home destroyed or condemned. If your • Your mortgage loan was a qualified homehome was destroyed or condemned, any gain improvement loan (QHIL) of not more than and Losses(for example, because of insurance proceeds $15,000 used for alterations, repairs, andyou received) qualifies for the exclusion. improvements that protect or improve theAny part of the gain that cannot be excluded basic livability or energy efficiency of your(because it is more than the maximum exclu- home. Introductionsion) can be postponed under the rules ex-
• Your mortgage loan was a QHIL of notplained in: This chapter discusses how to report capitalmore than $150,000 for a QHIL used to• Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, gains and losses from sales, exchanges, andrepair damage from Hurricane Katrina toand Thefts, in the case of a home that was other dispositions of investment property onhomes in the hurricane disaster area; adestroyed, or Schedule D of Form 1040. The discussion in-QHIL funded by a qualified mortgage bond cludes the following topics.that is a qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone• Chapter 1 of Publication 544, in the case
Bond; or a QHIL for an owner-occupiedof a home that was condemned. • How to report short-term gains and losses.home in the Gulf Opportunity Zone (GO
• How to report long-term gains and losses.Zone), Rita GO Zone, or Wilma GO Zone.Sale of remainder interest. Subject to the See Publication 4492, Information for Tax- • How to figure capital loss carryovers.other rules in this chapter, you can choose to payers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina,exclude gain from the sale of a remainder inter- • How to figure your tax on a net capitalRita, and Wilma, for more information).est in your home. If you make this choice, you gain.• The home is disposed of as a result ofcannot choose to exclude gain from your sale of • An illustrated example of how to completeyour death.any other interest in the home that you sell
Schedule D.separately. • You dispose of the home more than 9
years after the date you closed your mort-Exception for sales to related persons. If you sell or otherwise dispose of propertygage loan.You cannot exclude gain from the sale of a used in a trade or business or for the productionremainder interest in your home to a related • You transfer the home to your spouse, or of income, see Publication 544, Sales and Otherperson. Related persons include your brothers to your former spouse incident to a di- Dispositions of Assets, before completingand sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, vorce, where no gain is included in your Schedule D.spouse, ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), income.and lineal descendants (children, grandchildren,
Useful Items• You dispose of the home at a loss.etc.). Related persons also include certain cor-
You may want to see:porations, partnerships, trusts, and exempt or- • Your home is destroyed by a casualty, andganizations. you replace it on its original site within 2 Publicationyears after the end of the tax year when
the destruction happened (within 5 years if ❏ 537 Installment Sales
the home was in the Hurricane Katrina dis- ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofaster area and was destroyed by reasonRecapturing (Paying Assetsof the hurricane after August 24, 2005).
Back) a Federal ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses• You refinance your mortgage loan (unless
you later meet the conditions listed previ-Mortgage Subsidy Form (and Instructions)ously under When the recapture applies).
❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital GainsIf you financed your home under a federally
and LossesNotice of amounts. At or near the time ofsubsidized program (loans from tax-exempt
settlement of your mortgage loan, you shouldqualified mortgage bonds or loans with mort- ❏ 4797 Sales of Business Propertyreceive a notice that provides the federally sub-gage credit certificates), you may have to recap-
❏ 6252 Installment Sale Incomesidized amount and other information you willture all or part of the benefit you received from
need to figure your recapture tax.that program when you sell or otherwise dispose ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsof your home. You recapture the benefit by in- How to figure and report the recapture. Thecreasing your federal income tax for the year of recapture tax is figured on Form 8828, Recap-the sale. You may have to pay this recapture tax ture of Federal Mortgage Subsidy. If you selleven if you can exclude your gain from income your home and your mortgage is subject to re-under the rules discussed earlier; that exclusion Reporting Capitalcapture rules, you must file Form 8828 even ifdoes not affect the recapture tax. you do not owe a recapture tax. Attach Form
8828 to your Form 1040. For more information, Gains and LossesLoans subject to recapture rules. The re-
see Form 8828 and its instructions.capture applies to loans that:
Report capital gains and losses on Schedule D
1. Came from the proceeds of qualified mort- (Form 1040). Enter your sales and trades of
gage bonds, or stocks, bonds, etc., and real estate (if not re-
ported on Form 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or2. Were based on mortgage credit certifi- 8824) on line 1 of Part I or line 8 of Part II, ascates. appropriate. Include all these transactions evenThe recapture also applies to assumptions of if you did not receive a Form 1099-B, Proceedsthese loans. From Broker and Barter Exchange Transac-
tions, or Form 1099-S, Proceeds From RealWhen the recapture applies. The recapture Estate Transactions (or substitute statement).of the federal mortgage subsidy applies only if You can use Schedule D-1 as a continuationyou meet both of the following conditions.
schedule to report more transactions.• Within the first 9 years after the date you Be sure to add all sales price entries in col-close your mortgage loan, you sell or oth- umn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total onerwise dispose of your home at a gain. line 3. Also add all sales price entries in column
(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.• Your income for the year of disposition is
more than that year's adjusted qualifying Then add the following amounts reported to you
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 107

for 2007 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-S Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a You also report the following in Part II of
(or on substitute statements): nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your Schedule D:
name but actually belong to someone else),• Proceeds from transactions involving • Undistributed long-term capital gains fromreport on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only thestocks, bonds, and other securities, and a mutual fund (or other regulated invest-proceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol- ment company) or real estate investment• Gross proceeds from real estate transac- lowing amounts reported to you for 2007 on trust (REIT),tions (other than the sale of your main Forms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state-
home if you had no taxable gain) not re- ments) that you are not reporting on another • Your share of long-term capital gains or
ported on another form or schedule. form or schedule included with your return: losses from partnerships, S corporations,
and fiduciaries,If this total is more than the total of lines 3 and 1. Proceeds from transactions involving10, attach a statement to your return explaining stocks, bonds, and other securities, and • All capital gain distributions from mutualthe difference. funds and REITs not reported directly on2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-
line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Formtions (other than the sale of your mainInstallment sales. You cannot use the install- 1040, andhome if you are not required to report it).ment method to report a gain from the sale of
stock or securities traded on an established se- • Long-term capital loss carryovers.If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total of
curities market. You must report the entire gain lines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your return
in the year of sale (the year in which the trade  The result after combining these items withexplaining the reason for the difference.
date occurs). your other long-term capital gains and losses isFile Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with the your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 ofIRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi-Passive activity gains and losses. If you Schedule D).nee in 2007, you must file a Form 1099-B orhave gains or losses from a passive activity, you
Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS. Capital gain distributions only. You domay also have to report them on Form 8582. In
Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with a not have to file Schedule D if both of the follow-some cases, the loss may be limited under the
Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of ing are true.passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its
U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-separate instructions for more information about • The only amounts you would have to re-nue Service Center by February 28, 2008reporting capital gains and losses from a pas- port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-(March 31, 2008, if you file Form 1099-B or Formsive activity. butions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (or1099-S electronically). Give the actual owner of substitute statement).the proceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B orForm 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop-
Form 1099-S by January 31, 2008. On Formerty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi- • You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,
1099-B, you should be listed as the ªPayer.º Theties, through a broker, you should receive Form or 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substitute
other owner should be listed as the ªRecipient.º1099-B or equivalent statement from the broker. statement).
On Form 1099-S, you should be listed as theUse the Form 1099-B or the equivalent state-
ªFiler.º The other owner should be listed as thement to complete Schedule D.
If both of the above statements are true, reportªTransferor.º You do not, however, have to file aReport the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of
your capital gain distributions directly on line 13Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceedsForm 1099-B as the gross sales price in column
of Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also,for your spouse. For more information about the(d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,
use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gainreporting requirements and the penalties for fail-whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-
Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions toure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that gross
figure your tax.see the General Instructions for Forms 1099,proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions
1098, 5498, and W-2G.and option premiums were reported to the IRS, You can report your capital gain distributionsenter that net sales price in column (d) of either on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on FormSale of property bought at various times. Ifline 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies. 1040, if both of the following are true.you sell a block of stock or other property that If the net sales price is entered in column (d),
you bought at various times, report the • None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substitutedo not include the commissions and option pre-
short-term gain or loss from the sale on one line statements) you received have an amountmiums in column (e).
in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain or in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.
Form 1099-S transactions. If you sold or loss on one line in Part II. Write ªVariousº in • You do not have to file Form 1040 for anytraded reportable real estate, you generally column (b) for the ªDate acquired.º See Compre- other capital gains or losses.should receive from the real estate reporting hensive Example later in this chapter.
person a Form 1099-S showing the gross pro-
ceeds. Sale expenses.  Add to your cost or other Total net gain or loss. To figure your total net
ªReportable real estateº is defined as any basis any expense of sale such as brokers' fees, gain or loss, combine your net short-term capital
present or future ownership interest in any of the commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-term
following: option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result on
column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule Schedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses are• Improved or unimproved land, including air D, whichever applies, unless you reported the more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next.space, net sales price amount in column (d). If both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 of• Inherently permanent structures, including For more information about adjustments to Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gainany residential, commercial, or industrial basis, see chapter 13. Tax Rates, later.building,
Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain or• A condominium unit and its accessory fix- Capital Lossesloss on the sale or trade of investment propertytures and common elements, including held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain orland, and If your capital losses are more than your capitalloss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If the gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.• Stock in a cooperative housing corporation amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show it Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,(as defined in section 216 of the Internal in parentheses. enclosed in parentheses.Revenue Code). You combine your share of short-term capital
gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,
Limit on deduction. Your allowable capitalA ªreal estate reporting personº could include and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital loss
loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is thethe buyer's attorney, your attorney, the title or carryover, with your other short-term capital
lesser of:escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro- gains and losses to figure your net short-term
ker, the buyer's broker, or the person acquiring capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D. • $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and filethe biggest interest in the property. a separate return), orYour Form 1099-S will show the gross pro- Long-term gains and losses. A capital gain
• Your total net loss as shown on line 16 ofceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol- or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-
Schedule D.low the instructions for Schedule D to report erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital
these transactions and include them on line 1 or gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Schedule
You can use your total net loss to reduce your8 as appropriate. However, report like-kind ex- D. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,
income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.changes on Form 8824 instead. show it in parentheses.
Page 108 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-Table 16-1. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
tion about the limit on investment interest, see
chapter 3 of Publication 550.THEN your
maximum capital Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain or loss
IF your net capital gain is from ... gain rate is ... from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,
antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-collectibles gain 28% num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-
erage held more than 1 year.gain on qualified small business stock minus the section
1202 exclusion 28% Gain on qualified small business stock. If
you realized a gain from qualified small businessunrecaptured section 1250 gain 25% stock that you held more than 5 years, you
generally can exclude up to 50% of your gainother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25%
from income. The exclusion can be up to 60%or higher 15%
for certain empowerment zone business stock.
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is The eligible gain minus your section 1202 exclu-
lower than 25% 5% sion is a 28% rate gain. See Gains on Qualified
Small Business Stock in chapter 4 of Publication
550.1 Other gain means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on qualified small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.  Generally,
this is any part of your capital gain from selling
section 1250 property (real property) that is due
to depreciation (but not more than your net sec-Capital loss carryover. If you have a total net Decedent's capital loss. A capital loss tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in theloss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more than sustained by a decedent during his or her last 28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you tax year (or carried over to that year from an Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions
can carry over the unused part to the next year earlier year) can be deducted only on the final to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
and treat it as if you had incurred it in that next income tax return filed for the decedent. The For more information about section 1250 prop-
year. If part of the loss is still unused, you can capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply in erty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of
carry it over to later years until it is completely this situation. The decedent's estate cannot de- Publication 544.
used up. duct any of the loss or carry it over to following
Tax computation using maximum capitalyears.When you figure the amount of any capital gains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends andloss carryover to the next year, you must take Joint and separate returns. If you and your Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule Dthe current year's allowable deduction into ac- spouse once filed separate returns and are now Tax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figurecount, whether or not you claimed it. filing a joint return, combine your separate capi- your tax if you have qualified dividends or netWhen you carry over a loss, it remains long tal loss carryovers. However, if you and your capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-term or short term. A long-term capital loss you spouse once filed a joint return and are now ule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains.carry over to the next tax year will reduce that filing separate returns, any capital loss carryover Schedule D Tax Worksheet. You must useyear's long-term capital gains before it reduces from the joint return can be deducted only on the the Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedulethat year's short-term capital gains. return of the spouse who actually had the loss. D instructions to figure your tax if:
Figuring your carryover. The amount of • You have to file Schedule D, andyour capital loss carryover is the amount of your
total net loss that is more than the lesser of: • Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or lineCapital Gain Tax Rates 19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for more than zero.The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain arethe year, or generally lower than the tax rates that apply to See Comprehensive Example, later, for an ex-2. Your taxable income increased by your al- other income. These lower rates are called the ample of how to figure your tax using the Sched-lowable capital loss deduction for the year maximum capital gain rates. ule D Tax Worksheet.and your deduction for personal exemp- The term ªnet capital gainº means the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Taxtions. amount by which your net long-term capital gain Worksheet. If you do not have to use thefor the year is more than your net short-termIf your deductions are more than your gross Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explainedcapital loss.income for the tax year, use your negative tax- above) and any of the following apply, use the
able income in computing the amount in item (2). For 2007, the maximum capital gain rates Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-
are 5%, 15%, 25%, or 28%. See Table 16-1 for  Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work- sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form
details. 1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.sheet in Publication 550 to determine the part of
your capital loss for 2007 that you can carry over If you figure your tax using the maxi- • You received qualified dividends. (Seeto 2008. mum capital gain rates and the regular Qualified Dividends in chapter 8.)
tax computation results in a lower tax,
TIP • You do not have to file Schedule D andExample. Bob and Gloria sold securities in the regular tax computation applies. you received capital gain distributions.2007. The sales resulted in a capital loss of
(See Capital gain distributions only, ear-$7,000. They had no other capital transactions. Example. All of your net capital gain is from lier.)Their taxable income was $26,000. On their joint selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would2007 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un- • Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are bothbe 28%. Because you are single and your tax-used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), more than zero.able income is $25,000, none of your taxablecan be carried over to 2008. income will be taxed above the 15% rate. TheIf their capital loss had been $2,000, their 28% rate does not apply.capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.
They would have no carryover. Investment interest deducted. If you claim a ComprehensiveUse short-term losses first. When you fig- deduction for investment interest, you may have
ure your capital loss carryover, use your to reduce the amount of your net capital gain Example
short-term capital losses first, even if you in- that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.
curred them after a long-term capital loss. If you Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gain Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wages
have not reached the limit on the capital loss you choose to include in investment income from her job, she has income from stocks and
deduction after using the short-term capital when figuring the limit on your investment inter- other securities. For the 2007 tax year, she had
losses, use the long-term capital losses until you est deduction. This is done on the Schedule D the following capital gains and losses, which she
reach the limit. Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends and reports on Schedule D. All the Forms 1099 she
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 109

received showed net sales prices. Her filled-in basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $9,300 also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-
Schedule D is shown in this chapter. ($14,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-
enters in column (f) of line 8. sheet. Her filled-in 28% Rate Gain Worksheet isCapital gains and losses Ð Schedule D.
shown below.In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.Emily sold stock in two different companies that
for $4,100. This was qualified small businessshe held for less than a year. In June, she sold She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-stock that she had bought in September 2002.100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she had over Worksheet (not illustrated) in her 2006 edi-bought in February. She had an adjusted basis Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 gain tion of Publication 550, so she could properlyof $650 in the stock and sold it for $900, for a which she enters in column (f) of line 8. Because report her loss carryover for the 2007 tax yeargain of $250. In July, she sold 25 shares of she held the stock more than 5 years, she has a without refiguring it.Computer Co. stock that she bought in June. $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She claims the
She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,500 Tax computation. Because Emily hasexclusion on the line below by entering $1,500
and she sold it for $2,000, for a loss of $500. She as a loss in column (f). She also enters the gains on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D,
reports these short-term transactions on line 1 in exclusion as a positive amount on line 2 of the she checks the ªYesº box on line 17 and goes toPart I of Schedule D. 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. line 18. On line 18 she enters $450 from line 7 ofEmily had three other stock sales that she the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18She received a Form 1099-B (not shown)reports as long-term transactions on line 8 in is greater than zero, she checks the ªNoº box onfrom her broker for each of these transactions.Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60 line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheetshares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited
to figure her tax.the Car Co. stock from her father. Its fair market Reconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emily
value at the time of his death was $2,500, which makes sure that the total of the amounts re- After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400. ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched- of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofBecause she had inherited the stock, her loss is ule D is not less than the total of the amounts Form 1040 through line 43. She enters thea long-term loss, regardless of how long she and shown on the Forms 1099-B she received from amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of theher father actually held the stock. She enters the her broker. For 2007, the total is $23,100. Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out theloss in column (f) of line 8. rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax isCapital loss carryover from 2006. EmilyIn June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.
$3,223. This is less than the $4,113 tax shehas a capital loss carryover to 2007 of $800, ofstock for $14,000. She had bought 100 of those
would have figured without the capital gain taxwhich $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500shares in 1996, for $1,000. She had bought 100
is long-term capital loss. She enters these rates.more shares in 1998 for $2,200, and an addi-
amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. Shetional 300 shares in 2001 for $1,500. Her total
28% Rate Gain Worksheet for Emily JonesÐLine 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules
D and D-1 ................................................................... . 1. 0
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain .... 2. 1,500
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ............................ . 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
............... 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. ( 500)box 11, code C ................................................................ .
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... . 6. ( 550)
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18 ............................................................. . 7. 450
Page 110 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Schedule D Tax Worksheet
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 35 of the Instructions for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b);
or
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) is zero or less.
Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) ........................... 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or Form
1040NR, line 10b) .............................. 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952 (used to
figure investment interest expense
deduction), line 4g .................. 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e* .. 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ......... 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0- ..................... 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ....... 7. 9,350
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 ................... 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0- ..................... 9. 9,350
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ........................................................ 10. 9,350
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D ............................... 11. 450
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 ........................................... 12. 450
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10. ............................................................ 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. ............................................ 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
• The amount on line 1 or
}
•  $31,850 if single or married filing separately; ....... 15. 30,000$63,700 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$42,650 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15 ............................. 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ........ 17. 20,650
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 ......................................... © 18. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip lines 19 and 20 and go to line 21. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15 ............................................... © 19. 8,900
20. Multiply line 19 by 5% (.05) ............................................................. 20. 445
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 21 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 21.
21. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 .............................. 21.
22. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-) ............... 22.
23. Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. © 23.
24. Multiply line 23 by 15% (.15) ............................................................ 24.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 25 through 30 and go to line 31. Otherwise, go to line 25.
25. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 ................. 25.
26. Add lines 10 and 18 ............................. 26.
27. Enter the amount from line 1 above ................... 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- ................... 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. © 29.
30. Multiply line 29 by 25% (.25) ............................................................ 30.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 31 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 31.
31. Add lines 18, 19, 23, and 29 ................................................. 31.
32. Subtract line 31 from line 1 ................................................. 32.
33. Multiply line 32 by 28% (.28) ............................................................ 33.
34. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ..... 34. 2,778
35. Add lines 20, 24, 30, 33, and 34 .......................................................... 35. 3,223
36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ..... 36. 4,113
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line
36. Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41) ............................ 37. 3,223
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 111

Emily Jones 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
Car Co.
60 sh
INHERITED 2-3-07 2,100
20,200
2,500
Trucking Co.
100 sh
2-11-07 6-12-07 900 650
Computer Co.
25 sh
6-30-07 7-30-07 2,000 2,500
300
Furniture Co.
500 sh
VARIOUS 6-30-07 14,000 4,700 9,300
9,900
250
500
550
400
Toy Co.
20 sh
9-28-02 12-15-07 4,100 1,100 3,000
500
Section 1202
exclusion 1,500
()
()
()
()
2,900
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in
column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 10 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f)
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts. Add lines 8 and 9 in
column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions
14
15
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 15 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ( )
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to
Part III on the back 15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 or Form 1040NR instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2007Cat. No. 11338H
()
4 4
Part I
Part II
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
7
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
2007
Page 112 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

9,350
450
/H12011
/H12011
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2007
Summary
Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result16 16
18
Part III
Page 2
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-8 of the
instructions /H17075
Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank?
19
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2007
21
Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on 
page D-9 of the instructions /H17075
20
If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14, the smaller
of:
21
19
● The loss on line 16 or
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 35 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below.
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete the
Schedule D Tax Worksheet on page D-10 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and
22 below.
Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b?22
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 35 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR).
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
( )
Are lines 15 and 16 both gains?17
Yes. Go to line 18.
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22.
Note. When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers.
If line 16 is:
● A gain, enter the amount from line 16 on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14. Then
go to line 17 below.
● A loss, skip lines 17 through 20 below. Then go to line 21. Also be sure to complete line 22.
● Zero, skip lines 17 through 21 below and enter -0- on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR,
line 14. Then go to line 22.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 113

Part Four.
The three chapters in this part discuss some of the adjustments to income thatAdjustments to you can deduct in figuring your adjusted gross income. These chapters cover:
• Contributions you make to traditional individual retirement arrangementsIncome (IRAs) Ð chapter 17,
• Alimony you pay Ð chapter 18, and
• Student loan interest you payÐchapter 19.
Other adjustments to income are discussed elsewhere. See Table V below.
Table V. Other Adjustments to Income
Use this table to find information about other adjustments to income not covered in this part of the publication.
IF you are looking for more information about the deduction for... THEN see...
Certain business expenses of reservists, performing artists, and Chapter 26.
fee-basis officials
Contributions to a health savings account Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans.
Moving expenses Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
One-half of self-employment tax Chapter 22.
Self-employed health insurance Chapter 21.
Payments to self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business.
Penalty on the early withdrawal of savings Chapter 7.
Contributions to an Archer MSA Chapter 21.
Reforestation amortization or expense Chapter 9 of Publication 535, Business Expenses.
Contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18)(D) pension Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
plans
Expenses from the rental of personal property Chapter 12.
Certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment benefits Chapter 12.
(sub-pay)
Foreign housing costs Chapter 4 of Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident
Aliens Abroad.
Jury duty pay given to your employer Chapter 12.
Contributions by certain chaplains to Internal Revenue Code section Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of
403(b) plans the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Attorney fees and certain costs for actions involving certain unlawful Publication 525.
discrimination claims
Domestic production activities deduction Form 8903.
Page 114 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

as an inherited IRA. For more information about reduced (phased out) if your modified adjusted
gross income (AGI) is:rollovers, see Rollovers in Publication 590.
• More than $85,000 but less than $105,00017. Qualified health savings account (HSA) for a married couple filing a joint return orfunding distribution. If you are covered by a a qualifying widow(er),high deductible health plan (HDHP), you may be
able to make a nontaxable HSA funding distribu- • More than $53,000 but less than $63,000Individual tion from your IRA (other than a SEP or SIMPLE for a single individual or head of house-
IRA) that would otherwise be included in in- hold, or
come. The distribution must be a direct trus-Retirement • Less than $10,000 for a married individualtee-to-trustee transfer to an HSA. The filing a separate return.distribution will be nontaxable to the extent it isArrangements not more than the limit on your annual HSA If you either live with your spouse or file a jointcontributions. return, and your spouse is covered by a retire- Generally, you can make only one nontax-(IRAs) ment plan at work, but you are not, your deduc-able HSA funding distribution during your life- tion is phased out if your AGI is more than
time. However, if you change your HDHP $159,000 but less than $169,000. If your AGI is
coverage from self-only to family, you may be $169,000 or more, you cannot take a deductionWhat's New for 2007 able to make an additional distribution during the for contributions to a traditional IRA. See How
same year. For more information, see Publica- Much Can You Deduct? later.Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri- tion 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other
butions increased. For 2007, if you were cov- Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA contributionsTax-Favored Health Plans.
ered by a retirement plan at work, your increased. For 2008, your Roth IRA contribu-
Catch-up contributions in certain employerdeduction for contributions to a traditional IRA is tion limit is reduced (phased out) in the following
bankruptcies. If you participated in a 401(k)reduced (phased out) if your modified adjusted situations.
plan and the employer who maintained the plangross income (AGI) is: • Your filing status is married filing jointly orwent into bankruptcy in an earlier year, you may• More than $83,000 but less than $103,000 qualifying widow(er) and your modifiedbe able to contribute up to $7,000 to your IRA.for a married couple filing a joint return or AGI is at least $159,000. You cannotFor more information, see Catch-up contribu-a qualifying widow(er), make a Roth IRA contribution if your modi-tions in certain employer bankruptcies in Publi- fied AGI is $169,000 or more.• More than $52,000 but less than $62,000 cation 590.
for a single individual or head of house- • Your filing status is single, head of house-
hold, or hold, or married filing separately and you
did not live with your spouse at any time in• Less than $10,000 for a married individual 2008, and your modified AGI is at leastfiling a separate return. What's New for 2008 $101,000. You cannot make a Roth IRA
contribution if your modified AGI isIf you lived with your spouse or file a joint Traditional IRA contribution and deduction $116,000 or more.return, and your spouse was covered by a retire- limit. The contribution limit to your traditionalment plan at work, but you were not, your deduc- • Your filing status is married filing sepa-IRA for 2008 will be increased to the smaller oftion is phased out if your modified AGI is more rately, you lived with your spouse at anythe following amounts:than $156,000 but less than $166,000. If your time during the year, and your modified
• $5,000, ormodified AGI is $166,000 or more, you cannot AGI is more than -0-. You cannot make a
take a deduction for contributions to a traditional Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGI• Your taxable compensation for the year.IRA. See How Much Can You Deduct? later. is $10,000 or more.
If you were age 50 or older before 2009, the See Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA? later.Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA contributions most that can be contributed to your traditionalincreased. For 2007, your Roth IRA contribu- Rollovers from other retirement plans. ForIRA for 2008 will be the smaller of the followingtion limit is reduced (phased out) in the following 2008, you can roll over amounts from an eligibleamounts:situations. retirement plan into a Roth IRA. For more infor-• $6,000, or• Your filing status is married filing jointly or mation, see Rollovers from other retirement
qualifying widow(er) and your modified plans in chapter 2 of Publication 590.• Your taxable compensation for the year.
AGI is at least $156,000. You cannot
make a Roth IRA contribution if your modi- For more information, see How Much Can Be
fied AGI is $166,000 or more. Contributed? later.
• Your filing status is single, head of house- RemindersRoth IRA contribution limit. If contributionshold, or married filing separately and you on your behalf are made only to Roth IRAs, yourdid not live with your spouse at any time in Statement of required minimum distribution.contribution limit for 2008 will generally be the2007 and your modified AGI is at least If a minimum distribution is required from yourlesser of:$99,000. You cannot make a Roth IRA IRA, the trustee, custodian, or issuer that held• $5,000, orcontribution if your modified AGI is the IRA at the end of the preceding year must
$114,000 or more. either report the amount of the required mini-• Your taxable compensation for the year.
mum distribution to you, or offer to calculate it for• Your filing status is married filing sepa-
you. The report or offer must include the date byIf you were age 50 or older before 2009 andrately, you lived with your spouse at any
which the amount must be distributed. The re-contributions on your behalf were made only totime during the year, and your modified
port is due January 31 of the year in which theRoth IRAs, your contribution limit for 2008 willAGI is more than -0-. You cannot make a
minimum distribution is required. It can be pro-generally be the lesser of:Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGI
vided with the year-end fair market value state-is $10,000 or more. • $6,000, or ment that you normally get each year. No report
See Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA? later. is required for IRAs of owners who have died.• Your taxable compensation for the year.
Rollover by nonspouse beneficiary. A direct However, if your modified adjusted gross in- IRA interest. Although interest earned from
transfer from a deceased employee's qualified come (AGI) is above a certain amount, your your IRA is generally not taxed in the year
pension, profit-sharing or stock bonus plan, an- contribution limit may be reduced. For more in- earned, it is not tax-exempt interest. Do not
nuity plan, tax-sheltered annuity (section formation, see How Much Can Be Contributed? report this interest on your tax return as
403(b)) plan, or governmental deferred compen- under Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA? later. tax-exempt interest.
sation (section 457) plan to an IRA set up to
Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri-receive the distribution on your behalf can be Form 8606.  If you make nondeductible contri-
butions increased. For 2008, if you are cov-treated as an eligible rollover distribution if you butions to a traditional IRA and you do not file
ered by a retirement plan at work, yourare the designated beneficiary of the plan and Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs, with your tax
deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA isnot the employee's spouse. The IRA is treated return, you may have to pay a $50 penalty.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 115

Hurricane tax relief. Special rules apply to also set up an IRA through your stockbroker.Who Can Set Up Any IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code re-the use of retirement funds (including IRAs) by
a Traditional IRA? quirements.qualified individuals who suffered an economic
loss as a result of Hurricane Katrina, Rita, or Kinds of traditional IRAs. Your traditionalYou can set up and make contributions to aWilma. While qualified hurricane distributions IRA can be an individual retirement account ortraditional IRA if:can no longer be made, special rules apply to annuity. It can be part of either a simplifiedthe repayments of these distributions. See Hurri- • You (or, if you file a joint return, your employee pension (SEP) or an employer or em-cane-Related Relief in chapter 4 of Publication spouse) received taxable compensation ployee association trust account.590. during the year, and
The term ª50 or olderº is used several • You were not age 701/2 by the end of the How Much Can Betimes in this chapter. It refers to an IRA year.
Contributed?owner who is age 50 or older by the
TIP
end of the tax year. What is compensation? Generally, compen- There are limits and other rules that affect the
sation is what you earn from working. Compen- amount that can be contributed to a traditional
sation includes wages, salaries, tips, IRA. These limits and other rules are explained
professional fees, bonuses, and other amounts below.
you receive for providing personal services. TheIntroduction Community property laws. Except as dis-IRS treats as compensation any amount prop-An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is a cussed later under Spousal IRA limit, eacherly shown in box 1 (Wages, tips, other compen-personal savings plan that gives you tax advan- spouse figures his or her limit separately, usingsation) of Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement,tages for setting aside money for your retire- his or her own compensation. This is the ruleprovided that amount is reduced by any amount even in states with community property laws.ment. properly shown in box 11 (Nonqualified plans).
This chapter discusses the following topics. Scholarship and fellowship payments are Brokers' commissions. Brokers' commis-
compensation for this purpose only if shown in sions paid in connection with your traditional IRA• The rules for a traditional IRA (any IRA box 1 of Form W-2. are subject to the contribution limit.that is not a Roth or SIMPLE IRA). Compensation also includes commissions
Trustees' fees. Trustees' administrative fees• The Roth IRA, which features nondeduct- and taxable alimony and separate maintenance
are not subject to the contribution limit.ible contributions and tax-free distribu- payments.
tions. Qualified reservist repayments. If you areSelf-employment income. If you are
(or were) a member of a reserve component andself-employed (a sole proprietor or a partner),Simplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) and you were ordered or called to active duty aftercompensation is the net earnings from yourSavings Incentive Match Plans for Employees September 11, 2001, you may be able to con-trade or business (provided your personal serv-(SIMPLEs) are not discussed in this chapter. For tribute (repay) to an IRA amounts equal to anyices are a material income-producing factor) re-more information on these plans and employ- qualified reservist distributions you received.duced by the total of:ees' SEP IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are part of You can make these repayment contributionsthese plans, see Publications 560 and 590. • The deduction for contributions made on even if they would cause your total contributionsyour behalf to retirement plans, andFor information about contributions, deduc- to the IRA to be more than the general limit ontions, withdrawals, transfers, rollovers, and contributions. To be eligible to make these re-• The deduction allowed for one-half of yourother transactions for 2008, see Publication 590. payment contributions, you must have receivedself-employment taxes.
a qualified reservist distribution from an IRA or
from a section 401(k) or 403(b) plan or similarUseful Items Compensation includes earnings from
arrangement.self-employment even if they are not subject toYou may want to see:
For more information, see Qualified reservistself-employment tax because of your religious
repayments under How Much Can Be Contrib-beliefs.Publication
uted in chapter 1 of Publication 590.Nontaxable combat pay. For IRA pur-❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Small
Contributions on your behalf to a tradi-poses, your compensation includes any nontax-Business
tional IRA reduce your limit for contri-able combat pay you receive.❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements butions to a Roth IRA. (See Roth IRAs,
CAUTION
!
(IRAs) later.)What is not compensation? Compensation
does not include any of the following items.Form (and Instructions) General limit. For 2007, the most that can be• Earnings and profits from property, such contributed to your traditional IRA generally is❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans as rental income, interest income, and div- the smaller of the following amounts.(including IRAs) and Other idend income.Tax-Favored Accounts • $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older).• Pension or annuity income.❏ 8606 Nondeductible IRAs • Your taxable compensation (defined ear-• Deferred compensation received (com- lier) for the year.pensation payments postponed from a
This is the most that can be contributed regard-past year).
less of whether the contributions are to one or• Income from a partnership for which you more traditional IRAs or whether all or part of theTraditional IRAs do not provide services that are a material contributions are nondeductible. (See Nonde-income-producing factor. ductible Contributions, later.) Qualified reservistIn this chapter the original IRA (sometimes repayments do not affect this limit.• Any amounts (other than combat pay) youcalled an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred to
exclude from income, such as foreignas a ªtraditional IRA.º Two advantages of a tradi- Example 1. Betty, who is 34 years old andearned income and housing costs.tional IRA are: single, earned $24,000 in 2007. Her IRA contri-
• You may be able to deduct some or all of butions for 2007 are limited to $4,000.
your contributions to it, depending on your When and How Can a
Example 2. John, an unmarried college stu-circumstances, and Traditional IRA Be Set Up? dent working part time, earned $3,500 in 2007.• Generally, amounts in your IRA, including His IRA contributions for 2007 are limited toearnings and gains, are not taxed until You can set up a traditional IRA at any time. $3,500, the amount of his compensation.they are distributed. However, the time for making contributions for
any year is limited. See When Can Contributions Catch-up contributions in certain employer
Be Made, later. bankruptcies. If you participated in a 401(k)
  You can set up different kinds of IRAs with a plan and the employer who maintained the planWhat Is a Traditional IRA?
variety of organizations. You can set up an IRA went into bankruptcy in an earlier year, you may
A traditional IRA is any IRA that is not a Roth IRA at a bank or other financial institution or with a be able to contribute an additional $3,000 to
or a SIMPLE IRA. mutual fund or life insurance company. You can your IRA. See Publication 590 to see if you
Page 116 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

qualify to make these additional contributions. If Filing before a contribution is made. You Note. If you were divorced or legally sepa-
you qualify and chose to make these catch-up can file your return claiming a traditional IRA rated (and did not remarry) before the end of the
contributions, the higher contribution and de- contribution before the contribution is actually year, you cannot deduct any contributions to
duction limits for individuals who are age 50 or made. Generally, the contribution must be made your spouse's IRA. After a divorce or legal sepa-
older do not apply. The most that you can con- by the due date of your return, not including ration, you can deduct only contributions to your
tribute to your IRA is $7,000. extensions. own IRA. Your deductions are subject to the
rules for single individuals.Contributions not required. You do not haveSpousal IRA limit. For 2007, if you file a joint
to contribute to your traditional IRA for every taxreturn and your taxable compensation is less Covered by an employer retirement plan. If
year, even if you can.than that of your spouse, the most that can be you or your spouse was covered by an employer
contributed for the year to your IRA is the retirement plan at any time during the year for
smaller of the following amounts. which contributions were made, your deductionHow Much Can You may be further limited. This is discussed later1. $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older). Deduct? under Limit If Covered by Employer Plan. Limits
on the amount you can deduct do not affect the2. The total compensation includible in the Generally, you can deduct the lesser of: amount that can be contributed. See Nonde-gross income of both you and your spouse
ductible Contributions, later.for the year, reduced by the following two • The contributions to your traditional IRA
amounts. for the year, or
• The general limit (or the spousal IRA limit,a. Your spouse's IRA contribution for the Are You Covered by an Employerif it applies).year to a traditional IRA. Plan?
However, if you or your spouse was covered byb. Any contribution for the year to a Roth The Form W-2 you receive from your employeran employer retirement plan, you may not beIRA on behalf of your spouse. has a box used to indicate whether you wereable to deduct this amount. See Limit If Covered
covered for the year. The ªRetirement planº boxby Employer Plan, later.This means that the total combined contribu- should be checked if you were covered.tions that can be made for the year to your IRA Reservists and volunteer firefighters shouldYou may be eligible to claim a credit forand your spouse's IRA can be as much as also see Situations in Which You Are Not Cov-contributions to your traditional IRA.$8,000 ($9,000 if only one of you is 50 or older, ered, later.For more information see chapter 37.or $10,000 if both of you are 50 or older).
TIP If you are not certain whether you were cov-
ered by your employer's retirement plan, youTrustees' fees. Trustees' administrative feesWhen Can Contributions should ask your employer.that are billed separately and paid in connection
Be Made? with your traditional IRA are not deductible as Federal judges. For purposes of the IRA de-
IRA contributions. However, they may be de- duction, federal judges are covered by an em-As soon as you set up your traditional IRA, ductible as a miscellaneous itemized deduction ployer retirement plan.contributions can be made to it through your on Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28.chosen sponsor (trustee or other administrator).
Brokers' commissions. Brokers' commis-Contributions must be in the form of money For Which Year(s) Are Yousions are part of your IRA contribution and, as(cash, check, or money order). Property cannot Covered?such, are deductible subject to the limits.be contributed.
Full deduction. If neither you nor your spouse Special rules apply to determine the tax yearsContributions must be made by due date.
was covered for any part of the year by an for which you are covered by an employer plan.Contributions can be made to your traditional
employer retirement plan, you can take a deduc- These rules differ depending on whether theIRA for a year at any time during the year or by
tion for total contributions to one or more tradi- plan is a defined contribution plan or a definedthe due date for filing your return for that year,
tional IRAs of up to the lesser of the following benefit plan.not including extensions.
amounts. Tax year. Your tax year is the annual account-Nontaxable combat pay. If you received non- • $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older in ing period you use to keep records and reporttaxable combat pay in 2004 or 2005, and the 2007, or $7,000 for certain employer bank- income and expenses on your income tax re-treatment of the combat pay as compensation ruptcies). turn. For almost all people, the tax year is themeans that you can contribute more than you
calendar year.already have, you can make additional contribu- • 100% of your compensation.
tions to an IRA for 2004 or 2005 by May 28, Defined contribution plan. Generally, youThis limit is reduced by any contributions made2009. The contributions will be treated as having are covered by a defined contribution plan for ato a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf.been made on the last day of the year for which tax year if amounts are contributed or allocatedthey were made. If you have already filed your Spousal IRA. In the case of a married to your account for the plan year that ends withreturn for a year for which you make a contribu- couple with unequal compensation who file a or within that tax year.tion, you must file Form 1040X, Amended U.S. joint return, the deduction for contributions to the A defined contribution plan is a plan thatIndividual Income Tax Return. traditional IRA of the spouse with less compen- provides for a separate account for each person For more information, see When Can Contri- sation is limited to the lesser of the following covered by the plan. Types of defined contribu-butions Be Made in chapter 1 of Publication 590. amounts. tion plans include profit-sharing plans, stock bo-
nus plans, and money purchase pension plans.Age 701/2 rule. Contributions cannot be made 1. $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older into your traditional IRA for the year in which you 2007, or $7,000 for certain employer bank- Defined benefit plan. If you are eligible toreach age 701/2 or for any later year. ruptcies). participate in your employer's defined benefitYou attain age 70 1/2 on the date that is 6 plan for the plan year that ends within your tax2. The total compensation includible in thecalendar months after the 70th anniversary of year, you are covered by the plan. This rulegross income of both spouses for the yearyour birth. If you were born on June 30, 1937, applies even if you:reduced by the following three amounts.the 70th anniversary of your birth is June 30,
• Declined to participate in the plan,2007, and you attained age 70 1/2 on December a. The IRA deduction for the year of the30, 2007. If you were born on July 1, 1937, the • Did not make a required contribution, orspouse with the greater compensation.70th anniversary of your birth was July 1, 2007,
• Did not perform the minimum service re-and you attained age 701/2 on January 1, 2008. b. Any designated nondeductible contribu-
quired to accrue a benefit for the year.tion for the year made on behalf of theDesignating year for which contribution is spouse with the greater compensation.made. If an amount is contributed to your A defined benefit plan is any plan that is not atraditional IRA between January 1 and April 15, c. Any contributions for the year to a Roth defined contribution plan. Defined benefit plansyou should tell the sponsor which year (the cur- IRA on behalf of the spouse with the include pension plans and annuity plans.rent year or the previous year) the contribution is greater compensation.
for. If you do not tell the sponsor which year it is No vested interest. If you accrue a benefit for
for, the sponsor can assume, and report to the This limit is reduced by any contributions to a a plan year, you are covered by that plan even if
IRS, that the contribution is for the current year 501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse with you have no vested interest in (legal right to) the
(the year the sponsor received it). the lesser compensation. accrual.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 117

c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)Table 17-1. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are Covered by
above.Retirement Plan at Work
2. Your accrued retirement benefits at the be-If you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if
ginning of the year will not provide moreyour modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction.
than $1,800 per year at retirement.
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...
 $52,000 or less a full deduction.single Limit If Covered by Employer Plan
more than $52,000 a partial deduction. If either you or your spouse was covered by anor but less than $62,000 employer retirement plan, you may be entitled to
only a partial (reduced) deduction or no deduc-head of household $62,000 or more no deduction. tion at all, depending on your income and your
filing status. $83,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly
Your deduction begins to decrease (phase
more than $83,000 a partial deduction. out) when your income rises above a certainor but less than $103,000 amount and is eliminated altogether when it
reaches a higher amount. These amounts varyqualifying widow(er) $103,000 or more no deduction. depending on your filing status.
To determine if your deduction is subject toless than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing phaseout, you must determine your modifiedseparately2
$10,000 or more no deduction. adjusted gross income (AGI) and your filing sta-
tus. See Filing status and Modified adjusted1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). gross income (AGI), later. Then use Table 17-12If you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this purpose
or 17-2 to determine if the phaseout applies.(therefore, your IRA deduction is determined under the ªSingleº column).
Social security recipients. Instead of using
Table 17-1 or 17-2, use the worksheets in Ap-a. The United States,Situations in Which You Are Not pendix B of Publication 590 if, for the year, all ofCovered b. A state or political subdivision of a the following apply.state, orUnless you are covered under another employer • You received social security benefits.c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)plan, you are not covered by an employer plan if • You received taxable compensation.above.you are in one of the situations described below.
• Contributions were made to your tradi-Social security or railroad retirement. Cov- 2. You did not serve more than 90 days on tional IRA.erage under social security or railroad retire- active duty during the year (not counting • You or your spouse was covered by anment is not coverage under an employer duty for training). employer retirement plan.retirement plan.
Use those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc-Benefits from a previous employer's plan. Volunteer firefighters. If the only reason you tion, your nondeductible contribution, and theIf you receive retirement benefits from a previ- participate in a plan is because you are a volun- taxable portion, if any, of your social securityous employer's plan, you are not covered by that teer firefighter, you may not be covered by the benefits.plan. plan. You are not covered by the plan if both of
the following conditions are met.Reservists. If the only reason you participate Deduction phaseout. If you were covered by
in a plan is because you are a member of a an employer retirement plan and you did not1. The plan you participate in is establishedreserve unit of the armed forces, you may not be receive any social security retirement benefits,for its employees by:covered by the plan. You are not covered by the your IRA deduction may be reduced or elimi-
plan if both of the following conditions are met. nated depending on your filing status and modi-a. The United States,
fied AGI as shown in Table 17-1.b. A state or political subdivision of a1. The plan you participate in is established
If your spouse is covered. If you are notstate, orfor its employees by:
covered by an employer retirement plan, but
your spouse is, and you did not receive anyTable 17-2. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are NOT social security benefits, your IRA deduction may
Covered by Retirement Plan at Work be reduced or eliminated entirely depending on
your filing status and modified AGI as shown inIf you are not covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine Table 17-2.if your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction.
Filing status. Your filing status depends pri-
marily on your marital status. For this purpose,IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take... you need to know if your filing status is single or
single, any amount a full deduction. head of household, married filing jointly or quali-
fying widow(er), or married filing separately. Ifhead of household, or
you need more information on filing status, seequalifying widow(er)
chapter 2.
married filing jointly or any amount a full deduction.
Lived apart from spouse. If you did not liveseparately with a spouse who is with your spouse at any time during the year andnot covered by a plan at work you file a separate return, your filing status, for
this purpose, is single.$156,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly with a
spouse who is covered by a plan Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). Howmore than $156,000 a partial deduction.at work you figure your modified AGI depends onbut less than $166,000
whether you are filing Form 1040 or Form
$166,000 or more no deduction. 1040A. If you made contributions to your IRA for
2007 and received a distribution from your IRAless than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing separately with a in 2007, see Publication 590.spouse who is covered by a plan $10,000 or more no deduction. Do not assume that your modified AGIat work2
is the same as your compensation.
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). Your modified AGI may include income
CAUTION
!2You are entitled to the full deduction if you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year. in addition to your compensation (discussed
Page 118 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

was $65,000. Mike made a $4,000 IRA contribu-Worksheet 17-1. Figuring Your
tion for 2007. Because he was covered by aModified AGI Keep for Your Records
 retirement plan and his modified AGI was over
$62,000, he cannot deduct his $4,000 IRA con-Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for
tribution. He must designate this contribution astraditional IRA purposes.
a nondeductible contribution by reporting it on
Form 8606, as explained next.1. Enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) from Form 1040, line 38, or
Form 1040A, line 22 ................................ 1. Form 8606. To designate contributions as
nondeductible, you must file Form 8606.2. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Form 1040, line 32, or Form You do not have to designate a contribution1040A, line 17 .................................... 2. as nondeductible until you file your tax return.
When you file, you can even designate other-3. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line 33, or
wise deductible contributions as nondeductible.Form 1040A, line 18 ................................ 3.
You must file Form 8606 to report nonde-
4. Enter any tuition and fees deduction from Form 1040, line 34, or Form ductible contributions even if you do not have to
1040A, line 19 .................................... 4. file a tax return for the year.
5. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from Form 1040, Failure to report nondeductible contribu-
line 35 .......................................... 5. tions. If you do not report nondeductible con-
tributions, all of the contributions to your6. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from Form traditional IRA will be treated as deductible. All2555, line 45, or Form 2555-EZ, line 18 .................... 6. distributions from your IRA will be taxed unless
you can show, with satisfactory evidence, that7. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 ..... 7.
nondeductible contributions were made.
8. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 8. Penalty for overstatement. If you over-
state the amount of nondeductible contributions9. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form
on your Form 8606 for any tax year, you must8839, line 30 ...................................... 9.
pay a penalty of $100 for each overstatement,10. Add lines 1 through 9. This is your Modified AGI for traditional IRA unless it was due to reasonable cause.purposes ........................................ 10.  
Penalty for failure to file Form 8606. You
will have to pay a $50 penalty if you do not file a
required Form 8606, unless you can prove that
earlier), such as interest, dividends, and income • You made contributions to a traditional the failure was due to reasonable cause.
from IRA distributions. IRA for 2007.
Tax on earnings on nondeductible contribu-• Some of those contributions may be non-Form 1040. If you file Form 1040, refigure tions. As long as contributions are within thedeductible contributions.the amount on the page 1 ªadjusted gross in- contribution limits, none of the earnings or gains
comeº line without taking into account any of the on contributions (deductible or nondeductible)If this is your situation, you must figure the tax-
following amounts. will be taxed until they are distributed. See Whenable part of the traditional IRA distribution before
Can You Withdraw or Use IRA Assets, later.you can figure your modified AGI. To do this, you• IRA deduction.
can use Worksheet 1-5, Figuring the Taxable Cost basis. You will have a cost basis in your• Student loan interest deduction. Part of Your IRA Distribution, in Publication 590. traditional IRA if you made any nondeductible• Tuition and fees deduction. If at least one of the above does not apply, contributions. Your cost basis is the sum of the
figure your modified AGI using Worksheet 17-1 nondeductible contributions to your IRA minus• Domestic production activities deduction.
in this chapter. any withdrawals or distributions of nondeduct-• Foreign earned income exclusion. ible contributions.How to figure your reduced IRA deduction.• Foreign housing exclusion or deduction. You can figure your reduced IRA deduction for
Inherited IRAseither Form 1040 or Form 1040A by using the• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-
worksheets in chapter 1 of Publication 590.est shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of In- If you inherit a traditional IRA, you are called aAlso, the instructions for Form 1040 and Formterest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings beneficiary. A beneficiary can be any person or1040A include similar worksheets that you mayBonds Issued After 1989 (For Filers With entity the owner chooses to receive the benefitsbe able to use instead.Qualified Higher Education Expenses). of the IRA after he or she dies. Beneficiaries of a
• Exclusion of employer-provided adoption traditional IRA must include in their gross in-
benefits shown on Form 8839, Qualified come any taxable distributions they receive.Reporting DeductibleAdoption Expenses. Contributions Inherited from spouse. If you inherit a tradi-This is your modified AGI. tional IRA from your spouse, you generally haveIf you file Form 1040, enter your IRA deductionForm 1040A. If you file Form 1040A, the following three choices.on line 32 of that form. If you file Form 1040A,refigure the amount on the page 1 ªadjusted enter your IRA deduction on line 17. You cannot 1. Treat it as your own IRA by designatinggross incomeº line without taking into account deduct IRA contributions on Form 1040EZ. yourself as the account owner.any of the following amounts.
2. Treat it as your own by rolling it over into• IRA deduction. Nondeductible your traditional IRA, or to the extent it is
• Student loan interest deduction. taxable, into a:Contributions
• Tuition and fees deduction. a. Qualified employer plan,Although your deduction for IRA contributions• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter- may be reduced or eliminated, contributions can b. Qualified employee annuity plan (sec-est shown on Form 8815. be made to your IRA up to the general limit or, if tion 403(a) plan),
it applies, the spousal IRA limit. The differenceThis is your modified AGI. c. Tax-sheltered annuity plan (sectionbetween your total permitted contributions andBoth contributions for 2007 and distribu- 403(b) plan), oryour IRA deduction, if any, is your nondeductibletions in 2007. If all three of the following apply, contribution. d. Deferred compensation plan of a stateany IRA distributions you received in 2007 may or local government (section 457 plan).be partly tax free and partly taxable. Example. Mike is 28 years old and single. In
• You received distributions in 2007 from 2007, he was covered by a retirement plan at 3. Treat yourself as the beneficiary rather
one or more traditional IRAs. work. His salary was $57,312. His modified AGI than treating the IRA as your own.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 119

Treating it as your own. You will be con- plan that you contribute (roll over) to another amount distributed, within the same 1-year pe-
sidered to have chosen to treat the IRA as your retirement plan. The contribution to the second riod, from the IRA into which you made the
own if: retirement plan is called a ªrollover contribution.º tax-free rollover.
The 1-year period begins on the date you• Contributions (including rollover contribu- Note. An amount rolled over tax free from receive the IRA distribution, not on the date youtions) are made to the inherited IRA, or one retirement plan to another is generally in- roll it over into an IRA.
• You do not take the required minimum dis- cludible in income when it is distributed from the
tribution for a year as a beneficiary of the second plan. Example. You have two traditional IRAs,
IRA. IRA-1 and IRA-2. You make a tax-free rollover of
Kinds of rollovers to a traditional IRA. You a distribution from IRA-1 into a new traditionalYou will only be considered to have chosen to can roll over amounts from the following plans IRA (IRA-3). You cannot, within 1 year of thetreat the IRA as your own if: into a traditional IRA: distribution from IRA-1, make a tax-free rollover
• You are the sole beneficiary of the IRA, of any distribution from either IRA-1 or IRA-3 into• A traditional IRA,and another traditional IRA.
• An employer's qualified retirement plan for However, the rollover from IRA-1 into IRA-3• You have an unlimited right to withdraw its employees, does not prevent you from making a tax-freeamounts from it. rollover from IRA-2 into any other traditional• A deferred compensation plan of a state or IRA. This is because you have not, within thelocal government (section 457 plan), orHowever, if you receive a distribution from last year, rolled over, tax free, any distributionyour deceased spouse's IRA, you can roll that • A tax-sheltered annuity plan (section from IRA-2 or made a tax-free rollover intodistribution over into your own IRA within the 403(b) plan). IRA-2.60-day time limit, as long as the distribution is
not a required distribution, even if you are not Exception. There is an exception to the rule
Treatment of rollovers. You cannot deduct athe sole beneficiary of your deceased spouse's that amounts rolled over tax free into an IRA
rollover contribution, but you must report theIRA. cannot be rolled over tax free again within the
rollover distribution on your tax return as dis- 1-year period beginning on the date of the origi-
cussed later under Reporting rollovers fromInherited from someone other than spouse. nal distribution. The exception applies to a distri-
IRAs and under Reporting rollovers from em-If you inherit a traditional IRA from anyone other bution which meets all three of the following
ployer plans.than your deceased spouse, you cannot treat requirements.
the inherited IRA as your own. This means that Kinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA. 1. It is made from a failed financial institutionyou cannot make any contributions to the IRA. It You may be able to roll over, tax free, a distribu- by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora-also means you cannot roll over any amounts tion from your traditional IRA into a qualified tion (FDIC) as receiver for the institution.into or out of the inherited IRA. However, you plan. These plans include the federal Thrift Sav-can make a trustee-to-trustee transfer as long 2. It was not initiated by either the custodialings Fund (for federal employees), deferredas the IRA into which amounts are being moved institution or the depositor.compensation plans of state or local govern-is set up and maintained in the name of the ments (section 457 plans), and tax-sheltered 3. It was made because:deceased IRA owner for the benefit of you as annuity plans (section 403(b) plans). The part ofbeneficiary. a. The custodial institution is insolvent,the distribution that you can roll over is the partFor more information, see the discussion of andthat would otherwise be taxable (includible ininherited IRAs under Rollover From One IRA your income). Qualified plans may, but are not b. The receiver is unable to find a buyerInto Another, later. required to, accept such rollovers. for the institution.
Time limit for making a rollover contribution.Can You Move Retirement
You generally must make the rollover contribu- Partial rollovers. If you withdraw assets fromPlan Assets? tion by the 60th day after the day you receive the a traditional IRA, you can roll over part of the
distribution from your traditional IRA or your em- withdrawal tax free and keep the rest of it. TheYou can transfer, tax free, assets (money or ployer's plan. amount you keep will generally be taxable (ex-property) from other retirement plans (including  The IRS may waive the 60-day requirement cept for the part that is a return of nondeductibletraditional IRAs) to a traditional IRA. You can where the failure to do so would be against contributions). The amount you keep may bemake the following kinds of transfers. equity or good conscience, such as in the event subject to the 10% additional tax on early distri-
• Transfers from one trustee to another. of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond butions, discussed later under What Acts Result
your reasonable control. For more information, in Penalties or Additional Taxes.• Rollovers. see Publication 590. Required distributions. Amounts that must• Transfers incident to a divorce. Extension of rollover period. If an amount be distributed during a particular year under the
distributed to you from a traditional IRA or a required distribution rules (discussed later) are
Transfers to Roth IRAs. Under certain condi- qualified employer retirement plan is a frozen not eligible for rollover treatment.
tions, you can move assets from a traditional deposit at any time during the 60-day period Inherited IRAs. If you inherit a traditional IRAIRA or from a designated Roth account to a Roth allowed for a rollover, special rules extend the from your spouse, you generally can roll it over,IRA. See Can You Move Amounts Into a Roth rollover period. For more information, see Publi- or you can choose to make the inherited IRAIRA under Roth IRAs, later. cation 590. your own. See Treating it as your own, earlier.
More information. For more information on Not inherited from spouse. If you inherit arollovers, see Publication 590.Trustee-to-Trustee Transfer traditional IRA from someone other than your
spouse, you cannot roll it over or allow it toA transfer of funds in your traditional IRA from receive a rollover contribution. You must with-one trustee directly to another, either at your Rollover From One IRA Into draw the IRA assets within a certain period. Forrequest or at the trustee's request, is not a rollo- Another more information, see Publication 590.ver. Because there is no distribution to you, the
Reporting rollovers from IRAs. Report anytransfer is tax free. Because it is not a rollover, it You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the
rollover from one traditional IRA to the same oris not affected by the 1-year waiting period re- assets from one traditional IRA if you reinvest
another traditional IRA on lines 15a and 15b,quired between rollovers, discussed later under them within 60 days in the same or another
Form 1040, or lines 11a and 11b, Form 1040A.Rollover From One IRA Into Another. For infor- traditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, you
Enter the total amount of the distribution onmation about direct transfers to IRAs from retire- cannot deduct the amount that you reinvest in an
Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a. Ifment plans other than IRAs, see Publication IRA.
the total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or590.
Waiting period between rollovers. Gener- Form 1040A, line 11a, was rolled over, enter
ally, if you make a tax-free rollover of any part of zero on Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A,
a distribution from a traditional IRA, you cannot, line 11b. If the total distribution was not rolledRollovers
within a 1-year period, make a tax-free rollover over, enter the taxable portion of the part that
Generally, a rollover is a tax-free distribution to of any later distribution from that same IRA. You was not rolled over on Form 1040, line 15b, or
you of cash or other assets from one retirement also cannot make a tax-free rollover of any Form 1040A, line 11b. Put ªRolloverº next to
Page 120 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. shown in box 5 of Form 1099-R) that were tax- IRA. If you recharacterize your contribution, you
See the forms instructions. able to you when made. From that result, sub- must do all three of the following.
tract the amount that was rolled over eitherIf you rolled over the distribution in 2008 or • Include in the transfer any net income allo-directly or within 60 days of receiving the distri-from an IRA into a qualified plan (other than an cable to the contribution. If there was abution. Enter the remaining amount, even ifIRA), attach a statement explaining what you loss, the net income you must transferzero, on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A,did. may be a negative amount.line 12b. Also, enter ``Rollover'' next to Form
• Report the recharacterization on your tax1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b.
return for the year during which the contri-Rollover From Employer's Plan bution was made.Into an IRA Transfers Incident to Divorce • Treat the contribution as having been
You can roll over into a traditional IRA all or part made to the second IRA on the date that itIf an interest in a traditional IRA is transferredof an eligible rollover distribution you receive was actually made to the first IRA.from your spouse or former spouse to you by afrom your (or your deceased spouse's): divorce or separate maintenance decree or a
• Employer's qualified pension, written document related to such a decree, the No deduction allowed. You cannot deductprofit-sharing or stock bonus plan, interest in the IRA, starting from the date of the the contribution to the first IRA. Any net income
transfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer is you transfer with the recharacterized contribu-• Annuity plan, tax free. For detailed information, see Publica- tion is treated as earned in the second IRA.
tion 590.• Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) Required notifications. To recharacterizeplan), or a contribution, you must notify both the trustee of
the first IRA (the one to which the contribution• Governmental deferred compensation Converting From Any Traditional was actually made) and the trustee of the sec-plan (section 457 plan). IRA to a Roth IRA ond IRA (the one to which the contribution is
being moved) that you have elected to treat theA qualified plan is one that meets the require- You can convert amounts from a traditional IRA contribution as having been made to the secondments of the Internal Revenue Code. into a Roth IRA if, for the tax year you make the IRA rather than the first. You must make thewithdrawal from the traditional IRA, both of the notifications by the date of the transfer. Only oneEligible rollover distribution. Generally, an following requirements are met. notification is required if both IRAs are main-eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of • Your modified AGI (explained later under tained by the same trustee. The notification(s)all or part of the balance to your credit in a Roth IRAs) is not more than $100,000. must include all of the following information.qualified retirement plan except the following.
• You are not a married individual filing a • The type and amount of the contribution to1. A required minimum distribution (explained separate return. the first IRA that is to be recharacterized.later under When Must You Withdraw IRA
• The date on which the contribution wasAssets? (Required Minimum Distributions).
made to the first IRA and the year forNote. If you did not live with your spouse at2. Hardship distributions. which it was made.any time during the year and you file a separate3. Any of a series of substantially equal peri- return, your filing status, for this purpose, is • A direction to the trustee of the first IRA toodic distributions paid at least once a year single. transfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer theover: amount of the contribution and any netRequired distributions. You cannot convert income (or loss) allocable to the contribu-a. Your lifetime or life expectancy, amounts that must be distributed from your tion to the trustee of the second IRA.traditional IRA for a particular year (including theb. The lifetimes or life expectancies of you calendar year in which you reach age 70 1/2) • The name of the trustee of the first IRAand your beneficiary, or under the required distribution rules (discussed and the name of the trustee of the second
c. A period of 10 years or more. later). IRA.
• Any additional information needed toInherited IRAs. If you inherited a traditional4. Corrective distributions of excess contribu- make the transfer.IRA from someone other than your spouse, youtions or excess deferrals, and any income
cannot convert it to a Roth IRA.allocable to the excess, or of excess an-
nual additions and any allocable gains. Reporting a recharacterization. If you electIncome. You must include in your gross in-
to recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as acome distributions from a traditional IRA that5. A loan treated as a distribution because it
contribution to another IRA, you must report theyou would have had to include in income if youdoes not satisfy certain requirements ei-
recharacterization on your tax return as directedhad not converted them into a Roth IRA. You dother when made or later (such as upon
by Form 8606 and its instructions. You mustnot include in gross income any part of a distri-default), unless the participant's accrued
treat the contribution as having been made tobution from a traditional IRA that is a return ofbenefits are reduced (offset) to repay the
the second IRA.your basis, as discussed later.loan.
If you must include any amount in your gross6. Dividends on employer securities. income, you may have to increase your with- When Can You Withdrawholding or make estimated tax payments. See7. The cost of life insurance coverage. or Use IRA Assets?chapter 4.
Rollover by nonspouse beneficiary. A direct There are rules limiting use of your IRA assets
transfer from a deceased employee's qualified and distributions from it. Violation of the rulesRecharacterizationspension, profit-sharing or stock bonus plan, an- generally results in additional taxes in the year of
nuity plan, tax-sheltered annuity (section violation. See What Acts Result in Penalties orYou may be able to treat a contribution made to403(b)) plan, or governmental deferred compen- Additional Taxes, later.one type of IRA as having been made to asation (section 457) plan to an IRA set up to different type of IRA. This is called recharacter- Contributions returned before the due datereceive the distribution on your behalf can be izing the contribution. More detailed information of return. If you made IRA contributions intreated as an eligible rollover distribution if you is in Publication 590. 2007, you can withdraw them tax free by the dueare the designated beneficiary of the plan and
How to recharacterize a contribution. To date of your return. If you have an extension ofnot the employee's spouse. The IRA is treated
recharacterize a contribution, you generally time to file your return, you can withdraw themas an inherited IRA. For more information about
must have the contribution transferred from the tax free by the extended due date. You can doinherited IRAs, see Inherited IRAs, earlier.
first IRA (the one to which it was made) to the this if, for each contribution you withdraw, both
Reporting rollovers from employer plans. second IRA in a trustee-to-trustee transfer. If the of the following conditions apply.
Enter the total distribution (before income tax or transfer is made by the due date (including ex- • You did not take a deduction for the contri-other deductions were withheld) on Form 1040, tensions) for your tax return for the year during bution.line 16a, or Form 1040A, line 12a. This amount which the contribution was made, you can elect
should be shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R. From to treat the contribution as having been originally • You withdraw any interest or other income
this amount, subtract any contributions (usually made to the second IRA instead of to the first earned on the contribution. You can take
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 121

into account any loss on the contribution Even if you begin receiving distribu- Distributions Fully or Partly
while it was in the IRA when calculating tions before you attain age 70 1/2, you Taxablethe amount that must be withdrawn. If must begin calculating and receiving
CAUTION
!
there was a loss, the net income earned required minimum distributions by your required Distributions from your traditional IRA may be
on the contribution may be a negative beginning date. fully or partly taxable, depending on whether
amount. your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu-Distributions after the required beginning tions.date. The required minimum distribution for
any year after the year you turn 70 1/2 must beNote. To calculate the amount you must Fully taxable. If only deductible contributionsmade by December 31 of that later year.withdraw, see Publication 590. were made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, if
you have more than one), you have no basis inEarnings includible in income. You must Beneficiaries. If you are the beneficiary of a
your IRA. Because you have no basis in yourinclude in income any earnings on the contribu- decedent's traditional IRA, the requirements for
IRA, any distributions are fully taxable whentions you withdraw. Include the earnings in in- distributions from that IRA generally depend on
received. See Reporting taxable distributions oncome for the year in which you made the whether the IRA owner died before or after the
your return, later.contributions, not in the year in which you with- required beginning date for distributions.
draw them.
More information. For more information, in- Partly taxable. If you made nondeductibleGenerally, except for any part of a with- cluding how to figure your minimum required contributions to any of your traditional IRAs, youdrawal that is a return of nondeductible distribution each year and how to figure your have a cost basis (investment in the contract)contributions (basis), any withdrawal of
CAUTION
! required distribution if you are a beneficiary of a equal to the amount of those contributions.your contributions after the due date (or ex- decedent's IRA, see Publication 590. These nondeductible contributions are not taxedtended due date) of your return will be treated as when they are distributed to you. They are aa taxable distribution. Excess contributions can return of your investment in your IRA.Are Distributions Taxable?also be recovered tax free as discussed under
Only the part of the distribution that repre-What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional
In general, distributions from a traditional IRA sents nondeductible contributions (your cost ba-Taxes, later.
are taxable in the year you receive them. sis) is tax free. If nondeductible contributions
have been made, distributions consist partly ofEarly distributions tax. The 10% additional Exceptions. Exceptions to distributions from nondeductible contributions (basis) and partly oftax on distributions made before you reach age traditional IRAs being taxable in the year you deductible contributions, earnings, and gains (if591/2 does not apply to these tax-free withdraw- receive them are: there are any). Until all of your basis has beenals of your contributions. However, the distribu- distributed, each distribution is partly nontaxable• Rollovers,tion of interest or other income must be reported and partly taxable.on Form 5329 and, unless the distribution quali- • Qualified charitable distributions, dis-
fies as an exception to the age 59 1/2 rule, it will cussed below, Form 8606. You must complete Form 8606be subject to this tax. and attach it to your return if you receive a• Tax-free withdrawals of contributions, dis-
distribution from a traditional IRA and have evercussed earlier, and
When Must You Withdraw made nondeductible contributions to any of your• The return of nondeductible contributions, traditional IRAs. Using the form, you will figureIRA Assets? (Required discussed later under Distributions Fully or the nontaxable distributions for 2007 and yourPartly Taxable.Minimum Distributions) total IRA basis for 2007 and earlier years.
You cannot keep funds in a traditional IRA indef- Note. If you are required to file Form 8606,Although a conversion of a traditionalinitely. Eventually they must be distributed. If but you are not required to file an income taxIRA is considered a rollover for Roththere are no distributions, or if the distributions return, you still must file Form 8606. Send it toIRA purposes, it is not an exception to
CAUTION
!are not large enough, you may have to pay a the IRS at the time and place you would other-the rule that distributions from a traditional IRA50% excise tax on the amount not distributed as wise file an income tax return.are taxable in the year you receive them. Con-required. See Excess Accumulations (Insuffi- version distributions are includible in your grosscient Distributions), later. The requirements for income subject to this rule and the special rules Distributions reported on Form 1099-R. Ifdistributing IRA funds differ depending on for conversions explained in Publication 590. you receive a distribution from your traditionalwhether you are the IRA owner or the benefi- IRA, you will receive Form 1099-R, Distributionsciary of a decedent's IRA. From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement orQualified charitable distributions. A quali-
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-fied charitable distribution (QCD) is a nontax-Required minimum distribution. The tracts, etc., or a similar statement. IRA distribu-able distribution made directly by the trustee ofamount that must be distributed each year is tions are shown in boxes 1 and 2a of Formyour IRA (other than a SEP or SIMPLE IRA) toreferred to as the required minimum distribution. 1099-R. A number or letter code in box 7 tellsan organization eligible to receive tax-deductible
you what type of distribution you received fromcontributions. You must have been at least ageRequired distributions not eligible for rollo- your IRA.701/2 when the distribution was made. Your totalver. Amounts that must be distributed (re- QCDs for the year cannot be more thanquired minimum distributions) during a particular $100,000. If you file a joint return, your spouse Withholding. Federal income tax is withheldyear are not eligible for rollover treatment. can also have a QCD of up to $100,000. How- from distributions from traditional IRAs unless
ever, the amount of the QCD is limited to the you choose not to have tax withheld. See chap-IRA owners. If you are the owner of a tradi- amount of the distribution that would otherwise ter 4.tional IRA, you must start receiving distributions be included in income. If your IRA includes non- IRA distributions delivered outside thefrom your IRA by April 1 of the year following the deductible contributions, the distribution is first United States. In general, if you are a U.S.year in which you reach age 701/2. April 1 of the considered to be paid out of otherwise taxable citizen or resident alien and your home addressyear following the year in which you reach age income. For more information see Publication is outside the United States or its possessions,701/2 is referred to as the required beginning 590. you cannot choose exemption from withholdingdate. You cannot claim a charitable contribu- on distributions from your traditional IRA.
tion deduction for any QCD not in-Distributions by the required beginning date. cluded in your income.
CAUTION
! Reporting taxable distributions on your re-You must receive at least a minimum amount for
turn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ-each year starting with the year you reach age
ing early distributions on Form 1040, line 15b, or701/2 (your 701/2 year). If you do not (or did not) Ordinary income. Distributions from tradi-
Form 1040A, line 11b (no entry is required onreceive that minimum amount in your 701/2 year, tional IRAs that you include in income are taxed
Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a). Ifthen you must receive distributions for your 701/2 as ordinary income.
only part of the distribution is taxable, enter theyear by April 1 of the next year.
total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or FormIf an IRA owner dies after reaching age 701/2, No special treatment. In figuring your tax,
1040A, line 11a, and the taxable part on Formbut before April 1 of the next year, no minimum you cannot use the 10-year tax option or capital
1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. Youdistribution is required because death occurred gain treatment that applies to lump-sum distribu-
cannot report distributions on Form 1040EZ.before the required beginning date. tions from qualified employer plans.
Page 122 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

How to treat withdrawn interest or otherInvestment in CollectiblesWhat Acts Result in income. You must include in your gross in-
If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, thePenalties or Additional come the interest or other income that was
amount invested is considered distributed to you earned on the excess contribution. Report it onTaxes? in the year invested. You may have to pay the your return for the year in which the excess
contribution was made. Your withdrawal of inter-10% additional tax on early distributions, dis-The tax advantages of using traditional IRAs for est or other income may be subject to an addi-cussed later.retirement savings can be offset by additional tional 10% tax on early distributions, discussedtaxes and penalties if you do not follow the rules. later.Collectibles. These include:There are additions to the regular tax for
Excess contributions withdrawn after due• Artworks,using your IRA funds in prohibited transactions.
date of return. In general, you must include allThere are also additional taxes for the following • Rugs, distributions (withdrawals) from your traditionalactivities.
IRA in your gross income. However, if the follow-• Antiques,• Investing in collectibles. ing conditions are met, you can withdraw excess• Metals, contributions from your IRA and not include the• Making excess contributions.
amount withdrawn in your gross income.• Gems,• Taking early distributions.
• Total contributions (other than rollover• Stamps,• Allowing excess amounts to accumulate contributions) for 2007 to your IRA were(failing to take required distributions). not more than $4,000 ($5,000 if you are• Coins,
50 or older, or $7,000 for certain employer• Alcoholic beverages, andThere are penalties for overstating the bankruptcies).amount of nondeductible contributions and for • Certain other tangible personal property. • You did not take a deduction for the ex-failure to file a Form 8606, if required.
cess contribution being withdrawn.Exception. Your IRA can invest in one,
The withdrawal can take place at any time, evenone-half, one-quarter, or one-tenth ounce U.S.Prohibited Transactions after the due date, including extensions, for filinggold coins, or one-ounce silver coins minted by
your tax return for the year.the Treasury Department. It can also invest inGenerally, a prohibited transaction is any im-
certain platinum coins and certain gold, silver,proper use of your traditional IRA by you, your Excess contribution deducted in an earlierpalladium, and platinum bullion.beneficiary, or any disqualified person. year. If you deducted an excess contribution in
Disqualified persons include your fiduciary an earlier year for which the total contributions
were not more than the maximum deductibleand members of your family (spouse, ancestor, Excess Contributions amount for that year ($2,000 for 2001 and earlierlineal descendent, and any spouse of a lineal
years, $3,000 for 2002 through 2004 ($3,500 ifdescendent). Generally, an excess contribution is the amount
you were age 50 or older), $4,000 for 2005contributed to your traditional IRA(s) for the yearThe following are examples of prohibited ($4,500 if you were age 50 or older), $4,000 forthat is more than the smaller of the followingtransactions with a traditional IRA. 2006 ($5,000 if you were age 50 or older)), youamounts.• Borrowing money from it. can still remove the excess from your traditional
• The maximum deductible amount for the IRA and not include it in your gross income. To• Selling property to it. year. For 2007, this is $4,000 ($5,000 if do this, file Form 1040X for that year and do not
you are 50 or older, or $7,000 for certain• Receiving unreasonable compensation for deduct the excess contribution on the amended
employer bankruptcies).managing it. return. Generally, you can file an amended re-
turn within 3 years after you filed your return, or• Your taxable compensation for the year.• Using it as security for a loan. 2 years from the time the tax was paid, which-
• Buying property for personal use (present ever is later.
Tax on excess contributions. In general, ifor future) with IRA funds.
Excess due to incorrect rollover information.the excess contributions for a year are not with-
If an excess contribution in your traditional IRA isdrawn by the date your return for the year is dueEffect on an IRA account. Generally, if you or the result of a rollover and the excess occurred(including extensions), you are subject to a 6%your beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans- because the information the plan was requiredtax. You must pay the 6% tax each year onaction in connection with your traditional IRA to give you was incorrect, you can withdraw theexcess amounts that remain in your traditionalaccount at any time during the year, the account excess contribution. The limits mentioned aboveIRA at the end of your tax year. The tax cannotstops being an IRA as of the first day of that are increased by the amount of the excess thatbe more than 6% of the combined value of youryear. is due to the incorrect information. You will haveIRAs as of the end of your tax year. to amend your return for the year in which the
excess occurred to correct the reporting of theEffect on you or your beneficiary. If your Excess contributions withdrawn by due date rollover amounts in that year. Do not include inaccount stops being an IRA because you or your of return. You will not have to pay the 6% tax if your gross income the part of the excess contri-beneficiary engaged in a prohibited transaction, you withdraw an excess contribution made dur- bution caused by the incorrect information.the account is treated as distributing all its as- ing a tax year and you also withdraw interest or
sets to you at their fair market values on the first other income earned on the excess contribution.
day of the year. If the total of those values is You must complete your withdrawal by the date Early Distributionsmore than your basis in the IRA, you will have a your tax return for that year is due, including
taxable gain that is includible in your income. For You must include early distributions of taxableextensions.
information on figuring your gain and reporting it amounts from your traditional IRA in your grossHow to treat withdrawn contributions. Doin income, see Are Distributions Taxable, ear- income. Early distributions are also subject to annot include in your gross income an excesslier. The distribution may be subject to additional additional 10% tax. See the discussion of Formcontribution that you withdraw from your tradi-taxes or penalties. 5329 under Reporting Additional Taxes, later, totional IRA before your tax return is due if both figure and report the tax.the following conditions are met.
Taxes on prohibited transactions. If some- Early distributions defined. Early distribu-• No deduction was allowed for the excessone other than the owner or beneficiary of a tions generally are amounts distributed fromcontribution.traditional IRA engages in a prohibited transac- your traditional IRA account or annuity before
tion, that person may be liable for certain taxes. you are age 591/2.• You withdraw the interest or other income
In general, there is a 15% tax on the amount of earned on the excess contribution. Age 591/2 rule. Generally, if you are under agethe prohibited transaction and a 100% additional You can take into account any loss on the contri- 591/2, you must pay a 10% additional tax on thetax if the transaction is not corrected. bution while it was in the IRA when calculating distribution of any assets (money or other prop-
the amount that must be withdrawn. If there was erty) from your traditional IRA. Distributions
More information. For more information on a loss, the net income you must withdraw may before you are age 591/2 are called early distribu-
prohibited transactions, see Publication 590. be a negative amount. tions.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 123

The 10% additional tax applies to the part of you may have to pay a 50% excise tax for that Reporting Additional Taxes
the distribution that you have to include in gross year on the amount not distributed as required.
Generally, you must use Form 5329 to report theincome. It is in addition to any regular income tax Request to waive the tax. If the excess ac- tax on excess contributions, early distributions,on that amount. cumulation is due to reasonable error, and you and excess accumulations. If you must file FormExceptions. There are several exceptions have taken, or are taking, steps to remedy the 5329, you cannot use Form 1040A or Formto the age 59 1/2 rule. Even if you receive a insufficient distribution, you can request that the 1040EZ.distribution before you are age 59 1/2, you may tax be excused. If you believe you qualify for this
Filing a tax return. If you must file an individ-not have to pay the 10% additional tax if you are relief, attach a statement of explanation and
ual income tax return, complete Form 5329 andin one of the following situations. complete Form 5329 as instructed under Waiver
attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the totalof tax in the Instructions for Form 5329.• You have unreimbursed medical expenses amount of additional taxes due on Form 1040,that are more than 7.5% of your adjusted Exemption from tax. If you are unable to take line 60.gross income. required distributions because you have a tradi- Not filing a tax return. If you do not have totional IRA invested in a contract issued by an• The distributions are not more than the file a tax return but do have to pay one of theinsurance company that is in state insurer delin-cost of your medical insurance. additional taxes mentioned earlier, file the com-quency proceedings, the 50% excise tax does• You are disabled. pleted Form 5329 with the IRS at the time andnot apply if the conditions and requirements of place you would have filed your Form 1040. BeRevenue Procedure 92-10 are satisfied.• You are the beneficiary of a deceased IRA sure to include your address on page 1 and yourowner. More information. For more information on signature and date on page 2. Enclose, but do
• You are receiving distributions in the form excess accumulations, see Publication 590. not attach, a check or money order payable to
of an annuity.
• The distributions are not more than your Worksheet 17-2. Modified Adjustedqualified higher education expenses. Gross Income for Roth IRA• You use the distributions to buy, build, or Purposes Keep for Your Records
rebuild a first home.
Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for Roth IRA purposes.• The distribution is due to an IRS levy of
the qualified plan.
1. Enter your adjusted gross income from Form 1040, line 38, or• The distribution is a qualified reservist dis- Form 1040A, line 22 ............................... 1.tribution.
2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRAMost of these exceptions are explained in Publi-
(other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA or a minimum requiredcation 590.
distribution from an IRA (if figuring MAGI for conversion purposes) 2.
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........................... 3.Note. Distributions that are timely and prop-
erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, are not 4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Form 1040, line 32, orsubject to either regular income tax or the 10% Form 1040A, line 17 ............................... 4.additional tax. Certain withdrawals of excess
contributions after the due date of your return 5. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line
are also tax free and therefore not subject to the 33, or Form 1040A, line 18 ........................... 5.
10% additional tax. (See Excess contributions
6. Enter any tuition and fees deduction from Form 1040, line 34, orwithdrawn after due date of return, earlier.) This
Form 1040A, line 19 ............................... 6.also applies to transfers incident to divorce, as
discussed earlier. 7. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from Form
Receivership distributions. Early distribu- 1040, line 35 .................................... 7.
tions (with or without your consent) from savings 8. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion frominstitutions placed in receivership are subject to Form 2555, line 45, or Form 2555-EZ, line 18 .............. 8.this tax unless one of the exceptions listed ear-
lier applies. This is true even if the distribution is 9. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 ... 9.from a receiver that is a state agency.
10. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line
Additional 10% tax. The additional tax on 14 ........................................... 10.early distributions is 10% of the amount of the
11. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits fromearly distribution that you must include in your
Form 8839, line 30 ................................ 11.gross income. This tax is in addition to any
regular income tax resulting from including the 12. Add the amounts on lines 3 through 11 .................. 12.distribution in income.
13. Enter:Nondeductible contributions. The tax on • $166,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)early distributions does not apply to the part of a • $10,000 if married filing separately and you lived with yourdistribution that represents a return of your non- spouse at any time during the yeardeductible contributions (basis). • $114,000 for all others 13.
More information. For more information on Is the amount on line 12 more than the amount on line 13?early distributions, see Publication 590. If yes, then see the Note below.
If no, then the amount on line 1 2 is your modified AGI for Roth
IRA purposes.
Excess Accumulations
(Insufficient Distributions) Note. If the amount on line 12 is more than the amount on line 13 and you have other
income or loss items, such as social security income or passive activity losses, that areYou cannot keep amounts in your traditional IRA subject to AGI-based phaseouts, you can refigure your AGI solely for the purpose ofindefinitely. Generally, you must begin receiving figuring your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. When figuring your modified AGI fordistributions by April 1 of the year following the conversion purposes, refigure your AGI without taking into account any income fromyear in which you reach age 701/2. The required conversions or minimum required distributions from IRAs. (If you receive social securityminimum distribution for any year after the year benefits, use Worksheet 1 in Appendix B of Publication 590 to refigure your AGI.) Then goin which you reach age 70 1/2 must be made by to list item (2) under Modified AGI or line 3 above in Worksheet 17-2 to refigure yourDecember 31 of that later year. modified AGI. If you do not have other income or loss items subject to AGI-based
phaseouts, your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes is the amount on line 12.Tax on excess. If distributions are less than
the required minimum distribution for the year,
Page 124 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

the United States Treasury for the tax you owe, Table 17-3. Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution
as shown on Form 5329. Enter your social se-
This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by thecurity number and ª2007 Form 5329º on your
amount of your modified adjusted gross income (modified AGI).check or money order.
IF you have taxableForm 5329 not required. You do not have to
compensation and your AND your modifieduse Form 5329 if either of the following situa-
tions exist. filing status is... AGI is... THEN...
• Distribution code 1 (early distribution) is less than $156,000 you can contribute up to $4,000married filing jointly, or
correctly shown in box 7 of all Forms ($5,000 if you are 50 or older inqualifying widow(er)
1099-R. If you do not owe any other addi- 2007).tional tax on a distribution, multiply the tax-
at least $156,000 the amount you can contribute isable part of the early distribution by 10%
and enter the result on Form 1040, line 60. but less than $166,000 reduced as explained under
Put ªNoº to the left of line 60 to indicate Contribution limit reduced in
that you do not have to file Form 5329. Publication 590.
However, if you owe this tax and also owe
$166,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.any other additional tax on a distribution,
do not enter this 10% additional tax di- zero (-0-) you can contribute up to $4,000married filing separatelyrectly on your Form 1040. You must file ($5,000 if you are 50 or older inand you lived with yourForm 5329 to report your additional taxes. 2007).spouse at any time during
• If you rolled over part or all of a distribution the year more than zero (-0-) the amount you can contribute isfrom a qualified retirement plan, the part
but less than $10,000 reduced as explained underrolled over is not subject to the tax on
Contribution limit reduced inearly distributions.
Publication 590.
$10,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
less than $99,000 you can contribute up to $4,000single,Roth IRAs ($5,000 if you are 50 or older inhead of household, or
2007).married filing separatelyRegardless of your age, you may be able to and you did not live withestablish and make nondeductible contributions at least $99,000 the amount you can contribute isyour spouse at any timeto a retirement plan called a Roth IRA. but less than $114,000 reduced as explained underduring the year Contribution limit reduced in
Publication 590.Contributions not reported. You do not re-
port Roth IRA contributions on your return. $114,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
What Is a Roth IRA?
• $114,000 for single, head of household, or a. Conversion income. This is any incomeA Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that, married filing separately and you did not resulting from the conversion of an IRAexcept as explained in this chapter, is subject to live with your spouse at any time during (other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA.the rules that apply to a traditional IRA (defined the year, or b. Minimum required distributions fromearlier). It can be either an account or an annu-
• $10,000 for married filing separately and IRAs (for conversions only).ity. Individual retirement accounts and annuities
you lived with your spouse at any timeare described in Publication 590.
2. Add the following deductions and exclu-during the year.To be a Roth IRA, the account or annuity
sions:must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is set
up. A deemed IRA can be a Roth IRA, but You may be eligible to claim a credit for a. Traditional IRA deduction,neither a SEP IRA nor a SIMPLE IRA can be contributions to your Roth IRA. Fordesignated as a Roth IRA. b. Student loan interest deduction,more information, see chapter 37.
TIPUnlike a traditional IRA, you cannot deduct c. Tuition and fees deduction,contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy
the requirements, qualified distributions (dis- d. Domestic production activities deduc-Is there an age limit for contributions? Con-cussed later) are tax free. Contributions can be tion,tributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard-made to your Roth IRA after you reach age 701/2
less of your age. e. Foreign earned income exclusion,and you can leave amounts in your Roth IRA as
long as you live. f. Foreign housing exclusion or deduction,Can you contribute to a Roth IRA for your
g. Exclusion of qualified savings bond in-spouse? You can contribute to a Roth IRA forWhen Can a Roth IRA Be terest shown on Form 8815, andyour spouse provided the contributions satisfy
the spousal IRA limit (discussed in How MuchSet Up? h. Exclusion of employer-provided adop-Can Be Contributed under Traditional IRAs), tion benefits shown on Form 8839.you file jointly, and your modified AGI is lessYou can set up a Roth IRA at any time. How-
than $166,000.ever, the time for making contributions for any You can use Worksheet 17-2 to figure your
year is limited. See When Can You Make Contri- modified AGI.
butions, later under Can You Contribute to a Compensation. Compensation includes
Roth IRA? wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, bo-
nuses, and other amounts received for providing How Much Can Be Contributed?personal services. It also includes commissions,Can You Contribute to a
self-employment income, nontaxable combat The contribution limit for Roth IRAs generallyRoth IRA? pay, and taxable alimony and separate mainte- depends on whether contributions are madenance payments. only to Roth IRAs or to both traditional IRAs andGenerally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA if
Roth IRAs.you have taxable compensation (defined later)
Modified AGI. Your modified AGI for Roth IRAand your modified AGI (defined later) is less
purposes is your adjusted gross income (AGI)than: Roth IRAs only. If contributions are madeas shown on your return modified as follows.
• $166,000 for married filing jointly or quali- only to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit gener-
fying widow(er), 1. Subtract the following: ally is the lesser of the following amounts.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 125

• $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older in 1. Amounts contributed for the tax year to to a Roth IRA under the same rules explained
your Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop- earlier under Converting From Any Traditional2007).
erly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRA IRA to a Roth IRA.• Your taxable compensation. or properly converted from a traditional  However, you cannot convert any amount
However, if your modified AGI is above a certain IRA, as described later) that are more than distributed from the SIMPLE IRA during the
amount, your contribution limit may be reduced, your contribution limit for the year, plus 2-year period beginning on the date you first
participated in any SIMPLE IRA plan maintainedas explained later under Contribution limit re- 2. Any excess contributions for the preceding by your employer.duced. year, reduced by the total of:
More information. For more detailed informa-Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs. If contribu- a. Any distributions out of your Roth IRAs tion on conversions, see Publication 590.tions are made to both Roth IRAs and traditional for the year, plus
IRAs established for your benefit, your contribu- b. Your contribution limit for the year mi-tion limit for Roth IRAs generally is the same as Failed Conversionsnus your contributions to all your IRAsyour limit would be if contributions were made for the year.only to Roth IRAs, but then reduced by all contri- If, when you converted amounts from a tradi-butions for the year to all IRAs other than Roth tional IRA into a Roth IRA, you expected to haveIRAs. Employer contributions under a SEP or Withdrawal of excess contributions. For modified AGI of less than $100,000 and a filingSIMPLE IRA plan do not affect this limit. purposes of determining excess contributions, status other than married filing separately, but
any contribution that is withdrawn on or beforeThis means that your contribution limit is the your expectations did not come true, you have
the due date (including extensions) for filing yourlesser of the following amounts. made a failed conversion.
tax return for the year is treated as an amount• $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older in Results of failed conversions. If the con-not contributed. This treatment applies only if2007) minus all contributions (other than verted amount (contribution) is not recharacter-any earnings on the contributions are also with-employer contributions under a SEP or ized (explained earlier), the contribution will bedrawn. The earnings are considered to haveSIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to all IRAs treated as a regular contribution to the Roth IRAbeen earned and received in the year the excessother than Roth IRAs. and subject to the following tax consequences.contribution was made.
• Your taxable compensation minus all con- • A 6% excise tax per year will apply to anyApplying excess contributions. If contribu-tributions (other than employer contribu- excess contribution not withdrawn fromtions to your Roth IRA for a year were more thantions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) the Roth IRA.the limit, you can apply the excess contributionfor the year to all IRAs other than Roth in one year to a later year if the contributions for • The distributions from the traditional IRAIRAs. that later year are less than the maximum al- must be included in your gross income.
lowed for that year.However, if your modified AGI is above a certain • The 10% additional tax on early distribu-amount, your contribution limit may be reduced, tions may apply to any distribution.as explained later under Contribution limit re- Can You Move Amountsduced. How to avoid. You must move the amountInto a Roth IRA? converted (including all earnings from the dateCatch-up contributions in certain employer of conversion) into a traditional IRA by the dueYou may be able to convert amounts from eitherbankruptcies. If you participated in a 401(k) date (including extensions) for your tax return fora traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRA into a Rothplan and the employer who maintained the plan the year during which you made the conversionIRA. You may be able to recharacterize contri-went into bankruptcy in an earlier year, you may to the Roth IRA. You do not have to include thisbutions made to one IRA as having been madebe able to contribute an additional $3,000 to distribution (withdrawal) in income. Seedirectly to a different IRA. You can roll amountsyour IRA. See Publication 590 to see if you Recharacterizations, earlier, for more informa-over from a designated Roth account or fromqualify to make these additional contributions. If tion.one Roth IRA to another Roth IRA.you qualify and choose to make these catch-up
contributions, the higher contribution and de-
duction limits for individuals who are age 50 or Rollover From a Roth IRAConversionsolder do not apply. The most that you can con-
tribute to your Roth IRA is $7,000. You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of theYou can convert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA.
assets from one Roth IRA if you contribute themThe conversion is treated as a rollover, regard-Contribution limit reduced. If your modified within 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of theless of the conversion method used. Most of theAGI is above a certain amount, your contribution rules for rollovers, explained earlier under Rollo-rules for rollovers, described earlier under Rollo-limit is gradually reduced. Use Table 17-3 to ver From One IRA Into Another under Tradi-ver From One IRA Into Another under Tradi-determine if this reduction applies to you. tional IRAs, apply to these rollovers.tional IRAs, apply to these rollovers. However,
the 1-year waiting period does not apply.Figuring the reduction. If the amount you
Are Distributions Taxable?can contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, see Conversion methods. You can convert
Publication 590 for how to figure the reduction. amounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA in You do not include in your gross income quali-any of the following ways. fied distributions or distributions that are a return
• Rollover. You can receive a distribution of your regular contributions from your RothWhen Can You Make from a traditional IRA and roll it over (con- IRA(s). You also do not include distributionsContributions? tribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 days from your Roth IRA that you roll over tax free into
after the distribution. another Roth IRA. You may have to include partYou can make contributions to a Roth IRA for a
of other distributions in your income. See Order-year at any time during the year or by the due • Trustee-to-trustee transfer. You can di- ing rules for distributions, later.date of your return for that year (not including rect the trustee of the traditional IRA to
extensions). transfer an amount from the traditional IRA Rollover from designated Roth account. A
to the trustee of the Roth IRA. rollover from a designated Roth account canYou can make contributions for 2007
only be made to another designated Roth ac-by the due date (not including exten- • Same trustee transfer. If the trustee of
count or to a Roth IRA.sions) for filing your 2007 tax return. the traditional IRA also maintains the Roth
TIP
IRA, you can direct the trustee to transfer What are qualified distributions? A qualifiedan amount from the traditional IRA to the distribution is any payment or distribution fromRoth IRA. your Roth IRA that meets the following require-What if You Contribute Too Much?
ments.Same trustee. Conversions made with theA 6% excise tax applies to any excess contribu- same trustee can be made by redesignating the 1. It is made after the 5-year period beginningtion to a Roth IRA. traditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open- with the first taxable year for which a con-
ing a new account or issuing a new contract. tribution was made to a Roth IRA set upExcess contributions. These are the contri- for your benefit, andbutions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equal Converting from a SIMPLE IRA. Generally,
the total of: you can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRA 2. The payment or distribution is:
Page 126 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

a. Made on or after the date you reach • Whether you must recapture the tax bene- • Payments to keep up the payer's property,
age 591/2, fits of alimony. Recapture means adding or
back in your income all or part of a deduc-b. Made because you are disabled, • Use of the payer's property.tion you took in a prior year.
c. Made to a beneficiary or to your estate
after your death, or Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or Payments to a third party. Cash payments,
former spouse under a divorce or separation checks, or money orders to a third party ond. To pay up to $10,000 (lifetime limit) of instrument. It does not include voluntary pay- behalf of your spouse under the terms of yourcertain qualified first-time homebuyer ments that are not made under a divorce or divorce or separation instrument can be ali-amounts. See Publication 590 for more separation instrument. mony, if they otherwise qualify. These includeinformation. payments for your spouse's medical expenses,Alimony is deductible by the payer and must
housing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition,be included in the spouse's or former spouse's
etc. The payments are treated as received byAdditional tax on distributions of conversion income. Although this chapter is generally writ-
your spouse and then paid to the third party.contributions within 5-year period. If, within ten for the payer of the alimony, the recipient can
the 5-year period starting with the first day of use the information to determine whether an Life insurance premiums. Alimony includesyour tax year in which you convert an amount amount received is alimony. premiums you must pay under your divorce orfrom a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA, you take a To be alimony, a payment must meet certain separation instrument for insurance on your lifedistribution from a Roth IRA, you may have to requirements. Different requirements generally to the extent your spouse owns the policy.pay the 10% additional tax on early distributions. apply to payments under instruments executedYou generally must pay the 10% additional tax Payments for jointly-owned home. If yourafter 1984 and to payments under instrumentson any amount attributable to the part of the divorce or separation instrument states that youexecuted before 1985. This chapter discussesamount converted (the conversion contribution) must pay expenses for a home owned by youthe rules for payments under instruments exe-that you had to include in income. A separate and your spouse or former spouse, some of yourcuted after 1984. If you need the rules for pay-5-year period applies to each conversion. See payments may be alimony.ments under pre-1985 instruments, get andOrdering rules for distributions, later, to deter- keep a copy of the 2004 version of Publication Mortgage payments. If you must pay all themine the amount, if any, of the distribution that is 504. That was the last year the information on mortgage payments (principal and interest) on aattributable to the part of the conversion contri- pre-1985 instruments was included in Publica- jointly-owned home, and they otherwise qualifybution that you had to include in income. tion 504. as alimony, you can deduct one-half of the totalAdditional tax on other early distributions. Use Table 18-1 in this chapter as a guide to payments as alimony. If you itemize deductionsUnless an exception applies, the taxable part of determine whether certain payments are con- and the home is a qualified home, you can claimother distributions from your Roth IRA(s) that sidered alimony. half of the interest in figuring your deductibleare not qualified distributions is subject to the interest. Your spouse must report one-half of theDefinitions. The following definitions apply10% additional tax on early distributions. See payments as alimony received. If your spousethroughout this chapter.Publication 590 for more information. itemizes deductions and the home is a qualified
home, he or she can claim one-half of the inter-Spouse or former spouse. Unless other-Ordering rules for distributions. If you re- est on the mortgage in figuring deductible inter-wise stated, the term ªspouseº includes formerceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that is est.spouse.not a qualified distribution, part of it may be
taxable. There is a set order in which contribu- Taxes and insurance. If you must pay allDivorce or separation instrument. Thetions (including conversion contributions) and the real estate taxes or insurance on a hometerm ªdivorce or separation instrumentº means:earnings are considered to be distributed from held as tenants in common, you can deduct• A decree of divorce or separate mainte-your Roth IRA. Regular contributions are distrib- one-half of these payments as alimony. Yournance or a written instrument incident touted first. See Publication 590 for more informa- spouse must report one-half of these paymentsthat decree,tion. as alimony received. If you and your spouse
itemize deductions, you can each claim one-half• A written separation agreement, orMust you withdraw or use Roth IRA assets? of the real estate taxes and none of the homeYou are not required to take distributions from • A decree or any type of court order requir- insurance.your Roth IRA at any age. The minimum distri- ing a spouse to make payments for the  If your home is held as tenants by the en-bution rules that apply to traditional IRAs do not support or maintenance of the other tirety or joint tenants, none of your payments forapply to Roth IRAs while the owner is alive. spouse. This includes a temporary decree, taxes or insurance are alimony. But if you item-However, after the death of a Roth IRA owner, an interlocutory (not final) decree, and a ize deductions, you can claim all of the realcertain of the minimum distribution rules that decree of alimony pendente lite (while estate taxes and none of the home insurance.apply to traditional IRAs also apply to Roth IRAs. awaiting action on the final decree or
Other payments to a third party. If youagreement).More information. For more detailed informa- made other third-party payments, see Publica-tion on Roth IRAs, see Publication 590. tion 504 to see whether any part of the payments
Useful Items qualifies as alimony.
You may want to see:
Publication
Instruments❏ 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals18. Executed After 1984
The following rules for alimony apply to pay-
Alimony ments under divorce or separation instrumentsGeneral Rules executed after 1984.
The following rules apply to alimony regardless Exception for instruments executed before
Introduction of when the divorce or separation instrument 1985. There are two situations where the rules
was executed. for instruments executed after 1984 apply toThis chapter discusses the rules that apply if you instruments executed before 1985.pay or receive alimony. It covers the following Payments not alimony. Not all paymentstopics. 1. A divorce or separation instrument exe-under a divorce or separation instrument are
cuted before 1985 and then modified after• What payments are alimony. alimony. Alimony does not include:
1984 to specify that the after-1984 rules• What payments are not alimony, such as • Child support, will apply.child support. • Noncash property settlements, 2. A temporary divorce or separation instru-• How to deduct alimony you paid. • Payments that are your spouse's part of ment executed before 1985 and incorpo-
• How to report alimony you received as in- community income as explained under rated into, or adopted by, a final decree
come. Community Property in Publication 504, executed after 1984 that:
Chapter 18 Alimony Page 127

agreement (and therefore a divorce or separa-Table 18-1. Alimony Requirements (Instruments Executed After 1984)
tion instrument). If you are subject to temporary
support orders, the designation must be made inPayments ARE alimony if all of the Payments are NOT alimony if any of the the original or a later temporary support order.following are true: following are true: Your spouse can exclude the payments from
Payments are required by a divorce or Payments are not required by a divorce or income only if he or she attaches a copy of the
separation instrument. separation instrument. instrument designating them as not alimony to
his or her return. The copy must be attachedPayer and recipient spouse do not file a joint Payer and recipient spouse file a joint return each year the designation applies.return with each other. with each other.
Spouses cannot be members of the samePayment is in cash (including checks or Payment is:
household.  Payments to your spouse whilemoney orders). • Not in cash, you are members of the same household are not• A noncash property settlement, alimony if you are legally separated under a
• Spouse's part of community income, or decree of divorce or separate maintenance. A
• To keep up the payer's property. home you formerly shared is considered one
household, even if you physically separate your-Payment is not designated in the instrument Payment is designated in the instrument as selves in the home.as not alimony. not alimony. You are not treated as members of the same
household if one of you is preparing to leave theSpouses legally separated under a decree of Spouses legally separated under a decree of
household and does leave no later than 1 monthdivorce or separate maintenance are not divorce or separate maintenance are
after the date of the payment.members of the same household. members of the same household.
Exception. If you are not legally separatedPayments are not required after death of the Payments are required after death of the under a decree of divorce or separate mainte-recipient spouse. recipient spouse. nance, a payment under a written separation
agreement, support decree, or other court orderPayment is not treated as child support. Payment is treated as child support.
may qualify as alimony even if you are members
of the same household when the payment isThese payments are deductible by the payer These payments are neither deductible by the
made.and includible in income by the recipient. payer nor includible in income by the recipient.
Liability for payments after death of recipient
spouse. If any part of payments you makea. Changes the amount or period of pay- • The payment is not treated as child sup- must continue to be made for any period afterment, or port. your spouse's death, that part of your payments
is not alimony, whether made before or after theb. Adds or deletes any contingency or Each of these requirements is discussed next.
death. If all of the payments would continue,condition.
then none of the payments made before or afterCash payment requirement. Only cash pay-
the death are alimony.For the rules for alimony payments under ments, including checks and money orders,
pre-1985 instruments not meeting these excep- The divorce or separation instrument doesqualify as alimony. The following do not qualify
tions, see the 2004 revision of Publication 504 not have to expressly state that the paymentsas alimony.
on the IRS website at www.irs.gov. cease upon the death of your spouse if, for• Transfers of services or property (includ- example, the liability for continued paymentsing a debt instrument of a third party or anExample 1. In November 1984, you and would end under state law.annuity contract).your former spouse executed a written separa-
tion agreement. In February 1985, a decree of Example. You must pay your former• Execution of a debt instrument by the
divorce was substituted for the written separa- spouse $10,000 in cash each year for 10 years.payer.
tion agreement. The decree of divorce did not Your divorce decree states that the payments• The use of the payer's property.change the terms for the alimony you pay your will end upon your former spouse's death. You
former spouse. The decree of divorce is treated must also pay your former spouse or your formerPayments to a third party. Cash paymentsas executed before 1985. Alimony payments spouse's estate $20,000 in cash each year for
to a third party under the terms of your divorce orunder this decree are not subject to the rules for 10 years. The death of your spouse would not
separation instrument can qualify as cash pay-payments under instruments executed after terminate these payments under state law.
ments to your spouse. See Payments to a third1984. The $10,000 annual payments may qualify
party under General Rules, earlier. as alimony. The $20,000 annual payments that
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Also, cash payments made to a third party at do not end upon your former spouse's death are
Example 1 except that the decree of divorce not alimony.the written request of your spouse may qualify
changed the amount of the alimony. In this ex- as alimony if all the following requirements are Substitute payments. If you must makeample, the decree of divorce is not treated as met. any payments in cash or property after yourexecuted before 1985. The alimony payments spouse's death as a substitute for continuing• The payments are in lieu of payments ofare subject to the rules for payments under in- otherwise qualifying payments before the death,alimony directly to your spouse.struments executed after 1984. the otherwise qualifying payments are not ali-• The written request states that both mony. To the extent that your payments begin,Alimony requirements. A payment to or for a spouses intend the payments to be treated accelerate, or increase because of the death ofspouse under a divorce or separation instrument as alimony. your spouse, otherwise qualifying payments youis alimony if the spouses do not file a joint return
made may be treated as payments that were notwith each other and all the following require- • You receive the written request from your
alimony. Whether or not such payments will bements are met. spouse before you file your return for the
treated as not alimony depends on all the factsyear you made the payments.• The payment is in cash. and circumstances.
• The instrument does not designate the Payments designated as not alimony. You Example 1. Under your divorce decree, youpayment as not alimony.
and your spouse can designate that otherwise must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually.• The spouses are not members of the qualifying payments are not alimony. You do this The payments will stop at the end of 6 years orsame household at the time the payments by including a provision in your divorce or sepa- upon your former spouse's death, if earlier.are made. This requirement applies only if ration instrument that states the payments are Your former spouse has custody of your mi-the spouses are legally separated under a not deductible as alimony by you and are ex- nor children. The decree provides that if anydecree of divorce or separate mainte- cludable from your spouse's income. For this child is still a minor at your spouse's death, younance. purpose, any instrument (written statement) must pay $10,000 annually to a trust until the
signed by both of you that makes this designa- youngest child reaches the age of majority. The• There is no liability to make any payment
tion and that refers to a previous written separa- trust income and corpus (principal) are to be(in cash or property) after the death of the
tion agreement is treated as a written separation used for your children's benefit.recipient spouse.
Page 128 Chapter 18 Alimony

These facts indicate that the payments to be In all other situations, reductions in payments The reasons for a reduction or termination of
are not treated as clearly associated with the alimony payments that can require a recapturemade after your former spouse's death are a
happening of a contingency relating to your include:substitute for $10,000 of the $30,000 annual
child.payments. Of each of the $30,000 annual pay- • A change in your divorce or separationments, $10,000 is not alimony. Either you or the IRS can overcome the pre- instrument,
sumption in the two situations above. This is • A failure to make timely payments,Example 2. Under your divorce decree, you done by showing that the time at which themust pay your former spouse $30,000 annually. • A reduction in your ability to provide sup-payments are to be reduced was determinedThe payments will stop at the end of 15 years or port, orindependently of any contingencies relating toupon your former spouse's death, if earlier. The your children. For example, if you can show that • A reduction in your spouse's supportdecree provides that if your former spouse dies the period of alimony payments is customary in needs.before the end of the 15-year period, you must the local jurisdiction, such as a period equal topay the estate the difference between $450,000 one-half of the duration of the marriage, you can($30,000 × 15) and the total amount paid up to When to apply the recapture rule. You areovercome the presumption and may be able tothat time. For example, if your spouse dies at the subject to the recapture rule in the third year iftreat the amount as alimony.end of the tenth year, you must pay the estate the alimony you pay in the third year decreases$150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000). by more than $15,000 from the second year or
These facts indicate that the lump-sum pay- the alimony you pay in the second and third
ment to be made after your former spouse's years decreases significantly from the alimonyHow To Deductdeath is a substitute for the full amount of the you pay in the first year.
$30,000 annual payments. None of the annual When you figure a decrease in alimony, doAlimony Paidpayments are alimony. The result would be the not include the following amounts.
same if the payment required at death were to • Payments made under a temporary sup-You can deduct alimony you paid, whether orbe discounted by an appropriate interest factor port order.not you itemize deductions on your return. Youto account for the prepayment. must file Form 1040. You cannot use Form • Payments required over a period of at1040A or Form 1040EZ. least 3 calendar years that vary becauseChild support. A payment that is specifically
Enter the amount of alimony you paid on they are a fixed part of your income from adesignated as child support or treated as specifi-
Form 1040, line 31a. In the space provided on business or property, or from compensa-cally designated as child support under your
line 31b, enter your spouse's social security tion for employment or self-employment.divorce or separation instrument is not alimony.
number.The amount of child support may vary over time. • Payments that decrease because of theChild support payments are not deductible by death of either spouse or the remarriage If you paid alimony to more than one person,the payer and are not taxable to the recipient. of the spouse receiving the paymentsenter the social security number of one of the
before the end of the third year.recipients. Show the social security number andSpecifically designated as child support.
amount paid to each other recipient on an at-A payment will be treated as specifically desig-
tached statement. Enter your total payments onnated as child support to the extent that the Figuring the recapture. You can use Work-line 31a.payment is reduced either: sheet 1 in Publication 504 to figure recaptured
alimony.If you do not provide your spouse's• On the happening of a contingency relat-
social security number, you may haveing to your child, or Including the recapture in income. If youto pay a $50 penalty and your deduc-
CAUTION
!• At a time that can be clearly associated must include a recapture amount in income,tion may be disallowed.with the contingency. show it on Form 1040, line 11 (ªAlimony re-
ceivedº). Cross out ªreceivedº and enter ªrecap-A payment may be treated as specifically desig- ture.º On the dotted line next to the amount,nated as child support even if other separate enter your spouse's last name and social secur-payments are specifically designated as child ity number.How To Reportsupport.
Contingency relating to your child. A Deducting the recapture. If you can deduct aAlimony Receivedcontingency relates to your child if it depends on recapture amount, show it on Form 1040, line
any event relating to that child. It does not matter 31a (ªAlimony paidº). Cross out ªpaidº and enterReport alimony you received as income on Form
whether the event is certain or likely to occur. ªrecapture.º In the space provided, enter your1040, line 11. You cannot use Form 1040A or
Events relating to your child include the child's: spouse's social security number.Form 1040EZ.
• Becoming employed, You must give the person who paid the
alimony your social security number. If• Dying,
you do not, you may have to pay a $50
CAUTION
!• Leaving the household, penalty.
• Leaving school,
19.• Marrying, or
• Reaching a specified age or income level. Recapture Rule Education-Clearly associated with a contingency. If your alimony payments decrease or terminatePayments that would otherwise qualify as ali- during the first 3 calendar years, you may bemony are presumed to be reduced at a time Relatedsubject to the recapture rule. If you are subject toclearly associated with the happening of a con- this rule, you have to include in income in thetingency relating to your child only in the follow- third year part of the alimony payments youing situations. Adjustmentspreviously deducted. Your spouse can deduct in
• The payments are to be reduced not more the third year part of the alimony payments he or
than 6 months before or after the date the she previously included in income.
child will reach 18, 21, or local age of What's NewThe 3-year period starts with the first calen-majority. dar year you make a payment qualifying as
• The payments are to be reduced on two or alimony under a decree of divorce or separate Income limits increased. The amount of your
more occasions that occur not more than maintenance or a written separation agreement. student loan interest deduction for 2007 is grad-
1 year before or after a different one of Do not include any time in which payments were ually reduced (phased out) if your modified ad-
your children reaches a certain age from being made under temporary support orders. justed gross income (MAGI) is between $55,000
18 to 24. This certain age must be the The second and third years are the next 2 calen- and $70,000 ($110,000 and $140,000 if you file
same for each child, but need not be a dar years, whether or not payments are made a joint return). You cannot take a deduction if
whole number of years. during those years. your MAGI is $70,000 or more ($140,000 or
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 129

more if you file a joint return). This is an increase • Any reimbursements you received for • For education provided during an aca-
from the 2006 limits of $50,000 and $65,000 demic period for an eligible student.these expenses that were not reported to
($105,000 and $135,000 if filing a joint return). you in box 1 of your Form W-2.
Loans from the following sources are not qual-See chapter 4 of Publication 970 for more infor-
ified student loans.mation. How the deduction is claimed. To claim the
• A related person.deduction, enter the allowable amount on line 23
of Form 1040, or line 16 of Form 1040A. • A qualified employer plan.
Introduction Exceptions. For purposes of the student
This chapter discusses the education-related loan interest deduction, the following are excep-
adjustments you can deduct in figuring your ad- tions to the general rules for dependents.Student Loan Interestjusted gross income. • An individual can be your dependent evenThis chapter covers: Deduction if you are the dependent of another tax-
• Educator expenses, payer.Generally, personal interest you pay, other than• The student loan interest deduction, and • An individual can be your dependent evencertain mortgage interest, is not deductible on
if the individual files a joint return with ayour tax return. However, if your modified ad-• The tuition and fees deduction. spouse.justed gross income (MAGI) is less than
$70,000 ($140,000 if filing a joint return) there is • An individual can be your dependent evenUseful Items a special deduction allowed for paying interest if the individual had gross income for theYou may want to see: on a student loan (also known as an education year that was equal to or more than the
loan) used for higher education. For most tax- exemption amount for the year ($3,400 forPublication payers, MAGI is the adjusted gross income as 2007).
figured on their federal income tax return before❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education subtracting any deduction for student loan inter- Reasonable period of time. Qualified educa-est. This deduction can reduce the amount ofForm (and Instructions) tion expenses are treated as paid or incurredyour income subject to tax by up to $2,500 in within a reasonable period of time before or after2007. Table 19-1 summarizes the features of❏ 8917 Tuition and Fees Deduction you take out the loan if they are paid with thethe student loan interest deduction. proceeds of student loans that are part of a
federal postsecondary education loan program.Table 19-1. Student Loan Interest Even if not paid with the proceeds of thatDeduction at a Glance type of loan, the expenses are treated as paid orEducator Expenses Do not rely on this table alone. incurred within a reasonable period of time if
Refer to the text for more details. both of the following requirements are met.If you were an eligible educator in 2007, you can
• The expenses relate to a specific aca-deduct up to $250 of qualified expenses you Feature Description
demic period, andpaid in 2007 as an adjustment to gross income,
Maximum You can reduce your incomerather than as a miscellaneous itemized deduc- • The loan proceeds are disbursed within abenefit subject to tax by up to $2,500.tion. If you and your spouse are filing jointly and period that begins 90 days before the startboth of you were eligible educators, the maxi- Your student loan:Loan of that academic period and ends 90 daysmum deduction is $500. However, neither qualifications • must have been taken out after the end of that academic period.solely to pay qualifiedspouse can deduct more than $250 of his or her
education expenses, andqualified expenses. If neither of the above situations applies, the• cannot be from a related reasonable period of time usually is determinedEligible educator. An eligible educator is a person or made under a
based on all the relevant facts and circum-kindergarten through grade 12 teacher, instruc- qualified employer plan.
stances.tor, counselor, principal, or aide who worked in a The student must be:Studentschool for at least 900 hours during a school qualifications • you, your spouse, or your Academic period. An academic period in-year. dependent, and cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or other
• enrolled at least half-time inQualified expenses. Qualified expenses in- period of study (such as a summer school ses-
a degree program.clude ordinary and necessary expenses paid in sion) as reasonably determined by an educa-
connection with books, supplies, equipment (in- tional institution. In the case of an educationalTime limit on You can deduct interest paid
cluding computer equipment, software, and institution that uses credit hours or clock hoursdeduction during the remaining period of
services), and other materials used in the class- and does not have academic terms, each pay-your student loan.
room. An ordinary expense is one that is com- ment period can be treated as an academicPhaseout The amount of your deductionmon and accepted in your educational field. A period.depends on your income level.necessary expense is one that is helpful and
Eligible student. This is a student who wasappropriate for your profession as an educator.
 enrolled at least half-time in a program leadingAn expense does not have to be required to be
to a degree, certificate, or other recognized edu-considered necessary.
cational credential.Qualified expenses do not include expenses Student Loan Interest
for home schooling or for nonathletic supplies Enrolled at least half-time. A student wasDefinedfor courses in health or physical education. enrolled at least half-time if the student wasYou must reduce your qualified expenses by taking at least half the normal full-time work loadStudent loan interest is interest you paid duringthe following amounts. for his or her course of study.the year on a qualified student loan. It includes The standard for what is half of the normal• Tax-free distribution of interest under an both required and voluntary interest payments. full-time work load is determined by each eligibleeducation savings bond program (Form
educational institution. However, the standard8815). See Figuring the Tax-Free Amount
may not be lower than any of those establishedin chapter 10 of Publication 970. Qualified Student Loan by the Department of Education under the• Tax-free distribution of earnings from a Higher Education Act of 1965.This is a loan you took out solely to pay qualifiedqualified tuition program (QTP). See Figur- education expenses (defined later) that were:ing the Taxable Portion of a Distribution in Loan from a related person. You cannot de-
• For you, your spouse, or a person whochapter 8 of Publication 970. duct interest on a loan you get from a related
was your dependent (defined in chapter 3) person. Related persons include:• Tax-free distribution of earnings from a when you took out the loan,Coverdell education savings account • Your spouse,
• Paid or incurred within a reasonable pe-(ESA). See Figuring the Taxable Portion • Your brothers and sisters,riod of time before or after you took out theof a Distribution in chapter 7 of Publication
loan, and970. • Your half brothers and half sisters,
Page 130 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

• Your ancestors (parents, grandparents, • Your filing status is any filing status exceptInclude as Interest
etc.), married filing separately.
In addition to simple interest on the loan, certain• Your lineal descendants (children, grand- • No one else is claiming an exemption forloan origination fees, capitalized interest, inter-children, etc.), and you on his or her tax return.est on revolving lines of credit, and interest on
refinanced student loans can be student loan• Certain corporations, partnerships, trusts, • You are legally obligated to pay interest on
interest if all other requirements are met.and exempt organizations. a qualified student loan.
Loan origination fee. This is a one-time fee • You paid interest on a qualified studentLoan from a qualified employer plan. You charged by the lender when a loan is made. It is loan.cannot deduct interest on a loan made under a for the use of money and is treated as interest
qualified employer plan or under a contract pur- accrued over the life of the loan. This fee cannot Interest paid by others. If you are the personchased under such a plan. be for property or services provided by the legally obligated to make interest payments andlender, such as commitment fees or processing someone else makes a payment of interest oncosts. your behalf, you are treated as receiving theQualified Education Expenses
payments from the other person and, in turn,Capitalized interest.  This is unpaid interest
For purposes of the student loan interest deduc- paying the interest. See chapter 4 of Publicationon a student loan that is added by the lender to
tion, these expenses are the total costs of at- the outstanding principal balance of the loan. 970 for more information.
tending an eligible educational institution,
Interest on revolving lines of credit. Thisincluding graduate school. They include
interest, which includes interest on credit cardamounts paid for the following items. No Double Benefit Alloweddebt, is student loan interest if the borrower uses• Tuition and fees. the line of credit (credit card) only to pay quali- You cannot deduct as interest on a student loan
fied education expenses. See Qualified Educa- any amount that is an allowable deduction under• Room and board.
tion Expenses, earlier. any other provision of the tax law (for example,• Books, supplies, and equipment. home mortgage interest).Interest on refinanced student loans. This• Other necessary expenses (such as trans- includes interest on both:portation). How Much Can You• Consolidated loansÐloans used to refi-
DeductThe cost of room and board qualifies only to nance more than one student loan of the
the extent that it is not more than the greater of: same borrower, and Your student loan interest deduction for 2007 is
• The allowance for room and board, as de- • Collapsed loansÐtwo or more loans of generally the smaller of:
termined by the eligible educational institu- the same borrower that are treated by • $2,500, ortion, that was included in the cost of both the lender and the borrower as one
attendance (for federal financial aid pur- loan. • The interest you paid in 2007.
poses) for a particular academic period
and living arrangement of the student, or The amount determined above is phased outIf you refinance a qualified student loan (gradually reduced) if your MAGI is between• The actual amount charged if the student for more than your original loan and $55,000 and $70,000 ($110,000 and $140,000 ifis residing in housing owned or operated you use the additional amount for any
CAUTION
! you file a joint return). You cannot take a studentby the eligible educational institution. purpose other than qualified education ex- loan interest deduction if your MAGI is $70,000penses, you cannot deduct any interest paid on
or more ($140,000 or more if you file a jointthe refinanced loan.Eligible educational institution. An eligible return). For details on figuring your MAGI, seeeducational institution is any college, university, chapter 4 of Publication 970.Voluntary interest payments. These arevocational school, or other postsecondary edu- payments made on a qualified student loan dur-cational institution eligible to participate in a stu- ing a period when interest payments are not How Do You Figure thedent aid program administered by the required, such as when the borrower has beenDepartment of Education. It includes virtually all Deductiongranted a deferment or the loan has not yetaccredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri- entered repayment status.vately owned profit-making) postsecondary in- Generally, you figure the deduction using the
stitutions. Student Loan Interest Deduction Worksheet in
the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions.Certain educational institutions located Do Not Include as Interest However, if you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ,outside the United States also participate in the
or 4563, or you are excluding income fromU.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu- You cannot claim a student loan interest deduc-
sources within Puerto Rico, you must completedent Aid (FSA) programs. tion for any of the following items.
Worksheet 4-1 in chapter 4 of Publication 970.For purposes of the student loan interest • Interest you paid on a loan if, under the To help you figure your student loan interestdeduction, an eligible educational institution terms of the loan, you are not legally obli- deduction, you should receive Form 1098-E,also includes an institution conducting an intern- gated to make interest payments. Student Loan Interest Statement. Generally, anship or residency program leading to a degree or
• Loan origination fees that are payments institution (such as a bank or governmentalcertificate from an institution of higher educa-
for property or services provided by the agency) that received interest payments of $600tion, a hospital, or a health care facility that
lender, such as commitment fees or or more during 2007 on one or more qualifiedoffers postgraduate training.
processing costs. student loans must send Form 1098-E (or ac-An educational institution must meet the ceptable substitute) to each borrower by Janu-above criteria only during the academic pe- • Interest you paid on a loan to the extent ary 31, 2008.riod(s) for which the student loan was incurred. payments were made through your partici-
For qualified student loans taken out beforeThe deductibility of interest on the loan is not pation in the National Health Service
September 1, 2004, the institution is required toaffected by the institution's subsequent loss of Corps Loan Repayment Program (the
include on Form 1098-E only payments of statedeligibility. ªNHSC Loan Repayment Programº) or
interest. Other interest payments, such as cer-certain other state loan repayment pro-The educational institution should be tain loan origination fees and capitalized inter-grams. For more information, see Studentable to tell you if it is an eligible educa- est, may not appear on the form you receive.Loan Repayment Assistance in chapter 5tional institution.
TIP However, if you pay qualifying interest that is notof Publication 970. 
included on Form 1098-E, you can also deduct
those amounts. For information on allocatingAdjustments to qualified education ex- payments between interest and principal, seeCan You Claim thepenses. You must reduce your qualified edu- chapter 4 of Publication 970.cation expenses by certain tax-free items (such Deduction
 To claim the deduction, enter the allowableas the tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-
ships). See chapter 4 of Publication 970 for amount on line 33 (Form 1040), or line 18 (FormGenerally, you can claim the deduction if all four
details. of the following requirements are met. 1040A).
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 131

expenses of the student for whom the able to tell you if it is an eligible educational
qualified education expenses were paid. institution.Tuition and Fees
Certain educational institutions located
outside the United States also participate in theDeduction Table 19-2. Tuition and Fees U.S. Department of Education's FSA programs.
Deduction at a GlanceYou may be able to deduct qualified education
Do not rely on this table alone.expenses paid during the year for yourself, your Related expenses. Student-activity fees and
Refer to the text for more details.spouse, or a dependent. You cannot claim this expenses for course-related books, supplies,
deduction if your filing status is married filing and equipment are included in qualified educa-Question Answerseparately or if another person can claim an tion expenses only if the fees and expenses
exemption for you as a dependent on his or her must be paid to the institution as a condition ofWhat is the You can reduce your income
maximum subject to tax by up to $4,000.tax return. The qualified expenses must be for enrollment or attendance.
benefit?higher education, as explained later under What
Expenses Qualify. Where is As an adjustment to income on
No Double Benefit Allowedthe Form 1040, line 34, or 1040A,The tuition and fees deduction can reduce
deduction line 19.the amount of your income subject to tax by up  You cannot do any of the following.taken?to $4,000.
• Deduct qualified education expenses youTable 19-2 summarizes the features of the For whom A student enrolled in an eligible
deduct under any other provision of themust the educational institution who istuition and fees deduction.
expenses either: law, for example, as a business expense.You may be able to take a credit for be paid? • you, • Deduct qualified education expenses for ayour education expenses instead of a • your spouse, or
student on your income tax return if you ordeduction. You can choose the one • your dependent for whom you
TIP
anyone else claims a Hope or lifetimeclaim an exemption.that will give you the lower tax. See chapter 35
learning credit for that same student in thefor details about the credits. What tuition Tuition and fees required for same year.and fees enrollment or attendance at an
are eligible postsecondary • Deduct qualified education expenses thatCan You Claim the deductible? educational institution, but not have been used to figure the tax-free por-including personal, living, orDeduction tion of a distribution from a Coverdell edu-family expenses, such as room cation savings account (ESA) or aand board.The following rules will help you determine if you qualified tuition program (QTP). For acan claim the tuition and fees deduction. QTP, this applies only to the amount of tax-free earnings that were distributed, not
to the recovery of contributions to the pro-Who Can Claim the Deduction What Expenses Qualify gram. See Figuring the Taxable Portion of
a Distribution in chapter 7 (Coverdell ESA)Generally, you can claim the tuition and fees The tuition and fees deduction is based on quali- and in chapter 8 (QTP) of Publication 970.deduction if all three of the following require- fied education expenses you pay for yourself,ments are met. • Deduct qualified education expenses thatyour spouse, or your dependent for whom you
have been paid with tax-free interest onclaim an exemption on your tax return. Gener-1. You paid qualified education expenses of U.S. savings bonds (Form 8815). See Fig-ally, the deduction is allowed for qualified educa-higher education. uring the Tax-Free Amount in chapter 10tion expenses paid in 2007 in connection with
2. You paid the education expenses for an enrollment at an institution of higher education of Publication 970.
eligible student. during 2007 or for an academic period (defined • Deduct qualified education expenses thatearlier under Student Loan Interest Deduction)3. The eligible student is yourself, your have been paid with tax-free scholarship,beginning in 2007 or in the first 3 months ofspouse, or a dependent for whom you grant, or employer-provided educational2008.claim an exemption (defined in chapter 3) assistance. See the following section on
on your tax return. Adjustments to qualified education ex-Payments with borrowed funds. You can
penses.claim a tuition and fees deduction for qualifiedQualified education expenses are defined education expenses paid with the proceeds of alater under What Expenses Qualify. Eligible stu- loan. You use the expenses to figure the deduc-dents are defined later under Who Is an Eligible Adjustments to qualified education ex-tion for the year in which the expenses are paid,Student. penses. If you paid qualified education ex-not the year in which the loan is repaid. Treat penses with certain tax-free funds, you cannotloan payments sent directly to the educational claim a deduction for those amounts. You mustinstitution as paid on the date the institutionWho Cannot Claim the Deduction reduce the qualified education expenses by thecredits the student's account. amount of any tax-free educational assistanceYou cannot claim the tuition and fees deduction and refunds you received.Student withdraws from class(es). You canif any of the following apply. claim a tuition and fees deduction for qualified Tax-free educational assistance. This in-• Your filing status is married filing sepa- education expenses not refunded when a stu- cludes:rately. dent withdraws.
• The tax-free part of scholarships and fel-
• Another person can claim an exemption lowships (see chapter 1 of Publication
for you as a dependent on his or her tax 970),Qualified Education Expensesreturn. You cannot take the deduction
• Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publicationeven if the other person does not actually For purposes of the tuition and fees deduction, 970),claim that exemption. qualified education expenses are tuition and
certain related expenses required for enrollment • Employer-provided educational assistance• Your modified adjusted gross income or attendance at an eligible educational institu- (see chapter 11 of Publication 970),(MAGI) is more than $80,000 ($160,000 if tion.filing a joint return). • Veterans' educational assistance (see
Eligible educational institution. An eligible• You were a nonresident alien for any part chapter 1 of Publication 970), and
educational institution is any college, university,of the year and did not elect to be treated • Any other nontaxable (tax-free) paymentsvocational school, or other postsecondary edu-as a resident alien for tax purposes. More (other than gifts or inheritances) receivedcational institution eligible to participate in a stu-information on nonresident aliens can be as educational assistance.dent aid program administered by thefound in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide Department of Education. It includes virtually allfor Aliens. Refunds. Qualified education expenses doaccredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-
• You or anyone else claims a Hope or life- not include expenses for which you, or someonevately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-
time learning credit in 2007 with respect to stitutions. The educational institution should be else who paid qualified education expenses on
Page 132 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

behalf of a student, receive a refund. (For infor- course of instruction or other education that in- educational institution (such as a college or uni-
mation on expenses paid by a dependent stu- volves sports, games or hobbies, or any non- versity) must send Form 1098-T (or acceptable
dent or third party, see Who Can Claim a credit course. However, if the course of substitute) to each enrolled student by January
Dependent's Expenses, later.) instruction or other education is part of the stu- 31, 2008.
If a refund of expenses paid in 2007 is re- dent's degree program, these expenses can To claim the deduction, enter the allowable
ceived before you file your tax return for 2007, qualify. amount on Form 1040, line 34, or Form 1040A,
simply reduce the amount of the expenses paid line 19, and attach your completed Form 8917.Comprehensive or bundled fees. Some eli-by the amount of the refund received. If the gible educational institutions combine all of theirrefund is received after you file your 2007 tax Table 19-3. Who Can Claim afees for an academic period into one amount. Ifreturn, see When Must the Deduction Be Repaid Dependent's Expensesyou do not receive, or do not have access to, an(Recaptured), in chapter 6 of Publication 970. allocation showing how much you paid for quali- Do not rely on this table alone.You are considered to receive a refund of See Who Can Claim afied education expenses and how much youexpenses when an eligible educational institu- Dependent's Expenses in chapterpaid for personal expenses, such as those listedtion refunds loan proceeds to the lender on be- 6 of Publication 970.above, contact the institution. The institution ishalf of the borrower. Follow the above required to make this allocation and provide you IF yourinstructions according to when you are consid- with the amount you paid (or were billed) for dependent isered to receive the refund. qualified education expenses on Form 1098-T, an eligible
Amounts that do not reduce qualified educa- Tuition Statement. See How Do You Figure the student and
tion expenses. Do not reduce qualified edu- Deduction, below, for more information about you... AND... THEN...
cation expenses by amounts paid with funds the Form 1098-T. claim an you paid only you canstudent receives as: exemption for all deduct the
your qualified qualifiedWho Is an Eligible Student• Payment for services, such as wages,
dependent education education• A loan, expenses expenses that youFor purposes of the tuition and fees deduction,
for your paid. Youran eligible student is a student who is enrolled in• A gift, dependent dependent cannotone or more courses at an eligible educational take a deduction.• An inheritance, or institution (defined earlier). The student must
have either a high school diploma or a General claim an your no one is allowed• A withdrawal from the student's personal
exemption for dependent to take aEducational Development (GED) credential.savings.
your paid all deduction.
dependent qualifiedDo not reduce the qualified education ex- Who Can Claim a educationpenses by any scholarship or fellowship re- expensesDependent's Expensesported as income on the student's tax return in
the following situations. do not claim you paid no one is allowed
Generally, to claim the tuition and fees deduc- an exemption all to take a• The use of the money is restricted to costs tion for qualified education expenses for a de- for your qualified deduction.
of attendance (such as room and board) dependent, educationpendent, you must:
other than qualified education expenses. but are expenses• Have paid the expenses, and eligible to• The use of the money is not restricted and • Claim an exemption for the student as ais used to pay education expenses that do not claim your no one is alloweddependent. an exemption dependent to take aare not qualified (such as room and
for your paid all deduction.board). Table 19-3 summarizes who can claim the de- dependent, qualifiedduction. but are education
eligible to expensesExpenses That Do Not Qualify
How Much Can You are not you paid only yourQualified education expenses do not include eligible to all dependent canDeductamounts paid for: claim an qualified deduct the
exemption for education amount you paid.• Insurance, The maximum tuition and fees deduction in your expenses The amount you2007 is $4,000, $2,000, or $0, depending on the• Medical expenses (including student dependent paid is treated asamount of your MAGI. For details on figuringhealth fees), a gift to youryour MAGI, see chapter 6 of Publication 970. dependent.• Room and board,
are not your only your• Transportation, or eligible to dependent dependent canHow Do You Figure the Deduction claim an paid all take a deduction.• Similar personal, living, or family ex- exemption for qualifiedFigure the deduction using Form 8917.penses. your educationTo help you figure your tuition and fees de- dependent expensesThis is true even if the amount must be paid to duction, you should receive Form 1098-T, Tui-the institution as a condition of enrollment or tion Statement. Generally, an eligibleattendance.
Sports, games, hobbies, and noncredit
courses. Qualified education expenses gen-
erally do not include expenses that relate to any
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 133

Part Five.
After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to subtractStandard the deductions used to figure taxable income. You can subtract either the
standard deduction or itemized deductions. Itemized deductions are deduc-Deduction and tions for certain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 1040). The ten
chapters in this part discuss the standard deduction, each itemized deduction,
Itemized and the limit on some of your itemized deductions if your adjusted gross
income exceeds certain amounts. See chapter 20 for the factors to consider
when deciding whether to subtract the standard deduction or itemized deduc-Deductions
tions.
• You are a nonresident or dual-status alien Higher Standard Deduction
during the year. You are considered a for Blindness
dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-20. If you are blind on the last day of the year anddent and resident alien during the year.
you do not itemize deductions, you are entitledNote. If you are a nonresident alien who is to a higher standard deduction as shown in
married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at Table 20-2. You qualify for this benefit if you areStandard the end of the year, you can choose to be totally or partly blind.
treated as a U.S. resident. (See Publication Partly blind. If you are partly blind, you must519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.) If youDeduction get a certified statement from an eye doctor ormake this choice, you can take the stan- registered optometrist that:
dard deduction. • You cannot see better than 20/200 in the
What's New better eye with glasses or contact lenses,
If an exemption for you can be claimed or
on another person's return (such asIncrease in standard deduction. The stan- • Your field of vision is not more than 20your parents' return), your standard
CAUTION
!dard deduction for most taxpayers who do not degrees.deduction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-itemize their deductions on Schedule A of Form
tion for Dependents, later.1040 is higher in 2007 than it was in 2006. The If your eye condition will never improve be-amount depends on your filing status. There are yond these limits, the statement should includetables at the end of this chapter to help you this fact. You must keep the statement in yourfigure your standard deduction for 2007. records.
If your vision can be corrected beyond theseStandard Deduction limits only by contact lenses that you can wear
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,Amount you can take the higher standard deduction forIntroduction
blindness if you otherwise qualify.This chapter discusses the following topics.
• How to figure the amount of your standard
Spouse 65 or Older or Blinddeduction. The standard deduction amount depends on
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or• The standard deduction for dependents. You can take the higher standard deduction if
blind, and whether an exemption can be claimed your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:• Who should itemize deductions. for you by another taxpayer. Generally, the stan- • You file a joint return, ordard deduction amounts are adjusted each yearMost taxpayers have a choice of either taking • You file a separate return and can claimfor inflation. The standard deduction amountsa standard deduction or itemizing their deduc- an exemption for your spouse becausetions. The standard deduction is a dollar amount for most taxpayers for 2007 are shown in Table your spouse had no gross income and anthat reduces the amount of income on which you 20-1. exemption for your spouse could not beare taxed. claimed by another taxpayer.The standard deduction is a benefit that elim-
Decedent's final return. The amount of theinates the need for many taxpayers to itemize
standard deduction for a decedent's final taxactual deductions, such as medical expenses, You cannot claim the higher standard
charitable contributions, and taxes, on Schedule return is the same as it would have been had the deduction for an individual other than
A of Form 1040. The standard deduction is decedent continued to live. However, if the de- yourself and your spouse.
CAUTION
!
higher for taxpayers who are 65 or older or blind. cedent was not 65 or older at the time of death,
If you have a choice, you can use the method the higher standard deduction for age cannot bethat gives you the lower tax.    claimed. ExamplesYou benefit from the standard deduc-
tion if your standard deduction is more The following examples illustrate how to deter-
Higher Standard Deductionthan the total of your allowable item- mine your standard deduction using Tables 20-1
TIP
ized deductions. and 20-2.for Age (65 or Older)
If you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, arePersons not eligible for the standard deduc-
to a higher standard deduction if you are age 65 filing a joint return for 2007. Neither is blind.tion. Your standard deduction is zero and you
or older at the end of the year. You are consid- They decide not to itemize their deductions.should itemize any deductions you have if:
They use Table 20-1. Their standard deductionered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday.• You are married and filing a separate re- is $10,700.Therefore, you can take a higher standard de-turn, and your spouse itemizes deduc-
duction for 2007 if you were born before Januarytions, Example 2. Assume the same facts as in2, 1943.• You are filing a tax return for a short tax Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the end
Use Table 20-2 to figure the standard deduc-year because of a change in your annual of 2007. Larry and Donna use Table 20-2. Their
tion amount.accounting period, or standard deduction is $11,750.
Page 134 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

Example 3. Bill, 72, and Terry, 66, are filing Table 20-3. He enters his earned income, • Had large unreimbursed employee busi-
a joint return for 2007. Neither is blind. They ness expenses or other miscellaneous de-$3,800, on line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 and
decide not to itemize their deductions. They use ductions,enters $4,100 on line 3. On line 5 he enters
Table 20-2. Their standard deduction is $4,100, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Since Joe is • Had large uninsured casualty or theft$12,800. married filing a separate return, he enters losses,$5,350 on line 6. On line 7a he enters $4,100 as
• Made large contributions to qualified chari-his standard deduction because it is smaller
ties, orthan $5,350, the amount on line 6.
Standard Deduction • Have total itemized deductions that are
Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimed more than the standard deduction to whichfor Dependents on her parents' 2007 tax return. She is 18 years you otherwise are entitled.
old and blind. She has interest income of $1,300 These deductions are explained in chaptersThe standard deduction for an individual for and wages of $2,900. She has no itemized de- 21±28.whom an exemption can be claimed on another ductions. Amy uses Table 20-3 to find her stan-person's tax return is generally limited to the dard deduction. She enters her wages of $2,900 If you decide to itemize your deductions, com-greater of: on line 1. She adds lines 1 and 2 and enters plete Schedule A and attach it to your Form
$3,200 on line 3. On line 5 she enters $3,200,• $850, or 1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, line
the larger of lines 3 and 4. Since she is single, 29, on Form 1040, line 40.• The individual's earned income for the Amy enters $5,350 on line 6. She enters $3,200year plus $300 (but not more than the reg- on line 7a. This is the smaller of the amounts onular standard deduction amount, generally Electing to itemize for state tax or other pur-lines 5 and 6. Because she checked one box in$5,350). poses. Even if your itemized deductions arethe top part of the worksheet, she enters $1,300 less than the amount of your standard deduc-on line 7b. She then adds the amounts on linesHowever, if the individual is 65 or older or tion, you can elect to itemize deductions on your7a and 7b and enters her standard deduction ofblind, the standard deduction may be higher. federal return rather than take the standard de-$4,500 on line 7c.If an exemption for you (or your spouse if you duction. You may want to do this, for example, ifare filing jointly) can be claimed on someone the tax benefit of being able to itemize yourelse's return, use Table 20-3 to determine your deductions on your state tax return is greaterstandard deduction. than the tax benefit you lose on your federal
Earned income defined. Earned income is Who Should Itemize return by not taking the standard deduction. To
salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and make this election, you must check the box on
other amounts received as pay for work you You should itemize deductions if your total de- line 30 of Schedule A.
actually perform. ductions are more than the standard deduction
 For purposes of the standard deduction, amount. Also, you should itemize if you do not Changing your mind. If you do not itemizeearned income also includes any part of a schol- qualify for the standard deduction, as discussed your deductions and later find that you shouldarship or fellowship grant that you must include earlier under Persons not eligible for the stan- have itemized Ð or if you itemize your deduc-in your gross income. See Scholarships and dard deduction.Fellowships in chapter 1 of Publication 970 for tions and later find you should not have Ð you
 You should first figure your itemized deduc-more information on what qualifies as a scholar- can change your return by filing Form 1040X,
tions and compare that amount to your standardship or fellowship grant. Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.
deduction to make sure you are using the See Amended Returns and Claims for Refund in
method that gives you the greater benefit.Example 1. Michael is single. His parents chapter 1 for more information on amended re-
claim an exemption for him on their 2007 tax turns.You may be subject to a limit on somereturn. He has interest income of $780 and of your itemized deductions if your ad- Married persons who filed separate re-wages of $150. He has no itemized deductions. justed gross income (AGI) is more than
CAUTION
! turns. You can change methods of taking de-Michael uses Table 20-3 to find his standard $156,400 ($78,200 if you are married filing sep- ductions only if you and your spouse both makededuction. He enters $150 (his earned income) arately). See chapter 29 and the instructions for the same changes. Both of you must file a con-on line 1, $450 ($150 plus $300) on line 3, $850 Schedule A (Form 1040), line 29, for more infor- sent to assessment for any additional tax either(the larger of $450 and $850) on line 5, and mation on figuring the correct amount of your one may owe as a result of the change.$5,350 on line 6. The amount of his standard itemized deductions.deduction, on line 7a, is $850 (the smaller of You and your spouse can use the method$850 and $5,350). When to itemize. You may benefit from that gives you the lower total tax, even though
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form one of you may pay more tax than you wouldExample 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col- 1040) if you: have paid by using the other method. You bothlege student, is claimed on his parents' 2007 tax must use the same method of claiming deduc-• Do not qualify for the standard deduction,return. Joe is married and files a separate return. tions. If one itemizes deductions, the otheror the amount you can claim is limited,His wife does not itemize deductions on her should itemize because he or she will not qualifyseparate return. • Had large uninsured medical and dental for the standard deduction. See Persons notJoe has $1,500 in interest income and expenses during the year, eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.wages of $3,800. He has no itemized deduc-
• Paid interest and taxes on your home,tions. Joe finds his standard deduction by using
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 135

Table 20-3. Standard Deduction Worksheet2007 Standard Deduction Tables for Dependents
If you are married filling a separate return and your spouse Use this worksheet only if someone else can
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
take the standard deduction even if you were born before Janu- married filing jointly).
CAUTION
!
ary 2, 1943, or you are blind.
If you were born before January 2, 1943, or you are blind,
check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to theTable 20-1. Standard Deduction Chart
worksheet.for Most People*
Born beforeYouTHEN your January 2, 1943 
 Blind 
standard
IF your filing status is... deduction is...
Your spouse, if claiming Born beforesingle or married filing separately $ 5,350
spouse's exemption January 2, 1943 
 Blind 
married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child 10,700
head of household 7,850
Total number of boxes you checked
* Do not use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1943, or you are blind,
or if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married
1. Enter your earned income (definedfiling jointly). Use Table 20-2 or 20-3 instead.
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
2. Additional amount 2. $300
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $850
Table 20-2. Standard Deduction Chart for People 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.Born Before January 2, 1943, or
Who are Blind* 6. Enter the amount shown below for your
filing status.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the
chart. • Single or Married filing separatelyÐ
$5,350 6.Born beforeYou January 2, 1943 
 Blind 
 • Married filing jointlyÐ$10,700
• Head of householdÐ$7,850Your spouse, if claiming Born before
spouse's exemption January 2, 1943 
 Blind 
7. Standard deduction.
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If born after January 1, 1943, and notTotal number of boxes you checked
blind, stop here. This is your
THEN your standard deduction. Otherwise, go
AND the number standard on to line 7b. 7a.
IF your in the box above deduction b. If born before January 2, 1943, orfiling status is... is... is... blind, multiply $1,300 ($1,050 if
single 1 $ 6,650 married) by the number in the box
2 7,950 above. 7b.
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is yourmarried filing jointly or 1 11,750
standard deduction for 2007. 7c.qualifying widow(er) 2 12,800
with dependent child 3 13,850
4 14,900
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, andmarried filing 1 6,400 other compensation received for personal services you performed. Itseparately 2 7,450 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must3 8,500 include in your income.
4 9,550
head of household 1 9,150
2 10,450
* If someone can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table 20-3, instead.
Page 136 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

Form (and Instructions)
How Much of the❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions21. Expenses Can You
Deduct?
Medical and You can deduct only the amount of your medicalWhat Are Medical and dental expenses that is more than 7.5% of
your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, lineDental Expenses Expenses? 38).
In this chapter, the term ª7.5% limitº is usedMedical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, to refer to 7.5% of your adjusted gross income.cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of dis- The phrase ªsubject to the 7.5% limitº is alsoease, and the costs for treatments affecting anyWhat's New used. This phrase means that you must subtractpart or function of the body. They include the 7.5% (.075) of your adjusted gross income from
costs of equipment, supplies, and diagnosticStandard mileage rate. The standard mile- your medical expenses to figure your medical
age rate allowed for operating expenses for a devices needed for these purposes. They also expense deduction.
car when you use it for medical reasons is 20 include dental expenses.
Example. Your adjusted gross income iscents per mile. See Transportation under What Medical care expenses must be primarily to $40,000, 7.5% of which is $3,000. You paidMedical Expenses Are Includible. alleviate or prevent a physical or mental defect medical expenses of $2,500. You cannot deductor illness. Do not include expenses that areRetired public safety officers. If you are a any of your medical expenses because they aremerely beneficial to general health, such as vita-retired public safety officer, do not include as not more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross in-
mins or a vacation.medical expenses any health or long-term care come.
insurance premiums that you elected to have Medical expenses include the premiums you
paid with tax-free distributions from a retirement pay for insurance that covers the expenses of
plan. This applies only to distributions that would medical care, and the amounts you pay for
otherwise be included in income. For more infor- transportation to get medical care. Medical ex- Whose Medicalmation, see Insurance Premiums for Retired penses also include amounts paid for qualified
Public Safety Officers in Publication 575. Expenseslong-term care services and limited amounts
paid for any qualified long-term care insurance
Can You Include?contract.
You can generally include medical expensesReminders you pay for yourself as well as those you pay for
someone who was your spouse or your depen-
Health coverage tax credit. There is a credit dent either when the services were provided orWhat Expenses Can
for health insurance premiums paid by certain when you paid for them. There are different rules
workers who are displaced by foreign trade or for decedents and for individuals who are theYou Include This Year?
who are receiving a pension from the Pension subject of multiple support agreements.
Benefit Guaranty Corporation. For more infor- You can include only the medical and dental
What if you are claimed as a dependent onmation, see Health Coverage Tax Credit in expenses you paid this year, regardless of when
someone else's return? Even if you, or yourchapter 37. the services were provided. If you pay medical spouse if you are filing a joint return, are claimedexpenses by check, the day you mail or deliver as a dependent on someone else's tax return,the check generally is the date of payment. If you can include the medical expenses of anyyou use a ªpay-by-phoneº or ªonlineº account to person you could have claimed as a dependent
pay your medical expenses, the date reportedIntroduction if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, were not
on the statement of the financial institution being claimed as a dependent on someoneThis chapter will help you determine the follow- showing when payment was made is the date of else's return.ing. payment. If you use a credit card, include medi-
• What medical expenses are. cal expenses you charge to your credit card in Spouse
the year the charge is made, not when you• What expenses you can include this year.
You can include medical expenses you paid foractually pay the amount charged.• How much of the expenses you can de- your spouse. To include these expenses, youduct. must have been married either at the time yourSeparate returns. If you and your spouse live spouse received the medical services or at the• Whose medical expenses you can include.
in a noncommunity property state and file sepa- time you paid the medical expenses.• What medical expenses are includible. rate returns, each of you can include only the
Example 1. Mary received medical treat-• How to treat reimbursements. medical expenses you actually paid. Any medi-
ment before she married Bill. Bill paid for thecal expenses paid out of a joint checking ac-• How to report the deduction on your tax treatment after they married. Bill can includecount in which you and your spouse have thereturn. these expenses in figuring his medical expensesame interest are considered to have been paid deduction even if Bill and Mary file separate• How to report impairment-related work ex- equally by each of you, unless you can show returns.penses. otherwise. If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could not• How to report health insurance costs if you Community property states. If you and include Mary's expenses in his separate return.are self-employed. your spouse live in a community property state Mary would include the amounts she paid during
the year in her separate return. If they filed aand file separate returns, any medical expenses
joint return, the medical expenses both paidpaid out of community funds are divided equally.Useful Items during the year would be used to figure theirEach of you should include half the expenses. IfYou may want to see: medical expense deduction.medical expenses are paid out of the separate
funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paidPublications Example 2. This year, John paid medicalthe medical expenses can include them. If you expenses for his wife Louise, who died last year.❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses live in a community property state, are married, John married Belle this year and they file a joint
and file a separate return, see Publication 555,❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Other return. Because John was married to Louise
Tax-Favored Health Plans Community Property. when she received the medical services, he can
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 137

include those expenses in figuring his medical parents. Each parent can include the medical Example. You and your three brothers each
deduction for this year. provide one-fourth of your mother's total sup-expenses he or she pays for the child, even if the
port. Under a multiple support agreement, youother parent claims the child's dependency ex-
treat your mother as your dependent. You paidemption, if:Dependent all of her medical expenses. Your brothers reim-
1. The child is in the custody of one or both bursed you for three-fourths of these expenses.You can include medical expenses you paid for parents for more than half the year, In figuring your medical expense deduction, youyour dependent. For you to include these ex- can include only one-fourth of your mother'spenses, the person must have been your depen- 2. The child receives over half of his or her medical expenses. Your brothers cannot includedent either at the time the medical services were support during the year from his or her any part of the expenses. However, if you andprovided or at the time you paid the expenses. A parents, and your brothers share the nonmedical supportperson generally qualifies as your dependent for 3. The child's parents: items and you separately pay all of yourpurposes of the medical expense deduction if mother's medical expenses, you can include theboth of the following requirements are met. a. Are divorced or legally separated under unreimbursed amount you paid for her medical
a decree of divorce or separate mainte- expenses in your medical expenses.1. The person was a qualifying child (defined
nance,later) or a qualifying relative (defined later),
and b. Are separated under a written separa- Decedent
tion agreement, or2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national,
Medical expenses paid before death by the de-or a resident of the United States, Canada, c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 cedent are included in figuring any deduction foror Mexico. If your qualifying child was months of the year. medical and dental expenses on the decedent'sadopted, see Exception for adopted child,
final income tax return. This includes expensesnext. This does not apply if the child's exemption is for the decedent's spouse and dependents asbeing claimed under a multiple support agree- well as for the decedent.Exception for adopted child. If you are a ment. The survivor or personal representative of aU.S. citizen or U.S. national and your adopted
decedent can choose to treat certain expenseschild lived with you as a member of your house-
paid by the decedent's estate for the decedent'shold for 2007, that child does not have to be a Qualifying Relative medical care as paid by the decedent at the timeU.S. citizen or national or a resident of the
the medical services were provided. The ex-United States, Canada, or Mexico. A qualifying relative is a person: penses must be paid within the 1-year period
beginning with the day after the date of death. If1. Who is your:
you are the survivor or personal representativeQualifying Child a. Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or making this choice, you must attach a statement
a descendant of any of them (for exam- to the decedent's Form 1040 (or the decedent'sA qualifying child is a child who:
amended return, Form 1040X) saying that theple, your grandchild),
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster expenses have not been and will not be claimedb. Brother, sister, or a son or daughter ofchild, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis- on the estate tax return.either of them,ter, or a descendant of any of them (for Qualified medical expenses paidexample, your grandchild, niece, or c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sib- before death by the decedent are notnephew), ling of either of them (for example, your deductible if paid with a tax-free distri-
CAUTION
!grandmother, grandfather, aunt, or un-2. At the end of 2007 was: bution from any Archer MSA or health savingscle), account.a. Under age 19, d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, Amended returns and claims for refund are
b. Under age 24 and a full-time student, or stepmother, son-in-law, daugh- discussed in chapter 1.
ter-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law,c. Permanently and totally disabled, What if you pay medical expenses of a de-brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, or
ceased spouse or dependent? If you paid3. Lived with you for more than half of 2007, e. Any other person (other than your medical expenses for your deceased spouse orand spouse) who lived with you all year as a dependent, include them as medical expenses
member of your household if your rela-4. Did not provide over half of his or her own on your Form 1040 in the year paid, whether
tionship did not violate local law,support for 2007. they are paid before or after the decedent's
death. The expenses can be included if the
2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Quali-Adopted child. A legally adopted child is person was your spouse or dependent either at
treated as your own child. This includes a child fying Child earlier) of any other person for the time the medical services were provided or
lawfully placed with you for legal adoption. 2007, and at the time you paid the expenses.
You can include medical expenses that you 3. For whom you provided over half of thepaid for a child before adoption if the child quali- support in 2007. But see Child of divorcedfied as your dependent when the medical serv- or separated parents, earlier, and Supportices were provided or when the expenses were What Medicalclaimed under a multiple support agree-paid. ment, next.If you pay back an adoption agency or other Expenses Arepersons for medical expenses they paid under
an agreement with you, you are treated as hav- Support claimed under a multiple support Includible?ing paid those expenses provided you clearly agreement. If you are considered to have pro-substantiate that the payment is directly attribu- Use Table 21-1, later, as a guide to determinevided more than half of a qualifying relative'stable to the medical care of the child. which medical and dental expenses you cansupport under a multiple support agreement,But if you pay the agency or other person for include on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Publi-you can include medical expenses you pay formedical care that was provided and paid for cation 502 for information about other expensesthat person. A multiple support agreement isbefore adoption negotiations began, you cannot you can include.used when two or more people provide moreinclude them as medical expenses. than half of a person's support, but no one alone
You may be able to take an adoption provides more than half. Insurance Premiumscredit for other expenses related to an For rules regarding what expenses you canadoption. See the Instructions for Form
TIP You can include in medical expenses insuranceinclude this year, see What Expenses Can You8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses, for more premiums you pay for policies that cover medi-Include This Year, earlier.information. cal care. Policies can provide payment for:Any medical expenses paid by others who
joined you in the agreement cannot be includedChild of divorced or separated parents. For • Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays, etc.,
as medical expenses by anyone. However, youpurposes of the medical and dental expenses • Prescription drugs,can include the entire unreimbursed amount youdeduction, a child of divorced or separated par-
paid for medical expenses.ents can be treated as a dependent of both • Dental Care,
Page 138 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

• Replacement of lost or damaged contact Employer-sponsored health insurance plan. Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).
If you have medical expenses that are reim-Do not include in your medical and dental ex-lenses,
bursed by a health reimbursement arrange-penses any insurance premiums paid by an em-• Membership in an association that gives ment, you cannot include those expenses inployer-sponsored health insurance plan unlesscooperative or so-called ªfree-choiceº your medical expenses. This is because an HRAthe premiums are included in box 1 of your Formmedical service, or group hospitalization is funded solely by the employer.W-2. Also, do not include any other medical andand clinical care, or dental expenses paid by the plan unless the Retired public safety officers. You cannot
amount paid is included in box 1 of your Form• Qualified long-term care insurance con- deduct any premiums you paid to the extent they
W-2.tracts (subject to additional limitations). were paid for with a tax-free distribution from
See Qualified Long-term Care Insurance your retirement plan.
Example. You are a federal employee par-Contracts in Publication 502. Medicare A. If you are covered under socialticipating in the premium conversion plan of the security (or if you are a government employeeFederal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) pro-If you have a policy that provides more than who paid Medicare tax), you are enrolled ingram. Your share of the FEHB premium is paidone kind of payment, you can include the premi- Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare Aby making a pre-tax reduction in your salary.ums for the medical care part of the policy if the is not a medical expense. If you are not coveredBecause you are an employee whose insurancecharge for the medical part is reasonable. The under social security (or were not a governmentpremiums are paid with money that is nevercost of the medical part must be separately employee who paid Medicare tax), you can vol-included in your gross income, you cannot de-stated in the insurance contract or given to you untarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation youduct the premiums paid with that money. can include the premiums you paid for Medicarein a separate statement.
A as a medical expense.
Note. When figuring the amount of insur- Long-term care services. Contributions Medicare B. Medicare B is supplementalance premiums you can deduct on Schedule A, made by your employer to provide coverage for medical insurance. Premiums you pay for Medi-do not include any health coverage tax credit qualified long-term care services under a flexible care B are a medical expense. If you applied for
advance payments shown in box 1 of Form spending or similar arrangement must be in- it at age 65 or after you became disabled, you
1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) cluded in your income. This amount will be re- can include in medical expenses the monthly
Advance Payments. ported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2. premiums you paid. Check the information you
Table 21-1. Medical and Dental Expenses Checklist
You can include: You cannot include:
• Bandages • Medical and hospital • Baby sitting and childcare • Medical insurance included
• Birth control pills prescribed insurance premiums in a car insurance policy• Bottled water
by your doctor covering all persons• Medical services fees (from • Contributions to Archer MSAs
injured in or by your car• Capital expenses for doctors, dentists, surgeons, (see Publication 969)
equipment or improvements specialists, and other • Medicine you buy without a• Diaper service
to your home needed for medical practitioners) prescription• Expenses for your generalmedical care (see • Medicare Part D premiums • Nursing care for a healthyhealth (even if following yourPublication 502) baby• Oxygen equipment and doctor's advice) such asÐ
• Certain fertility oxygen • Prescription drugs youÐHealth club dues
enhancement procedures brought in (or ordered• Part of life-care fee paid to ÐHousehold help (even if
(see Publication 502) shipped) from anotherretirement home designated recommended by a doctor)
• Certain weight-loss country, in most casesfor medical care ÐSocial activities, such as
expenses for obesity (see Publication 502)dancing or swimming lessons• Prescription medicines
• Diagnostic devices ÐTrip for general health • Nutritional supplements,(prescribed by a doctor) and
improvement vitamins, herbal• Expenses of an organ insulin
supplements, ªnaturaldonor • Flexible spending account• Psychiatric and
medicines,º etc., unlessreimbursements for medical• Eye surgeryÐto promote psychological treatment
recommended by aexpenses (if contributionsthe correct function of the • Social Security tax, medical practitioner as awere on a pre-tax basis) (seeeye Medicare tax, FUTA, and treatment for a specificPublication 502)• Guide dogs or other state employment tax for medical condition• Funeral, burial, or cremationanimals aiding the blind, worker providing medical diagnosed by a physicianexpensesdeaf, and disabled care (see Wages for
• Surgery for purelynursing services, below) • Health savings account• Hospital services fees (lab cosmetic reasons (seepayments for medicalwork, therapy, nursing • Special items (artificial Publication 502)expenses (see Publicationservices, surgery, etc.) limbs, false teeth,
• Toothpaste, toiletries,502)eye-glasses, contact• Lead-based paint removal cosmetics, etc.lenses, hearing aids, • Illegal operation or treatment(see Publication 502)
• Teeth whiteningcrutches, wheelchair, etc.) • Life insurance or income• Legal abortion
• Weight-loss expenses not• Special education for protection policies, or policies• Legal operation to prevent for the treatment of obesitymentally or physically providing payment for loss ofhaving children such as a or other diseasedisabled persons (see life, limb, sight, etc.vasectomy or tubal ligation
Publication 502) • Maternity clothes• Long-term care contracts,
• Stop-smoking programsqualified (see Publication
• Transportation for needed502)
medical care• Meals and lodging provided
• Treatment at a drug orby a hospital during medical
alcohol center (includestreatment
meals and lodging provided
by the center)
• Wages for nursing services
(see Publication 502)
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 139

received from the Social Security Administration the home if a principal reason for being there is Disabled Dependentto get medical care.to find out your premium.
Care ExpensesDo not include the cost of meals and lodging
Medicare D.  Medicare D is a voluntary pre- if the reason for being in the home is personal.
Some disabled dependent care expenses mayscription drug insurance program for persons You can, however, include in medical expenses
qualify as either:with Medicare A or B. You can include as a the part of the cost that is for medical or nursing
medical expense premiums you pay for Medi- care. • Medical expenses orcare D.
• Work-related expenses for purposes ofTransportation taking a credit for dependent care. (SeePrepaid insurance premiums. Premiums
chapter 32.)you pay before you are age 65 for insurance for You can include in medical expenses amountsmedical care for yourself, your spouse, or your You can choose to apply them either way aspaid for transportation primarily for, and essen-dependents after you reach age 65 are medical long as you do not use the same expenses totial to, medical care.care expenses in the year paid if they are: claim both a credit and a medical expense de-You can include: duction.• Payable in equal yearly installments, or
• Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or ambu-more often, and
lance service,• Payable for at least 10 years, or until you
• Transportation expenses of a parent whoreach age 65 (but not for less than 5 How Do You Treatmust go with a child who needs medicalyears).
care,
Reimbursements?• Transportation expenses of a nurse orUnused sick leave used to pay premiums.
other person who can give injections,You must include in gross income cash pay- You can include in medical expenses only those
medications, or other treatment requiredments you receive at the time of retirement for amounts paid during the taxable year for which
by a patient who is traveling to get medicalunused sick leave. You also must include in you received no insurance or other reimburse-
care and is unable to travel alone, andgross income the value of unused sick leave ment.
that, at your option, your employer applies to the • Transportation expenses for regular visitscost of your continuing participation in your em- to see a mentally ill dependent, if these Insurance Reimbursementployer's health plan after you retire. You can visits are recommended as a part of treat-include this cost of continuing participation in the ment. You must reduce your total medical expenseshealth plan as a medical expense. for the year by all reimbursements for medicalIf you participate in a health plan where your expenses that you receive from insurance orCar expenses. You can include out-of-pocketemployer automatically applies the value of un- other sources during the year. This includesexpenses, such as the cost of gas and oil, whenused sick leave to the cost of your continuing payments from Medicare.you use your car for medical reasons. You can-participation in the health plan (and you do not Even if a policy provides reimbursement fornot include depreciation, insurance, general re-have the option to receive cash), do not include only certain specific medical expenses, youpair, or maintenance expenses.the value of the unused sick leave in gross must use amounts you receive from that policyIf you do not want to use your actual ex-income. You cannot include this cost of continu- to reduce your total medical expenses, includingpenses for 2007, you can use a standard rate ofing participation in that health plan as a medical those it does not provide reimbursement for.20 cents a mile for use of a car for medicalexpense. reasons. Example. You have insurance policies You can also include parking fees and tolls. which cover your hospital and doctors' bills butMeals and Lodging You can add these fees and tolls to your medical not your nursing bills. The insurance you receiveexpenses whether you use actual expenses or for the hospital and doctors' bills is more thanYou can include in medical expenses the cost of use the standard mileage rate. their charges. In figuring your medical deduc-meals and lodging at a hospital or similar institu-
tion, you must reduce the total amount you spenttion if a principal reason for being there is to get Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for for medical care by the total amount of insurancemedical care. See Nursing home, later. medical reasons during the year. He spent $250 you received even if the policies do not coverYou may be able to include in medical ex- for gas, $5 for oil, and $50 for tolls and parking. some of your medical expenses.penses the cost of lodging not provided in a He wants to figure the amount he can include in
hospital or similar institution. You can include medical expenses both ways to see which gives Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).him the greater deduction.the cost of such lodging while away from home if A health reimbursement arrangement is an em-He figures the actual expenses first. He addsall of the following requirements are met. ployer-funded plan that reimburses employeesthe $250 for gas, the $5 for oil, and the $50 for• The lodging is primarily for and essential for medical care expenses and allows unusedtolls and parking for a total of $305.to medical care. amounts to be carried forward. An HRA isHe then figures the standard mileage funded solely by the employer and the reim-amount. He multiplies the 2,800 miles by 20• The medical care is provided by a doctor bursements for medical expenses, up to a maxi-cents a mile for a total of $560. He then adds thein a licensed hospital or in a medical care mum dollar amount for a coverage period, are$50 in tolls and parking for a total of $610.facility related to, or the equivalent of, a not included in your income.Bill includes the $610 of car expenses withlicensed hospital.
his other medical expenses for the year because• The lodging is not lavish or extravagant Other reimbursements. Generally, you dothe $610 is more than the $305 he figured usingunder the circumstances. not reduce medical expenses by payments youactual expenses. receive for:• There is no significant element of personal Transportation expenses you cannot in-pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the • Permanent loss or loss of use of a mem-clude. You cannot include in medical ex- ber or function of the body (loss of limb,travel away from home. penses the cost of transportation expenses in sight, hearing, etc.) or disfigurement to theThe amount you include in medical expenses for the following situations. extent the payment is based on the naturelodging cannot be more than $50 for each night of the injury without regard to the amount• Going to and from work, even if your con-for each person. You can include lodging for a of time lost from work, ordition requires an unusual means of trans-person traveling with the person receiving the portation. • Loss of earnings.medical care. For example, if a parent is travel-
ing with a sick child, up to $100 per night can be • Travel for purely personal reasons to an-
You must, however, reduce your medical ex-included as a medical expense for lodging. other city for an operation or other medical
penses by any part of these payments that isMeals are not included. care.
designated for medical costs. See How Do You• Travel that is merely for the general im- Figure and Report the Deduction on Your TaxNursing home. You can include in medical provement of one's health. Return, later.expenses the cost of medical care in a nursing
home, home for the aged, or similar institution, • The costs of operating a specially For how to treat damages received for per-
for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents. equipped car for other than medical rea- sonal injury or sickness, see Damages for Per-
This includes the cost of meals and lodging in sons. sonal Injuries, later.
Page 140 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

future medical expenses. If it is, you must re-
duce any future medical expenses for these
injuries until the amount you received has been
completely used.
How Do You Figure
and Report the
Deduction on Your
Tax Return?
Once you have determined which medical care
expenses you can include, you figure and report
the deduction on your tax return.
What Tax Form Do You
Use?
You figure your medical expense deduction on
lines 1±4 of Schedule A, Form 1040. You can-
not claim medical expenses on Form 1040A, or
Form 1040EZ. If you need more information on
itemized deductions or you are not sure if you
can itemize, see chapters 20 and 29.
Enter the amount you paid for medical and
dental expenses on line 1, Schedule A (Form
1040). This should be your expenses that were
not reimbursed by insurance or any other
sources.
You can deduct only the amount of your
medical and dental expenses that is more than
7.5% of your adjusted gross income shown on
line 38, Form 1040. For an example, see the
partial Schedule A, above.
Figure 21-A. Is Your Excess Medical Reimbursement Taxable?
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this chapter.
Was any part of your
premiums paid by
your employer?
Were your employer’s
contributions to your
premiums included in
your income?
Did you pay any part
of the premiums?
NONE of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
You do not have a medical deduction if you earlier year, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries
are reimbursed for all of your medical expenses in chapter 12.
for the year.   
Impairment-RelatedExcess reimbursement. If you are reim- Medical expenses not deducted. If you didbursed more than your medical expenses, you not deduct a medical expense in the year you Work Expensesmay have to include the excess in income. You paid it because your medical expenses were notmay want to use Figure 21-A to help you decide more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income, (Business or Medical)if any of your reimbursement is taxable. or because you did not itemize deductions, do
not include the reimbursement up to the amountPremiums paid by you. If you pay the en- If you are disabled, you can take a businessof the expense in income. However, if the reim-tire premium for your medical insurance or all of deduction for expenses that are necessary forbursement is more than the expense, see Ex-the costs of a plan similar to medical insurance you to be able to work. If you take a businesscess reimbursement, earlier.and your insurance payments or other reim- deduction for these impairment-related work ex-bursements are more than your total medical penses, they are not subject to the 7.5% limitExample. Last year, you had medical ex-expenses for the year, you have an excess reim- that applies to medical expenses.penses of $500. You cannot deduct the $500bursement. You generally do not include the You are disabled if you have:because it is less than 7.5% of your adjustedexcess reimbursement in your gross income.
gross income. If, in a later year, you are reim- • A physical or mental disability (for exam-Premiums paid by you and your employer. bursed for any of the $500 in medical expenses, ple, blindness or deafness) that function-If both you and your employer contribute to your you do not include the amount reimbursed in ally limits your being employed, ormedical insurance plan and your employer's your gross income.contributions are not included in your gross in- • A physical or mental impairment (for ex-
come, you must include in your gross income ample, a sight or hearing impairment) that
the part of your excess reimbursement that is substantially limits one or more of your
from your employer's contribution. major life activities, such as performingDamages for PersonalSee Publication 502 to figure the amount of manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-the excess reimbursement you must include in ing, learning, or working.Injuriesgross income.
Reimbursement in a later year. If you are If you receive an amount in settlement of a Impairment-related expenses defined. Im-reimbursed in a later year for medical expenses personal injury suit, part of that award may be for pairment-related expenses are those ordinaryyou deducted in an earlier year, you generally medical expenses that you deducted in an ear- and necessary business expenses that are:must report the reimbursement as income up to lier year. If it is, you must include that part in your
• Necessary for you to do your work satis-the amount you previously deducted as medical income in the year you receive it to the extent it
factorily,expenses. reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.
However, do not report as income the See Reimbursement in a Later Year, discussed • For goods and services not required oramount of reimbursement you received up to the under How Do You Treat Reimbursements. used, other than incidentally, in your per-amount of your medical deductions that did not sonal activities, andreduce your tax for the earlier year. For more Future medical expenses. If you receive an
• Not specifically covered under other in-information about the recovery of an amount amount in settlement of a damage suit for per-
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an sonal injuries, part of that award may be for come tax laws.
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 141

3,434
2,475
959
33,000
Bill and Helen Jones 000000000
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and 
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-1)1
22
3Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38
(99) /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A&B (Form 1040).
2007
Where to report. If you are self-employed, • You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In- state and local income taxes was extended
deduct the business expenses on the appropri- come, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned through 2007.
ate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E, or F) used to Income Exclusion.
report your business income and expenses. • You are using amounts paid for qualifiedIf you are an employee, complete Form long-term care insurance to figure the de-2106, Employee Business Expenses, or Form Introductionduction.2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Employee Business
This chapter discusses which taxes you canIf you cannot use the worksheet in the FormExpenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form 1040),
deduct if you itemize deductions on Schedule A1040 instructions, use the worksheet in Publica-line 28, that part of the amount on Form 2106,
(Form 1040). It also explains which taxes yoution 535, Business Expenses, to figure your de-line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is related to
can deduct on other schedules or forms andduction.your impairment. Enter the amount that is unre-
which taxes you cannot deduct.lated to your impairment on Schedule A (Form
This chapter covers the following topics.1040), line 21. Your impairment-related work Note. When figuring the amount you canexpenses are not subject to the deduct for insurance premiums, do not include • Income taxes (federal, state, local, and2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies any advance payments shown in box 1 of Form foreign).to other employee business expenses. 1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) • General sales taxes (state and local).Advance Payments. Also, if you are claiming theExample. You are blind. You must use a • Real estate taxes (state, local, and for-health coverage tax credit, subtract the amountreader to do your work. You use the reader both eign).shown on Form 8885, line 4, from the total insur-during your regular working hours at your place ance premiums you paid. • Personal property taxes (state and local).of work and outside your regular working hours Also, do not include amounts paid for healthaway from your place of work. The reader's • Taxes and fees you cannot deduct.insurance coverage with retirement plan distri-services are only for your work. You can deduct butions that were tax-free because you are ayour expenses for the reader as business ex- Use Table 22-1 as a guide to determine whichretired public safety officer.penses. taxes you can deduct.
Where to report. You take this deduction on The end of the chapter contains a section
Form 1040, line 29. If you itemize your deduc- that explains which forms you use to deduct the
tions and do not claim 100% of your different types of taxes.
self-employed health insurance on line 29, in-Health Insurance Costs clude any remaining premiums with all other Business taxes. You can deduct certain
medical care expenses on Schedule A (Form taxes only if they are ordinary and necessaryfor Self-Employed 1040), subject to the 7.5% limit. See chapter 6 of expenses of your trade or business or of produc-
Publication 535, Business Expenses, for more ing income. For information on these taxes, seePersons information. Publication 535, Business Expenses.
If you were self-employed and had a net profit
State or local taxes. These are taxes im-for the year, were a general partner (or a limited
posed by the 50 states, U.S. possessions, orpartner receiving guaranteed payments), or re-
any of their political subdivisions (such as aceived wages from an S corporation in which
county or city), or by the District of Columbia.you were a more than 2% shareholder (who is
treated as a partner), you may be able to deduct, Indian tribal government. An Indian tribal22.as an adjustment to income, all of the amount government that is recognized by the Secretary
paid for medical and qualified long-term care of the Treasury as performing substantial gov-
insurance on behalf of yourself, your spouse, ernment functions will be treated as a state for
and dependents. purposes of claiming a deduction for taxes. In-Taxes
The insurance plan must be established come taxes, real estate taxes, and personal
under your trade or business, and you cannot property taxes imposed by that Indian tribal gov-
take this deduction to the extent that the amount ernment (or by any of its subdivisions that are
What's Newof the deduction is more than your earned in- treated as political subdivisions of a state) are
come from that trade or business. deductible.
Limit on itemized deductions. The amountYou cannot take this deduction for any
General sales taxes. These are taxes im-of adjusted gross income allowed without limit-month in which you were eligible to participate in
posed at one rate on retail sales of a broading your itemized deductions has increased. Forany subsidized health plan maintained by your
range of classes of items.2007, if your adjusted gross income is more thanemployer or your spouse's employer. This rule is
$156,400 ($78,200 if you are married filing sep-applied separately to plans that provide
Foreign taxes. These are taxes imposed by aarately), you may have to reduce the amount oflong-term care insurance and plans that do not
foreign country or any of its political subdivi-certain itemized deductions, including most mis-provide long-term care insurance.
sions.cellaneous deductions. For more informationIf you qualify to take the deduction, use the
and a worksheet, see the instructions for Sched-Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction
ule A (Form 1040), line 29. Useful ItemsWorksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to fig-
ure the amount you can deduct. But if any of the You may want to see:Deduction for general sales taxes extended.following applies, do not use the worksheet. The deduction for state and local general sales Publication• You had more than one source of income taxes that you can elect to take as an itemized
subject to self-employment tax. deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040) instead of ❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
Page 142 Chapter 22 Taxes

❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time benefits. Mandatory payments made to the fol-What To Deduct
lowing state benefit funds are deductible asHomeowners
Your deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti- state income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040),
mated tax payments, or other tax payments as line 5.Form (and Instructions)
follows. • Alaska Unemployment Compensation❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Fund.Deductions Withheld taxes. You can deduct state and
local income taxes withheld from your salary in • California Nonoccupational Disability Ben-❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental the year they are withheld. For 2007, these efit Fund.Income and Loss taxes will be shown in boxes 17 and 19 of your • New Jersey Nonoccupational Disability❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit Form W-2. You may also have state or local Benefit Fund.income tax withheld on Form W-2G (box 14),
Form 1099-MISC (box 16), or Form 1099-R • New Jersey Unemployment Compensa-
(boxes 10 and 13). tion Fund.
• New York Nonoccupational Disability Ben-Tests To Deduct Estimated tax payments. You can deduct es-
efit Fund.timated tax payments you made during the year
to a state or local government. However, youAny Tax • Pennsylvania Unemployment Compensa-must have a reasonable basis for making the tion Fund.The following two tests must be met for any tax estimated tax payments. Any estimated state or
• Rhode Island Temporary Disability Benefitlocal tax payments you make that are not rea-to be deductible by you.
Fund.sonably determined in good faith at the time of• The tax must be imposed on you. payment are not deductible. For example, you • Washington State Supplemental Work-made an estimated state income tax payment.• You must pay the tax during your tax year. men's Compensation Fund.However, the estimate of your state tax liability
shows that you will get a refund of the fullThe tax must be imposed on you. Generally, Employee contributions to private oramount of your estimated payment. You had noyou can deduct only taxes that are imposed on voluntary disability plans are not de-reasonable basis to believe you had any addi-you. ductible.tional liability for state income taxes and you
CAUTION
!
Generally, you can deduct property taxes cannot deduct the estimated tax payment.
only if you are an owner of the property. If your Refund (or credit) of state or local incomespouse owns the property and pays real estate Refund applied to taxes. You can deduct any taxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for)part of a refund of prior-year state or local in-taxes on it, the taxes are deductible on your state or local income taxes in a year after thecome taxes that you chose to have credited tospouse's separate return or on your joint return. year in which you paid them, you may have toyour 2007 estimated state or local income taxes. include the refund in income on Form 1040, line Do not reduce your deduction by either ofYou must pay the tax during your tax year. 10, in the year you receive it. This includesthe following items.If you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deduct refunds resulting from taxes that were
only those taxes you actually paid during your overwithheld, applied from a prior year return,• Any state or local income tax refund (or
tax year. If you pay your taxes by check, the day not figured correctly, or figured again because ofcredit) you expect to receive for 2007.
you mail or deliver the check is the date of an amended return. If you did not itemize your• Any refund of (or credit for) prior-yearpayment, provided the check is honored by the deductions in the previous year, do not includestate and local income taxes you actuallyfinancial institution. If you use a pay-by-phone the refund in income. If you deducted the taxesreceived in 2007. in the previous year, include all or part of theaccount, the date reported on the statement of
refund on Form 1040, line 10, in the year youthe financial institution showing when payment However, part or all of this refund (or credit) may
receive the refund. For a discussion of howwas made is the date of payment. If you contest be taxable. See Refund (or credit) of state or
much to include, see Recoveries in chapter 12.a tax liability and are a cash basis taxpayer, you local income taxes, later.
can deduct the tax only in the year you actually
Separate federal returns. If you and yourpay it (or transfer money or other property to Foreign Income Taxesspouse file separate state, local, and federalprovide for satisfaction of the contested liability).
income tax returns, you each can deduct on yourSee Publication 538, Accounting Periods and Generally, you can take either a deduction or a
federal return only the amount of your own stateMethods, for details. credit for income taxes imposed on you by a
and local income tax that you paid during the tax foreign country or a U.S. possession. However,If you use an accrual method of accounting,
year. you cannot take a deduction or credit for foreignsee Publication 538, for more information.
income taxes paid on income that is exemptJoint state and local returns. If you and from U.S. tax under the foreign earned incomeyour spouse file joint state and local returns and exclusion or the foreign housing exclusion. Forseparate federal returns, each of you can deduct information on these exclusions, see Publicationon your separate federal return a part of the totalIncome Taxes 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Residentstate and local income taxes paid during the tax Aliens Abroad. For information on the foreign taxyear. You can deduct only the amount of theThis section discusses the deductibility of state credit, see Publication 514.total taxes that is proportionate to your grossand local income taxes (including employee income compared to the combined gross in-contributions to state benefit funds), and foreign come of you and your spouse. However, youincome taxes. cannot deduct more than the amount you actu-
ally paid during the year. You can avoid this General Sales TaxesState and Local Income calculation if you and your spouse are jointly and
individually liable for the full amount of the state You can elect to deduct state and local generalTaxes and local income taxes. If so, you and your sales taxes, instead of state and local income
spouse can deduct on your separate federal taxes, as an itemized deduction on Schedule AYou can deduct state and local income taxes.
returns the amount you each actually paid. (Form 1040), line 5. Generally, you can useHowever, you can elect to deduct state and local
either your actual expenses or the state andgeneral sales taxes instead of state and local Joint federal return. If you file a joint federal local sales tax tables to figure your sales taxincome taxes. But you cannot deduct both taxes return, you can deduct the total of the state and deduction.in the same year. local income taxes both of you paid.
Actual expenses. Generally, you can deduct
Exception.  You cannot deduct state and local Contributions to state benefit funds. As an the actual state and local general sales taxes
income taxes you pay on income that is exempt employee, you can deduct mandatory contribu- (including compensating use taxes) if the tax
from federal income tax, unless the exempt in- tions to state benefit funds withheld from your rate was the same as the general sales tax rate.
come is interest income. For example, you can- wages that provide protection against loss of However, sales taxes on food, clothing, medical
not deduct the part of a state's income tax that is wages. For example, certain states require em- supplies, and motor vehicles are deductible as a
on a cost-of-living allowance that is exempt from ployees to make contributions to state funds general sales tax even if the tax rate was less
federal income tax. providing disability or unemployment insurance than the general sales tax rate. If you paid sales
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 143

Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estatetax on a motor vehicle at a rate higher than the the tax imposed relates) that each owned the
Tax Deduction ± Taxes on Old Homegeneral sales tax rate, you can deduct only the property. The seller is treated as paying the
amount of tax that you would have paid at the taxes up to, but not including, the date of sale. 1. Enter the total real estate taxes forgeneral sales tax rate on that vehicle. If you use The buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin- the real property tax year ..... $620the actual expenses method, you must have ning with the date of sale. This applies regard-receipts to show the general sales taxes paid. 2. Enter the number of days in theless of the lien dates under local law. Generally, real property tax year that youOptional sales tax tables. Instead of using this information is included on the settlement owned the property ......... 126your actual expenses, you can figure your state statement provided at the closing. 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leapand local general sales tax deduction using the If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes until years, divide line 2 by 366) .... .345state and local sales tax tables in the Instruc-
they are paid because you use the cash methodtions for Schedule A (Form 1040). You may also 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isof accounting, and the buyer of your property isbe able to add the state and local general sales your deduction. Enter it on
personally liable for the tax, you are consideredtaxes paid on certain specified items, such as Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $214
motor vehicles (purchased or leased), aircraft, to have paid your part of the tax at the time of the
boats, homes (including mobile and prefabri- Since the buyers of their old home paid all of thesale. This lets you deduct the part of the tax to
cated homes) and home building materials. taxes, Dennis and Beth also include the $214 inthe date of sale even though you did not actuallyYour applicable table amount is based on the the selling price of the old home. (The buyerspay it. However, you must also include thestate where you live, your income, and the num- add the $214 to their cost of the home.)amount of that tax in the selling price of theber of exemptions claimed on your tax return. Dennis and Beth owned their new home dur-property. The buyer must include the sameYour income is your adjusted gross income plus ing the real property tax year for 243 days (Mayamount in his or her cost of the property.any nontaxable items such as the following. 3 to December 31, including their date of
purchase). They figure their deduction for taxesYou figure your deduction for taxes on each• Tax-exempt interest. on their new home as follows.property bought or sold during the real property• Veterans' benefits. tax year as follows. Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estate• Nontaxable combat pay. Tax Deduction ± Taxes on New HomeWorksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real• Workers' compensation. Estate Tax Deduction 1. Enter the total real estate taxes forKeep for Your Records
• Nontaxable part of social security and rail- the real property tax year ..... $732road retirement benefits. 1. Enter the total real estate taxes for 2. Enter the number of days in the
the real property tax year .....• Nontaxable part of IRA, pension, or annu- real property tax year that you
ity distributions, excluding rollovers. owned the property ......... 2432. Enter the number of days in the
real property tax year that you• Public assistance payments. 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap
owned the property ......... years, divide line 2 by 366) .... .666If you lived in different states during the same 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This istax year, you must prorate your applicable table years, divide line 2 by 366) .... . your deduction. Enter it onamount for each state based on the days you
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $488lived in each state. See the instructions for 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5, for details. your deduction. Enter it on Since Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes onSchedule A (Form 1040), line 6 the new home, they add $244 ($732 paid less
Note. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property you $488 deduction) to their cost of the new home.bought or sold during the real property tax year. Your (The sellers add this $244 to their selling pricetotal deduction is the sum of the line 4 amounts for allReal Estate Taxes and deduct the $244 as a real estate tax.)of the properties.
Dennis and Beth's real estate tax deductionDeductible real estate taxes are any state, local, Real estate taxes for prior years. Do not for their old and new homes is the sum of $214or foreign taxes on real property levied for the divide delinquent taxes between the buyer and and $488, or $702. They will enter this amountgeneral public welfare. You can deduct these seller if the taxes are for any real property tax on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6.taxes only if they are based on the assessed year before the one in which the property is sold.value of the real property and charged uniformly
Even if the buyer agrees to pay the delinquent Example 2. George and Helen Brownagainst all property under the jurisdiction of the
bought a new home on May 3, 2007. Their realtaxes, the buyer cannot deduct them. The buyertaxing authority.
property tax year for the new home is the calen-Deductible real estate taxes generally do not must add them to the cost of the property. The
dar year. Real estate taxes for 2006 were as-include taxes charged for local benefits and im- seller can deduct these taxes paid by the buyer.
provements that increase the value of the prop- sessed in their state on January 1, 2007. TheHowever, the seller must include them in the
erty. They also do not include itemized charges taxes became due on May 31, 2007, and Octo-selling price.for services (such as trash collection) assessed ber 31, 2007.
Examples. The following examples illus-against specific property or certain people, even The Browns agreed to pay all taxes due aftertrate how real estate taxes are divided betweenif the charge is paid to the taxing authority. For the date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 2006more information about taxes and charges that buyer and seller. were $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 2007,are not deductible, see Real Estate-Related and $340 on October 31, 2007. These taxesItems You Cannot Deduct, later. Example 1. Dennis and Beth White's real were for the 2006 real property tax year. Theproperty tax year for both their old home andTenant-shareholders in a cooperative hous- Browns cannot deduct them since they did nottheir new home is the calendar year, with pay-ing corporation. Generally, if you are a ten- own the property until 2007. Instead, they mustment due August 1. The tax on their old home,ant-stockholder in a cooperative housing add $680 to the cost of their new home.
sold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their newcorporation, you can deduct the amount paid to In January 2008, the Browns receive theirhome, bought on May 3, was $732. Dennis andthe corporation that represents your share of the 2007 property tax statement for $752, whichreal estate taxes the corporation paid or incurred Beth are considered to have paid a proportion- they will pay in 2008. The Browns owned theirfor your dwelling unit. The corporation should ate share of the real estate taxes on the old new home during the 2007 real property tax yearprovide you with a statement showing your home even though they did not actually pay for 243 days (May 3 to December 31). They willshare of the taxes. For more information, see them to the taxing authority. On the other hand, figure their 2008 deduction for taxes as follows.Special Rules for Cooperatives in Publication they can claim only a proportionate share of the530. Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estatetaxes they paid on their new property even
Tax Deduction ± Taxes on New HomeDivision of real estate taxes between buyers though they paid the entire amount.
and sellers. If you bought or sold real estate Dennis and Beth owned their old home dur- 1. Enter the total real estate taxes forduring the year, the real estate taxes must be the real property tax year ..... $752ing the real property tax year for 126 days (Janu-divided between the buyer and the seller.
ary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). TheyThe buyer and the seller must divide the real 2. Enter the number of days in the
figure their deduction for taxes on their old homeestate taxes according to the number of days in real property tax year that you
owned the property ......... 243the real property tax year (the period to which as follows.
Page 144 Chapter 22 Taxes

Table 22-1.  Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
Type of Tax You Can Deduct You Cannot Deduct
Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or Fees and charges that are not expenses of your trade
business or of producing income. or business or of producing income, such as fees for
driver's licenses, car inspections, parking, or charges
for water bills (see Taxes and Fees You Cannot
Deduct).
Fines and penalties.
General Sales Taxes State and local general sales taxes, including State and local income taxes if you choose to deduct
compensating use taxes. state and local general sales taxes.
Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes.
Foreign income taxes. Employee contributions to private or voluntary
Employee contributions to state funds listed disability plans.
under Contributions to state benefit funds. State and local general sales taxes if you choose to
 deduct state and local income taxes.
Other Taxes Taxes that are expenses of your trade or business. Federal excise taxes, such as tax on gasoline, that are
Taxes on property producing rent or royalty not expenses of your trade or business or of
income. producing income.
Occupational taxes. See chapter 28. Per capita taxes.
One-half of self-employment tax paid.
Personal Property State and local personal property taxes. Customs duties that are not expenses of your trade or
Taxes business or of producing income.
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Real estate taxes that are treated as imposed on
Foreign real estate taxes. someone else (see Division of real estate taxes
Tenant's share of real estate taxes paid by between buyers and sellers).
cooperative housing corporation. Taxes for local benefits (with exceptions). See Real
Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct.
Trash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions). See
Real Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct.
Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
Homeowners' association charges.
seller reduces his or her real estate tax deduc- or rebate in 2007 of real estate taxes you de-3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap tion (or includes it in income) by the same ducted in an earlier year, you generally mustyears, divide line 2 by 366) .... .666 amount. See Refund (or rebate), later. include the refund or rebate in income in the
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is year you receive it. However, the amount youTaxes placed in escrow. If your monthlyyour deduction. Claim it on include in income is limited to the amount of themortgage payment includes an amount placedSchedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $501 deduction that reduced your tax in the earlierin escrow (put in the care of a third party) for real year. For more information, see Recoveries inThe remaining $251 ($752 paid less $501 de- estate taxes, you may not be able to deduct the chapter 12.duction) of taxes paid in 2008, along with the total amount placed in escrow. You can deduct$680 paid in 2007, is added to the cost of their If you did not itemize deductions in theonly the real estate tax that the third party actu-new home. year you paid the tax, do not report theally paid to the taxing authority. If the third party
Because the taxes up to the date of sale are refund as income.does not notify you of the amount of real estate
TIP
considered paid by the seller on the date of sale, tax that was paid for you, contact the third party
the seller is entitled to a 2007 tax deduction of or the taxing authority to find the proper amount
$931. This is the sum of the $680 for 2006 and to show on your return. Real Estate-Related Itemsthe $251 for the 122 days the seller owned the
You Cannot DeductTenants by the entirety. If you and yourhome in 2007. The seller must also include the
spouse held property as tenants by the entirety$931 in the selling price when he or she figures Payments for the following items generally areand you file separate federal returns, each ofthe gain or loss on the sale. The seller should not deductible as real estate taxes.you can deduct only the taxes each of you paidcontact the Browns in January 2008 to find out
on the property.how much real estate tax is due for 2007. • Taxes for local benefits.
Divorced individuals. If your divorce or sepa-Form 1099-S. For certain sales or ex- • Itemized charges for services (such as
ration agreement states that you must pay thechanges of real estate, the person responsible trash and garbage pickup fees).
real estate taxes for a home owned by you andfor closing the sale (generally the settlement • Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).your spouse, part of your payments may beagent) prepares Form 1099-S, Proceeds From
deductible as alimony and part as real estateReal Estate Transactions, to report certain infor- • Rent increases due to higher real estate
taxes. See Taxes and insurance in chapter 18mation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop- taxes.
for more information.erty. Box 2 of the form is for the gross proceeds • Homeowners' association charges.from the sale and should include the portion of Ministers' and military housing allowances.the seller's real estate tax liability that the buyer If you are a minister or a member of the uni-will pay after the date of sale. The buyer includes Taxes for local benefits. Deductible real es-formed services and receive a housing allow-these taxes in the cost basis of the property, and tate taxes generally do not include taxesance that you can exclude from income, you stillthe seller both deducts this amount as a tax paid charged for local benefits and improvementscan deduct all of the real estate taxes you pay onand includes it in the sales price of the property. tending to increase the value of your property.your home.For a real estate transaction that involves a These include assessments for streets, side-
home, any real estate tax the seller paid in Refund (or rebate). If you received a refund walks, water mains, sewer lines, public parking
advance but that is the liability of the buyer or rebate in 2007 of real estate taxes you paid in facilities, and similar improvements. You should
appears on Form 1099-S, box 5. The buyer 2007, you must reduce your deduction by the
deducts this amount as a real estate tax, and the amount refunded to you. If you received a refund
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 145

increase the basis of your property by the • License fees. You cannot deduct license
fees for personal purposes (such as mar-amount of the assessment. Personal Property riage, driver's, and dog license fees).Local benefit taxes are deductible only if they
are for maintenance, repair, or interest charges Taxes • Per capita taxes. You cannot deduct
related to those benefits. If only a part of the state or local per capita taxes.
taxes is for maintenance, repair, or interest, you Personal property tax is deductible if it is a state
must be able to show the amount of that part to or local tax that is: Many taxes and fees other than those listed
claim the deduction. If you cannot determine above are also nondeductible, unless they are• Charged on personal property,what part of the tax is for maintenance, repair, or ordinary and necessary expenses of a business
• Based only on the value of the personalinterest, none of it is deductible. or income producing activity. For other nonde-
property, and ductible items, see Real Estate-Related ItemsTaxes for local benefits may be included in
You Cannot Deduct, earlier.your real estate tax bill. If your taxing authority • Charged on a yearly basis, even if it is
(or mortgage lender) does not furnish you a copy collected more or less than once a year.
of your real estate tax bill, ask for it. You should
use the rules above to determine if the local A tax that meets the above requirements can
benefit tax is deductible. be considered charged on personal property Where To Deduct
even if it is for the exercise of a privilege. For
You deduct taxes on the following schedules.example, a yearly tax based on value qualifiesItemized charges for services.  An itemized
as a personal property tax even if it is called acharge for services assessed against specific State and local income taxes.  These taxesregistration fee and is for the privilege of regis-property or certain people is not a tax, even if the are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5,tering motor vehicles or using them on the high-charge is paid to the taxing authority. For exam- even if your only source of income is from busi-ways.ple, you cannot deduct the charge as a real ness, rents, or royalties. Check box a on line 5 toIf the tax is partly based on value and partlyestate tax if it is: indicate income taxes.based on other criteria, it may qualify in part.
• A unit fee for the delivery of a service
General sales taxes. Sales taxes are de-(such as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000 Example. Your state charges a yearly mo- ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5. Yougallons of water you use), tor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 50 must check box b on line 5. If you elect to deductcents per hundredweight. You paid $32 based• A periodic charge for a residential service sales taxes, you cannot deduct state and localon the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 lbs.) of(such as a $20 per month or $240 annual income taxes.your car. You can deduct $15 (1% × $1,500) asfee charged to each homeowner for trash a personal property tax because it is based oncollection), or Foreign income taxes. Generally, incomethe value. The remaining $17 ($.50 × 34), based taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. pos-• A flat fee charged for a single service pro- on the weight, is not deductible. session can be claimed as an itemized deduc-vided by your government (such as a $30 tion on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8, or as acharge for mowing your lawn because it credit against your U.S. income tax on Formwas allowed to grow higher than permitted 1040, line 51. To claim the credit, you may haveunder your local ordinance). Taxes and Fees to complete and attach Form 1116. For more
information, see chapter 37, the Form 1040 in-
You Cannot Deduct structions, or Publication 514.You must look at your real estate tax
bill to determine if any nondeductible
Real estate taxes and personal propertyMany federal, state, and local government taxesitemized charges, such as those listed
CAUTION
!
taxes.  These taxes are deducted on Sched-are not deductible because they do not fall withinabove, are included in the bill. If your taxing
ule A (Form 1040), lines 6 and 7, respectively,the categories discussed earlier. Other taxesauthority (or mortgage lender) does not furnish
unless they are paid on property used in yourand fees, such as federal income taxes, are notyou a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it.
business, in which case they are deducted ondeductible because the tax law specifically pro-
Exception. Service charges used to main- Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Schedule Fhibits a deduction for them. See Table 22-1.
tain or improve services (such as trash collec- (Form 1040). Taxes on property that producesTaxes and fees that are generally not de-
tion or police and fire protection) are deductible rent or royalty income are deducted on Sched-ductible include the following items.
ule E (Form 1040).as real estate taxes if: • Employment taxes. This includes social
• The fees or charges are imposed at a like security, Medicare, and railroad retirement Self-employment tax. Deduct one-half ofrate against all property in the taxing juris- taxes withheld from your pay. However, your self-employment tax on Form 1040, line 27.diction, one-half of self-employment tax you pay is
deductible. In addition, the social security Other taxes. All other deductible taxes are• The funds collected are not earmarked; and other employment taxes you pay on deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8.instead, they are commingled with general the wages of a household worker may berevenue funds, and included in medical expenses that you can
• Funds used to maintain or improve serv- deduct or child care expenses that allow
you to claim the child and dependent careices are not limited to or determined by the
credit. For more information, see chaptersamount of these fees or charges collected.
21 and 32.
Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes). Transfer • Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes- 23.
sion taxes. However, you can deduct thetaxes and similar taxes and charges on the sale
estate tax attributable to income in respectof a personal home are not deductible. If they
of a decedent if you, as a beneficiary,are paid by the seller, they are expenses of the
must include that income in your grosssale and reduce the amount realized on the sale. Interest
income. In that case, deduct the estate taxIf paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost
as a miscellaneous deduction that is notbasis of the property.
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross- Expense
income limit. For more information, seeRent increase due to higher real estate taxes. Publication 559.If your landlord increases your rent in the form of
a tax surcharge because of increased real es- • Federal income taxes. This includes in- What's Newtate taxes, you cannot deduct the increase as come taxes withheld from your pay.
taxes. • Fines and penalties. You cannot deduct Mortgage insurance premiums. You may befines and penalties paid to a government able to treat mortgage insurance premiums paidHomeowners' association charges. These for violation of any law, including related in connection with home acquisition debt ascharges are not deductible because they are amounts forfeited as collateral deposits.imposed by the homeowners' association, home mortgage interest. See Mortgage Insur-
rather than the state or local government. • Gift taxes. ance Premiums under Home Mortgage Interest.
Page 146 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Limit on itemized deductions.  If your ad- deductible depends on the date you took out the up to, but not including, the date of sale. Their
justed gross income is more than $156,400 mortgage, the amount of the mortgage, and your mortgage interest deduction is $1,270 ($1,220 +
($78,200 if you are married filing separately), the use of its proceeds. $50).
overall amount of your itemized deductions may Prepaid interest. If you pay interest in ad-Fully deductible interest. If all of your mort-be limited. See chapter 29 for more information vance for a period that goes beyond the end ofgages fit into one or more of the following threeabout this limit. the tax year, you must spread this interest overcategories at all times during the year, you can
the tax years to which it applies. You can deductdeduct all of the interest on those mortgages. (If
in each year only the interest that qualifies asany one mortgage fits into more than one cate-
home mortgage interest for that year. However,gory, add the debt that fits in each category to
Introduction there is an exception that applies to points, dis-your other debt in the same category.)
cussed later.The three categories are as follows:This chapter discusses interest. Interest is the
amount you pay for the use of borrowed money. Mortgage interest credit. You may be able to1. Mortgages you took out on or before Octo-The following are types of interest you can claim a mortgage interest credit if you wereber 13, 1987 (called grandfathered debt).deduct as itemized deductions on Schedule A issued a mortgage credit certificate (MCC) by a
2. Mortgages you took out after October 13,(Form 1040). state or local government. Figure the credit on
1987, to buy, build, or improve your home Form 8396, Mortgage Interest Credit. If you take• Home mortgage interest, including certain (called home acquisition debt), but only if this credit, you must reduce your mortgage inter-points and mortgage insurance premiums. throughout 2007 these mortgages plus any est deduction by the amount of the credit.
grandfathered debt totaled $1 million or• Investment interest. For more information on the credit, see chap-
less ($500,000 or less if married filing sep- ter 37.This chapter explains these deductions. It also arately).explains where to deduct other types of interest Ministers' and military housing allowance.
3. Mortgages you took out after October 13,and lists some types of interest you cannot de- If you are a minister or a member of the uni-
1987, other than to buy, build, or improveduct. formed services and receive a housing allow-
your home (called home equity debt), but ance that is not taxable, you can still deduct yourUse Table 23-1 to find out where to get more only if throughout 2007 these mortgages home mortgage interest.information on various types of interest, includ- totaled $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less ifing investment interest. Mortgage assistance payments. If you qual-married filing separately) and totaled no
ify for mortgage assistance payments formore than the fair market value of your
lower-income families under section 235 of theUseful Items home reduced by (1) and (2).
National Housing Act, part or all of the interestYou may want to see: The dollar limits for the second and third on your mortgage may be paid for you. You
categories apply to the combined mortgages on cannot deduct the interest that is paid for you.Publication your main home and second home.
No other effect on taxes. Do not include❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction See Part II of Publication 936 for more de-
these mortgage assistance payments in yourtailed definitions of grandfathered, home acqui-
income. Also, do not use these payments tosition, and home equity debt.
reduce other deductions, such as real estateYou can use Figure 23-A to check whether
taxes.your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
Home Mortgage Divorced or separated individuals. If a di-Limits on deduction. You cannot fully deduct vorce or separation agreement requires you orinterest on a mortgage that does not fit into anyInterest your spouse or former spouse to pay homeof the three categories listed above. If this ap- mortgage interest on a home owned by both ofplies to you, see Part II of Publication 936 toGenerally, home mortgage interest is any inter- you, the payment of interest may be alimony.figure the amount of interest you can deduct.est you pay on a loan secured by your home See the discussion of Payments for(main home or a second home). The loan may jointly-owned home in chapter 18.be a mortgage to buy your home, a second
Special Situations Redeemable ground rents. If you make an-mortgage, a line of credit, or a home equity loan.
nual or periodic rental payments on a redeem-You can deduct home mortgage interest only This section describes certain items that can be able ground rent, you can deduct them asif you meet all the following conditions. included as home mortgage interest and others mortgage interest.• You must file Form 1040 and itemize de- that cannot. It also describes certain special Payments made to end the lease and to buyductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). situations that may affect your deduction. the lessor's entire interest in the land are not
ground rents. You cannot deduct them. For• You must be legally liable for the loan. Late payment charge on mortgage payment.
more information, see Publication 936.You cannot deduct payments you make You can deduct as home mortgage interest a
for someone else if you are not legally late payment charge if it was not for a specific Nonredeemable ground rents. Payments
liable to make them. Both you and the service performed in connection with your mort- on a nonredeemable ground rent are not mort-
lender must intend that the loan be repaid. gage loan. gage interest. You can deduct them as rent if
In addition, there must be a true they are a business expense or if they are forMortgage prepayment penalty. If you pay offdebtor-creditor relationship between you rental property.your home mortgage early, you may have to payand the lender.
a penalty. You can deduct that penalty as home Rental payments. If you live in a house before
• The mortgage must be a secured debt on mortgage interest provided the penalty is not for final settlement on the purchase, any paymentsa qualified home in which you have an a specific service performed or cost incurred in you make for that period are rent and not inter-ownership interest. (Generally, your mort- connection with your mortgage loan. est. This is true even if the settlement papers callgage is a secured debt if you put your them interest. You cannot deduct these pay-Sale of home. If you sell your home, you canhome up as collateral to protect the inter- ments as home mortgage interest.deduct your home mortgage interest (subject toests of the lender. The term ªqualified
Mortgage proceeds invested in tax-exemptany limits that apply) paid up to, but not includ-homeº means your main home or second
securities. You cannot deduct the home mort-ing, the date of sale.home. For details, see Publication 936.)
gage interest on grandfathered debt or home
Example. John and Peggy Harris sold their equity debt if you used the proceeds of the
home on May 7. Through April 30, they made mortgage to buy securities or certificates thatAmount Deductible
home mortgage interest payments of $1,220. produce tax-free income. ªGrandfathered debtº
In most cases, you will be able to deduct all of The settlement sheet for the sale of the home and ªhome equity debtº are defined earlier under
your home mortgage interest. Whether it is all showed $50 interest for the 6-day period in May Amount Deductible.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 147

Figure 23-A. Is My Home Mortgage Interest Fully Deductible?
Were your total mortgage balances $100,000 or less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at all
times during the year?
Start Here:
No
/H17075
Were all of your home mortgages taken out on or
before 10-13-87?
Were all of your home mortgages taken out after
10-13-87 used to buy, build, or improve the main
home secured by that main home mortgage or
used to buy, build, or improve the second home
secured by that second home mortgage, or both?
Were the mortgage balances $1,000,000 or less
($500,000 or less if married filing separately) at 
all times during the year?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
Yes
(Instructions: Include balances of ALL mortgages secured by your main home and second home.)
Yes
/H17073
Yes
/H17076
/H17076
Your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
You do not need Publication 936.
Go to Part II of Publication 936 to determine the
limits on your deductible home mortgage interest.
Were your grandfathered debt plus home
acquisition debt balances $1,000,000 or less
3
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)
at all times during the year?
Were your home equity debt balances $100,000 or
less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at
all times during the year?
If all mortgages on your main or second home exceed the home’s fair market value, a lower limit may apply. See Home equity debt limit under Home Equity
Debt in Part II of Publication 936.
Amounts over the $1,000,000 limit ($500,000 if married filing separately) qualify as home equity debt if they are not more than  the total home equity debt
limit. See Publication 936 for more information about grandfathered debt, home acquisition debt, and home equity debt.
Do you meet the conditions to deduct home
mortgage interest?
/H17074
Yes
You cannot deduct the interest payments as home
mortgage interest.
4/H17075
No
You must itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) and be legally liable for the loan. The loan must be a secured debt on a qualified home. See Home
Mortgage Interest.
See Table 23-1 for where to deduct other types of interest payments.
4
3
2
1
1
Page 148 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Refunds of interest. If you receive a refund of 6. The funds you provided at or before clos- deduct two points ($2,000) ratably over the life of
ing, plus any points the seller paid, were at the loan. He deducts $67 [($2,000 ÷ 180interest in the same tax year you paid it, you
least as much as the points charged. The months) × 6 payments] of the points in 2007.must reduce your interest expense by the
funds you provided do not have to have The other point ($1,000) was a fee for servicesamount refunded to you. If you receive a refund
been applied to the points. They can in- and is not deductible.of interest you deducted in an earlier year, you
clude a down payment, an escrow deposit,generally must include the refund in income in
Example 2. The facts are the same as inearnest money, and other funds you paidthe year you receive it. However, you need to
Example 1, except that Bill used $25,000 of theat or before closing for any purpose. Youinclude it only up to the amount of the deduction
loan proceeds to improve his home and $75,000cannot have borrowed these funds fromthat reduced your tax in the earlier year. This is
to repay his existing mortgage. Bill deducts 25%your lender or mortgage broker.true whether the interest overcharge was re- ($25,000 ÷ $100,000) of the points ($2,000) infunded to you or was used to reduce the out- 7. You use your loan to buy or build your 2007. His deduction is $500 ($2,000 × 25%).standing principal on your mortgage. main home. Bill also deducts the ratable part of the re-If you received a refund of interest you over- 8. The points were computed as a percent- maining $1,500 ($2,000 − $500) that must bepaid in an earlier year, you generally will receive age of the principal amount of the mort- spread over the life of the loan. This is $50a Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, gage. [($1,500 ÷ 180 months) × 6 payments] in 2007.showing the refund in box 3. For information The total amount Bill deducts in 2007 is $5509. The amount is clearly shown on the settle-about Form 1098, see Form 1098, Mortgage ($500 + $50).ment statement (such as the SettlementInterest Statement, later.
Statement, Form HUD-1) as pointsFor more information on how to treat refunds charged for the mortgage. The points mayof interest deducted in earlier years, see Recov- Deduction Allowed Ratablybe shown as paid from either your funds oreries in chapter 12. the seller's. If you do not meet the tests listed under Deduc-
tion Allowed in Year Paid, earlier, the loan is notPoints a home improvement loan, or you choose not toNote. If you meet all of these tests, you can
deduct your points in full in the year paid, youchoose to either fully deduct the points in theThe term ªpointsº is used to describe certain can deduct the points ratably (equally) over theyear paid, or deduct them over the life of thecharges paid, or treated as paid, by a borrower life of the loan if you meet all the following tests.loan.to obtain a home mortgage. Points may also be
called loan origination fees, maximum loan 1. You use the cash method of accounting.Home improvement loan. You can also fully
charges, loan discount, or discount points. This means you report income in the yeardeduct in the year paid points paid on a loan to
A borrower is treated as paying any points you receive it and deduct expenses in theimprove your main home, if tests (1) through (6)
that a home seller pays for the borrower's mort- year you pay them. Most individuals useare met.
this method.gage. See Points paid by the seller, later. Second home. You cannot fully de-
2. Your loan is secured by a home. (Theduct in the year paid points you pay on
home does not need to be your mainloans secured by your second home.
CAUTION
!General Rule home.)You can deduct these points only over the life of
the loan.You generally cannot deduct the full amount of 3. Your loan period is not more than 30
points in the year paid. Because they are pre- years.Refinancing. Generally, points you pay topaid interest, you generally deduct them ratably refinance a mortgage are not deductible in full in 4. If your loan period is more than 10 years,over the life (term) of the mortgage. See Deduc- the year you pay them. This is true even if the the terms of your loan are the same astion Allowed Ratably, later. new mortgage is secured by your main home. other loans offered in your area for theFor exceptions to the general rule, see De- However, if you use part of the refinanced same or longer period.
duction Allowed in Year Paid, next. mortgage proceeds to improve your main home 5. Either your loan amount is $250,000 orand you meet the first 6 tests listed under De- less, or the number of points is not moreduction Allowed in Year Paid, you can fully de- than:Deduction Allowed in Year Paid duct the part of the points related to the
improvement in the year you paid them with your a. 4, if your loan period is 15 years or less,You can fully deduct points in the year paid if you own funds. You can deduct the rest of the points ormeet all the following tests. (You can use Figure over the life of the loan.23-B as a quick guide to see whether your points b. 6, if your loan period is more than 15
are fully deductible in the year paid.) years.Example 1. In 1994, Bill Fields got a mort-
gage to buy a home. In 2007, Bill refinanced that1. Your loan is secured by your main home. mortgage with a 15-year $100,000 mortgage(Your main home is the one you ordinarily loan. The mortgage is secured by his home. Tolive in most of the time.) Special Situationsget the new loan, he had to pay three points
2. Paying points is an established business ($3,000). Two points ($2,000) were for prepaid This section describes certain special situationspractice in the area where the loan was interest, and one point ($1,000) was charged for that may affect your deduction of points.services, in place of amounts that ordinarily aremade.
stated separately on the settlement statement.3. The points paid were not more than the Original issue discount. If you do not qualifyBill paid the points out of his private funds, rather to either deduct the points in the year paid orpoints generally charged in that area. than out of the proceeds of the new loan. The deduct them ratably over the life of the loan, or ifpayment of points is an established practice in4. You use the cash method of accounting. you choose not to use either of these methods,the area, and the points charged are not moreThis means you report income in the year the points reduce the issue price of the loan.than the amount generally charged there. Bill'syou receive it and deduct expenses in the This reduction results in original issue discount,first payment on the new loan was due July 1.year you pay them. (If you want more infor- which is discussed in chapter 4 of PublicationHe made six payments on the loan in 2007 andmation about this method, see Accounting 535.is a cash basis taxpayer.Methods in chapter 1.)
Bill used the funds from the new mortgage to Amounts charged for services. Amounts5. The points were not paid in place of repay his existing mortgage. Although the new charged by the lender for specific services con-amounts that ordinarily are stated sepa- mortgage loan was for Bill's continued owner- nected to the loan are not interest. Examples ofrately on the settlement statement, such as ship of his main home, it was not for the these charges are:appraisal fees, inspection fees, title fees, purchase or improvement of that home. He can-
• Appraisal fees,attorney fees, and property taxes. not deduct all of the points in 2007. He can
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 149

Figure 23-B. Are My Points Fully Deductible This Year?
Is the loan secured by your main home?
Start Here:
/H17075
/H17074Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
*The funds you provided do not have to have been applied to the points. They can include a down payment, an escrow deposit, ear nest money, and other
funds you paid at or before closing for any purpose.
Is the payment of points an established
business practice in your area?
Were the points paid more than the amount
generally charged in your area?
Do you use the cash method of accounting?
Did you take out the loan to improve your
main home?
Did you take out the loan to buy or build
your main home?
Were the points computed as a percentage of
the principal amount of the mortgage?
Were the funds you provided (other than
those you borrowed from your lender or
mortgage broker), plus any points the seller
paid, at least as much as the points charged?*
Is the amount paid clearly shown as points on
the settlement statement?
You can fully deduct the points this year on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
You cannot fully deduct the points this year. See the
discussion on Points.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
/H17075
Yes
Were the points paid in place of amounts that
ordinarily are separately stated on the
settlement sheet?
/H17074
/H17075
Yes
No
Page 150 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

• Notary fees, and Example. Dan paid $3,000 in points in 1997 mortgage, you generally will receive a Form
that he had to spread out over the 15-year life of 1098 or a similar statement from the mortgage• Preparation costs for the mortgage note or the mortgage. He had deducted $2,000 of these holder. You will receive the statement if you paydeed of trust. points through 2006. interest to a person (including a financial institu-
Dan prepaid his mortgage in full in 2007. He tion or a cooperative housing corporation) in theYou cannot deduct these amounts as points
can deduct the remaining $1,000 of points in course of that person's trade or business. Aeither in the year paid or over the life of the
2007. governmental unit is a person for purposes ofmortgage.
furnishing the statement.Limits on deduction. You cannot fully deduct The statement for each year should be sentPoints paid by the seller. The term ªpointsº points paid on a mortgage unless the mortgage to you by January 31 of the following year. Aincludes loan placement fees that the seller fits into one of the categories listed earlier under copy of this form will also be sent to the IRS.pays to the lender to arrange financing for the Fully deductible interest. See Publication 936 forbuyer. The statement will show the total interest youdetails. paid during the year, any mortgage insuranceTreatment by seller. The seller cannot de- premiums you paid, and if you purchased a mainduct these fees as interest. But they are a selling Mortgage Insurance home during the year, it also will show the de-expense that reduces the amount realized by ductible points paid during the year, includingPremiumsthe seller. See chapter 15 for information on seller-paid points. However, it should not showselling your home. any interest that was paid for you by a govern-You can treat amounts you paid during 2007 for
Treatment by buyer. The buyer reduces ment agency.qualified mortgage insurance as home mort-
the basis of the home by the amount of the As a general rule, Form 1098 will includegage interest. The insurance must be in connec-
seller-paid points and treats the points as if he or only points that you can fully deduct in the yeartion with home acquisition debt, the insurance
she had paid them. If all the tests under Deduc- paid. However, certain points not included oncontract must have been issued after 2006, and
tion Allowed in Year Paid, earlier, are met, the Form 1098 also may be deductible, either in theyou must have paid the premiums before 2008
buyer can deduct the points in the year paid. If year paid or over the life of the loan. See Points,for coverage in effect during 2007.
any of those tests are not met, the buyer deducts earlier, to determine whether you can deduct
Qualified mortgage insurance. Qualifiedthe points over the life of the loan. points not shown on Form 1098.
mortgage insurance is mortgage insurance pro-For information about basis, see chapter 13.
vided by the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Prepaid interest on Form 1098. If you pre-
Federal Housing Administration, or the RuralFunds provided are less than points. If you paid interest in 2007 that accrued in full by Janu-
Housing Service, and private mortgage insur-meet all the tests in Deduction Allowed in Year ary 15, 2008, this prepaid interest may be
ance (as defined in section 2 of the Homeown-Paid, earlier, except that the funds you provided included in box 1 of Form 1098. However, you
ers Protection Act of 1998 as in effect onwere less than the points charged to you (test cannot deduct the prepaid amount for January
December 20, 2006).(6)), you can deduct the points in the year paid, 2008 in 2007. (See Prepaid interest, earlier.)
Mortgage insurance provided by the Depart-up to the amount of funds you provided. In addi- You will have to figure the interest that accrued
ment of Veterans Affairs is commonly known astion, you can deduct any points paid by the for 2008 and subtract it from the amount in box
a funding fee. If provided by the Rural Housingseller. 1. You will include the interest for January 2008
Service, it is commonly known as a guarantee with the other interest you pay for 2008. See
fee. These fees can be deducted fully in 2007 ifExample 1. When you took out a $100,000 How To Report, later.
the mortgage insurance contract was issued inmortgage loan to buy your home in December,
2007. Contact the mortgage insurance issuer toyou were charged one point ($1,000). You meet Refunded interest. If you received a refund of
determine the deductible amount if it is not re-all the tests for deducting points in the year paid, mortgage interest you overpaid in an earlier
ported in box 4 of Form 1098.except the only funds you provided were a $750 year, you generally will receive a Form 1098
down payment. Of the $1,000 charged for showing the refund in box 3. See Refunds ofSpecial rules for prepaid mortgage insur-points, you can deduct $750 in the year paid. interest, earlier.ance. If you paid premiums for qualified mort-You spread the remaining $250 over the life of gage insurance that are allocable to periods Mortgage insurance premiums. The amountthe mortgage. after 2007, such premiums are treated as paid in of mortgage insurance premiums you paid dur-the period to which they are allocated. No de- ing 2007 may be shown in box 4 of Form 1098.Example 2. The facts are the same as in duction is allowed for the unamortized balance if See Mortgage Insurance Premiums, earlier.Example 1, except that the person who sold you the mortgage is satisfied before its term. Theyour home also paid one point ($1,000) to help preceding two sentences do not apply to quali-you get your mortgage. In the year paid, you can fied mortgage insurance provided by the Depart-deduct $1,750 ($750 of the amount you were ment of Veterans Affairs or Rural Housingcharged plus the $1,000 paid by the seller). You Investment InterestService.spread the remaining $250 over the life of the
mortgage. You must reduce the basis of your Limit on deduction. If your adjusted gross This section discusses interest expenses youhome by the $1,000 paid by the seller. income on Form 1040, line 38, is more than may be able to deduct as an investor.
$100,000 ($50,000 if your filing status is married If you borrow money to buy property you holdExcess points. If you meet all the tests in filing separately), the amount of your mortgage for investment, the interest you pay is invest-Deduction Allowed in Year Paid, earlier, except insurance premiums that are otherwise deducti- ment interest. You can deduct investment inter-that the points paid were more than generally ble is reduced and may be eliminated. See Line est subject to the limit discussed later. However,paid in your area (test (3)), you deduct in the 13 in the instructions for Schedule A (Form you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-year paid only the points that are generally 1040) and complete the Qualified Mortgage In- duce tax-exempt income. Nor can you deductcharged. You must spread any additional points surance Premiums Deduction Worksheet to fig- interest expenses on straddles.over the life of the mortgage. ure the amount you can deduct. If your adjusted Investment interest does not include anygross income is more than $109,000 ($54,500 if qualified home mortgage interest or any interestMortgage ending early. If you spread your married filing separately), you cannot deduct taken into account in computing income or lossdeduction for points over the life of the mort- your mortgage insurance premiums. from a passive activity.gage, you can deduct any remaining balance in
the year the mortgage ends. However, if you
Form 1098, Mortgagerefinance the mortgage with the same lender, Investment Property
you cannot deduct any remaining balance of Interest Statement
spread points. Instead, deduct the remaining Property held for investment includes property
balance over the term of the new loan. If you paid $600 or more of mortgage interest that produces interest, dividends, annuities, or
A mortgage may end early due to a prepay- (including certain points and mortgage insur- royalties not derived in the ordinary course of a
ment, refinancing, foreclosure, or similar event. ance premiums) during the year on any one trade or business. It also includes property that
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 151

produces gain or loss (not derived in the ordi- all or part of your net capital gain in investment loss from a passive activity are not included in
nary course of a trade or business) from the sale income. determining your investment income or invest-
or trade of property producing these types of You make this choice by completing Form ment expenses (including investment interest
income or held for investment (other than an 4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. expense). See Publication 925, Passive Activity
interest in a passive activity). Investment prop- If you choose to include any amount of your and At-Risk Rules, for information about passive
erty also includes an interest in a trade or busi- net capital gain in investment income, you must activities.
ness activity in which you did not materially reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for
participate (other than a passive activity). the lower capital gains tax rates by the same
amount. Form 4952
Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries. Before making either choice, consider Use Form 4952, Investment Interest ExpenseTo determine your investment interest, combine the overall effect on your tax liability. Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-your share of investment interest from a partner- Compare your tax if you make one or
TIP ment interest.ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your both of these choices with your tax if you do not.other investment interest.
Exception to use of Form 4952. You do notInvestment income of child reported on par- have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to yourAllocation of Interest ent's return. Investment income includes the return if you meet all of the following tests.part of your child's interest and dividend incomeExpense • Your investment interest expense is notthat you choose to report on your return. If the
more than your investment income fromchild does not have qualified dividends, AlaskaIf you borrow money for business or personal interest and ordinary dividends minus anyPermanent Fund dividends, or capital gain distri-purposes as well as for investment, you must qualified dividends.butions, this is the amount on line 6 of Formallocate the debt among those purposes. Only
8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter-the interest expense on the part of the debt used • You do not have any other deductible in-est and Dividends.for investment purposes is treated as invest- vestment expenses.
ment interest. The allocation is not affected by Child's qualified dividends. If part of the • You have no carryover of investment inter-the use of property that secures the debt. amount you report is your child's qualified divi- est expense from 2006.dends, that part (which is reported on Form
If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct all1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in-Limit on Deduction of your investment interest.vestment income. However, you can choose to
include all or part of it in investment income, asGenerally, your deduction for investment inter-
More Informationexplained under Choosing to include qualifiedest expense is limited to the amount of your net
dividends, earlier.investment income. For more information on investment interest,Your investment income also includes theYou can carry over the amount of investment see Interest Expenses in chapter 3 of Publica-amount on Form 8814, line 12, (or, if applicable,interest that you could not deduct because of tion 550.the reduced amount figured next under Child'sthis limit to the next tax year. The interest carried
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends).over is treated as investment interest paid or
accrued in that next year. Child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.
You can carry over disallowed investment If part of the amount you report is your child's Items Youinterest to the next tax year even if it is more than Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that part
your taxable income in the year the interest was does not count as investment income. To figure Cannot Deductpaid or accrued. the amount of your child's income that you can
consider your investment income, start with the Some interest payments are not deductible.amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that Certain expenses similar to interest also are notNet Investment Income amount by a percentage that is equal to the deductible. Nondeductible expenses include theAlaska Permanent Fund dividends divided byDetermine the amount of your net investment following items.the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. Subtractincome by subtracting your investment ex- the result from the amount on Form 8814, line • Personal interest (discussed later).penses (other than interest expense) from your 12.investment income. • Service charges (however, see Other Ex-
Child's capital gain distributions. If part penses in chapter 28).
of the amount you report is your child's capitalInvestment income. This generally includes • Annual fees for credit cards.gain distributions, that part (which is reported onyour gross income from property held for invest-
Schedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13)ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and • Loan fees.
generally does not count as investment income.royalties). Investment income does not include
• Credit investigation fees.However, you can choose to include all or part ofAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does
it in investment income, as explained in Choos-not include qualified dividends or net capital gain • Interest to purchase or carry tax-exempt
ing to include net capital gain, earlier.unless you choose to include them. securities.
Your investment income also includes theChoosing to include qualified dividends. amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable,Investment income generally does not include Penalties. You cannot deduct fines and pen-the reduced amount figured under Child'squalified dividends, discussed in chapter 8. alties paid to a government for violations of law,Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier).However, you can choose to include all or part of regardless of their nature.
your qualified dividends in investment income. Investment expenses. Investment expenses
You make this choice by completing Form include all income-producing expenses (other Personal Interest4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. than interest expense) relating to investment
If you choose to include any amount of your property that are allowable deductions after ap- Personal interest is not deductible. Personal in-qualified dividends in investment income, you plying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneous terest is any interest that is not home mortgagemust reduce your qualified dividends that are itemized deductions. Use the smaller of: interest, investment interest, business interest,eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by or other deductible interest. It includes the fol-• The investment expenses included onthe same amount. lowing items.Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, or
Choosing to include net capital gain. In- • Interest on car loans (unless you use the• The amount on Schedule A, line 27.vestment income generally does not include net car for business).capital gain from disposing of investment prop-
• Interest on federal, state, or local incomeerty (including capital gain distributions from mu- Losses from passive activities. Income or
tax.tual funds). However, you can choose to include expenses that you used in computing income or
Page 152 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

• Finance charges on credit cards, retail in- Table 23-1.  Where To Deduct Your Interest Expense
stallment contracts, and revolving charge
accounts incurred for personal expenses. AND for more
IF you have ... THEN deduct it on ... information go to ...• Late payment charges by a public utility.
deductible student loan interest Form 1040, line 33, or Publication 970.
You may be able to deduct interest you Form 1040A, line 18
pay on a qualified student loan. For deductible home mortgage interest and Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.details, see  Publication 970, Tax Ben-
TIP points reported on Form 1098 line 10efits for Education.
deductible home mortgage interest not Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.
reported on Form 1098 line 11
deductible points not reported on Form Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.
1098 line 12Allocation of Interest
deductible mortgage insurance Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.If you use the proceeds of a loan for more than premiums line 13one purpose (for example, personal and busi-
ness), you must allocate the interest on the loan deductible investment interest (other Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 550.
to each use. However, you do not have to allo- than incurred to produce rents or line 14
royalties)cate home mortgage interest if it is fully deducti-
ble, regardless of how the funds are used. deductible business interest (non-farm) Schedule C or C-EZ (Form Publication 535.You allocate interest (other than fully deduct- 1040)ible home mortgage interest) on a loan in the
same way as the loan itself is allocated. You do deductible farm business interest Schedule F (Form 1040) Publications 225 and 535.
this by tracing disbursements of the debt pro- deductible interest incurred to produce Schedule E (Form 1040) Publications 527 and 535.ceeds to specific uses. For details on how to do rents or royaltiesthis, see chapter 4 of Publication 535.
personal interest not deductible.
you file a joint return) were liable for and paid deduct only the interest payment for the rentedHow To Report
interest on a mortgage that was for your home, part in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). Deduct
and the other person received a Form 1098You must file Form 1040 to deduct any home the rest of the interest payment on Schedule A
showing the interest that was paid during themortgage interest expense on your tax return. (Form 1040) if it is deductible home mortgage
year, attach a statement to your return explain-Where you deduct your interest expense gener- interest.
ing this. Show how much of the interest each ofally depends on how you use the loan proceeds.
you paid, and give the name and address of theSee Table 23-1 for a summary of where to de-
person who received the form. Deduct yourduct your interest expense.
share of the interest on Schedule A (FormHome mortgage interest and points. Deduct 1040), line 11, and print ªSee attachedº next tothe home mortgage interest and points reported the line. Also, deduct your share of any qualifiedto you on Form 1098 on Schedule A (Form mortgage insurance premiums on Schedule A 24.1040), line 10. If you paid more deductible inter- (Form 1040), line 13.est to the financial institution than the amount Similarly, if you are the payer of record on ashown on Form 1098, show the larger deducti- mortgage on which there are other borrowersble amount on line 10. Attach a statement ex- entitled to a deduction for the interest shown on Contributionsplaining the difference and print ªSee attachedº the Form 1098 you received, deduct only yournext to line 10. share of the interest on Schedule A (Form Deduct home mortgage interest that was not 1040), line 10. You should let each of the otherreported to you on Form 1098 on Schedule A borrowers know what his or her share is. What's New(Form 1040), line 11. If you paid home mortgage
Mortgage proceeds used for business orinterest to the person from whom you bought
investment. If your home mortgage interestyour home, show that person's name, address, New recordkeeping requirements for cash
deduction is limited but all or part of the mort-and taxpayer identification number (TIN) on the contributions. You cannot deduct a cashgage proceeds were used for business, invest-dotted lines next to line 11. The seller must give contribution, regardless of the amount, unlessment, or other deductible activities, see Tableyou this number and you must give the seller you keep as a record of the contribution a bank23-1. It shows where to deduct the part of youryour TIN. A Form W-9, Request for Taxpayer record (such as a canceled check, a bank copyexcess interest that is for those activities.Identification Number and Certification, can be of a canceled check, or a bank statement con-used for this purpose. Failure to meet any of Investment interest. Deduct investment in- taining the name of the charity, the date, and thethese requirements may result in a $50 penalty terest, subject to certain limits discussed in Pub- amount) or a written communication from thefor each failure. The TIN can be either a social lication 550, on Schedule A (Form 1040), line charity. The written communication must includesecurity number, an individual taxpayer identifi- 14. the name of the charity, date of the contribution,cation number (issued by the Internal Revenue and amount of the contribution. See Records ToAmortization of bond premium. There areService), or an employer identification number. Keep, later.various ways to treat the premium you pay toSee Social Security Number in chapter 1 for
buy taxable bonds. See Bond Premium Amorti-more information about TINs.
zation in Publication 550.If you can take a deduction for points that
were not reported to you on Form 1098, deduct Income-producing rental or royalty interest.those points on Schedule A (Form 1040), line RemindersDeduct interest on a loan for income-producing12. rental or royalty property that is not used in yourDeduct mortgage insurance premiums on Contributions of cars, boats, and airplanes.business in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040).Schedule A (Form 1040), line 13. If you donate a car, boat, or airplane to a quali-
fied organization, your deduction generally isMore than one borrower. If you and at Example. You rent out part of your home
least one other person (other than your spouse if and borrow money to make repairs. You can limited to the gross proceeds from its sale by the
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 153

Table 24-1. Examples of Charitable ContributionsÐA Quick Check
Organizations That
Use the following lists for a quick check of contributions you can or cannot deduct. See the
rest of this chapter for more information and additional rules and limits that may apply. Qualify To Receive
Deductible As Not Deductible DeductibleCharitable Contributions As Charitable Contributions
Money or property you give to: Money or property you give to: Contributions
• Churches, synagogues, temples, • Civic leagues, social and sports clubs, You can deduct your contributions only if youmosques, and other religious labor unions, and chambers of make them to a qualified organization. To be-organizations commerce come a qualified organization, most organiza-• Federal, state, and local governments, if • Foreign organizations (except certain tions other than churches and governments, asyour contribution is solely for public Canadian, Israeli, and Mexican described below, must apply to the IRS.purposes (for example, a gift to reduce charities)
the public debt) You can ask any organization whether• Groups that are run for personal profit
• Nonprofit schools and hospitals it is a qualified organization, and most• Groups whose purpose is to lobby for
will be able to tell you. Or you can• Public parks and recreation facilities (but law changes
TIP
check IRS Publication 78, which lists most quali-not entry or usage fees) • Homeowners' associations
fied organizations. You may find Publication 78• Salvation Army, Red Cross, CARE, • Individuals in your local library's reference section, or on theGoodwill Industries, United Way, Boy • Political groups or candidates for Internet at www.irs.gov. You can also call theScouts, Girl Scouts, Boys and Girls public office IRS Tax Exempt/Government Entities CustomerClubs of America, etc.
Service at 1-877-829-5500 to find out if an or-• War veterans groups
ganization is qualified.• Charitable organizations listed in
Publication 78
Types of QualifiedCosts you pay for a student living with you, Noncharitable payments to federal, state,
sponsored by a qualified organization and local governments Organizations
Generally, only the five following types of organi-Out-of-pocket expenses when you serve a Cost of raffle, bingo, or lottery tickets zations can be qualified organizations.qualified organization as a volunteer
1. A community chest, corporation, trust,Dues, fees, or bills paid to country clubs, fund, or foundation organized or created inlodges, fraternal orders, or similar or under the laws of the United States, anygroups state, the District of Columbia, or any pos-
session of the United States (includingTuition
Puerto Rico). It must be organized and op-Value of your time or services erated only for one or more of the following
purposes.Value of blood given to a blood bank
a. Religious.
b. Charitable.organization. This rule applies if the claimed A charitable contribution is a donation or gift
value of the donated vehicle is more than $500. to, or for the use of, a qualified organization. It is c. Educational.For exceptions and more information, see voluntary and is made without getting, or expect-
d. Scientific.Cars, boats, and airplanes under Contributions ing to get, anything of equal value.
of Property. e. Literary.Form 1040 required. To deduct a charitable
contribution, you must file Form 1040 and item-Limit on itemized deductions. If your ad- f. The prevention of cruelty to children orize deductions on Schedule A. The amount ofjusted gross income is more than $156,400 animals.your deduction may be limited if certain rules($78,200 if you are married filing separately), the
Certain organizations that foster nationaland limits explained in this chapter apply to you.overall amount of your itemized deductions may
or international amateur sports competitionbe limited. See chapter 29 for more information
also qualify.about this limit. Useful Items
You may want to see: 2. War veterans' organizations, including
posts, auxiliaries, trusts, or foundations, or-
Publication ganized in the United States or any of its
possessions.Introduction ❏ 78 Cumulative List of Organizations
3. Domestic fraternal societies, orders, andThis chapter explains how to claim a deduction ❏ 526 Charitable Contributions
associations operating under the lodge sys-for your charitable contributions. It discusses the
❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated tem.following topics.
Property Note. Your contribution to this type of• Organizations that are qualified to receive organization is deductible only if it is to bedeductible charitable contributions. Form (and Instructions) used solely for charitable, religious, scien-
tific, literary, or educational purposes, or for• The types of contributions you can deduct. ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
the prevention of cruelty to children or ani-Deductions• How much you can deduct. mals. 
❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions• What records to keep. 4. Certain nonprofit cemetery companies or
corporations.• How to report your charitable contribu-
 Note. Your contribution to this type oftions.
organization is not deductible if it can be
used for the care of a specific lot or mauso-
leum crypt. 
Page 154 Chapter 24 Contributions

5. The United States or any state, the District value of the property at the time of the contribu- right to attend a charity ball, banquet, show,
of Columbia, a U.S. possession (including tion. See Contributions of Property, later in this sporting event, or other benefit event, you can
Puerto Rico), a political subdivision of a chapter. deduct only the amount that is more than the
state or U.S. possession, or an Indian tribal Your deduction for charitable contributions is value of the privileges or other benefits you
government or any of its subdivisions that generally limited to 50% of your adjusted gross receive.
perform substantial government functions. income, but in some cases 20% and 30% limits If there is an established charge for the
may apply. See Limits on Deductions, later.Note. To be deductible, your contribution event, that charge is the value of your benefit. If
Table 24-1 lists some examples of contribu-to this type of organization must be made there is no established charge, your contribution
tions you can deduct and some that you cannotsolely for public purposes. is that part of your payment that is more than the
deduct. reasonable value of the right to attend the event.
Whether you use the tickets or other privilegesExamples.   Qualified organizations include:
has no effect on the amount you can deduct.Contributions From• Churches, a convention or association of However, if you return the ticket to the qualifiedWhich You Benefitchurches, temples, synagogues, organization for resale, you can deduct the en-mosques, and other religious organiza- tire amount you paid for the ticket.If you receive a benefit as a result of making ations.
contribution to a qualified organization, you can Even if the ticket or other evidence of• Most nonprofit charitable organizations deduct only the amount of your contribution that payment indicates that the payment issuch as the Red Cross and the United is more than the value of the benefit you receive. a ªcontribution,º this does not mean
CAUTION
!Way. If you pay more than fair market value to a you can deduct the entire amount. If the ticket
qualified organization for merchandise, goods, shows the price of admission and the amount of• Most nonprofit educational organizations, or services, the amount you pay that is more the contribution, you can deduct the contributionincluding the Boy and Girl Scouts of than the value of the item can be a charitable amount.America, colleges, museums, and daycare contribution. For the excess amount to qualify,centers if substantially all the child care you must pay it with the intent to make a charita-provided is to enable individuals (the par- Example. You pay $40 to see a specialble contribution.ents) to be gainfully employed and the showing of a movie for the benefit of a qualified
services are available to the general pub- organization. Printed on the ticket is ªContribu-Example 1. You pay $65 for a ticket to alic. However, if your contribution is a sub- tionÐ$40.º If the regular price for the movie isdinner-dance at a church. All of the proceeds ofstitute for tuition or other enrollment fee, it $8, your contribution is $32 ($40 payment − $8the function go to the church. The ticket to theis not deductible as a charitable contribu- regular price).dinner-dance has a fair market value of $25.tion, as explained later under Contribu- When you buy your ticket, you know that itstions You Cannot Deduct. Membership fees or dues. You may be ablevalue is less than your payment. To figure the to deduct membership fees or dues you pay to a• Nonprofit hospitals and medical research amount of your charitable contribution, you sub-
qualified organization. However, you can deductorganizations. tract the value of the benefit you receive ($25)
only the amount that is more than the value offrom your total payment ($65). You can deduct• Utility company emergency energy pro- the benefits you receive. You cannot deduct$40 as a contribution to the church.grams, if the utility company is an agent dues, fees, or assessments paid to country
for a charitable organization that assists clubs and other social organizations. They areExample 2. At a fund-raising auction con-individuals with emergency energy needs. not qualified organizations.ducted by a charity, you pay $600 for a week's
stay at a beach house. The amount you pay is• Nonprofit volunteer fire companies. Certain membership benefits can be disre-
no more than the fair rental value. You have not garded. Both you and the organization can• Public parks and recreation facilities (but made a deductible charitable contribution. disregard certain membership benefits you getnot entry or usage fees).
in return for an annual payment of $75 or less toAthletic events. If you make a payment to, or• Civil defense organizations. the qualified organization. You can pay morefor the benefit of, a college or university and, as than $75 to the organization if the organizationa result, you receive the right to buy tickets to an does not require a larger payment for you to getCertain foreign charitable organizations.  athletic event in the athletic stadium of the col- the benefits. The following benefits are coveredUnder income tax treaties with Canada, Israel, lege or university, you can deduct 80% of the under this rule.and Mexico, you may be able to deduct contribu- payment as a charitable contribution.
tions to certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican If any part of your payment is for tickets 1. Any rights or privileges, other than thosecharitable organizations. Generally, you must (rather than the right to buy tickets), that part is discussed under Athletic events, earlier,have income from sources in that country. For not deductible. In that case, subtract the price of that you can use frequently while you are aadditional information on the deduction of contri- the tickets from your payment. 80% of the re- member, such as:butions to Canadian charities, see Publication maining amount is a charitable contribution.
597, Information on the United States±Canada a. Free or discounted admission to the or-
Income Tax Treaty. If you need more informa- Example 1. You pay $300 a year for mem- ganization's facilities or events,
tion on how to figure your contribution to Mexi- bership in an athletic scholarship program main- b. Free or discounted parking,can and Israeli charities, see Publication 526. tained by a university (a qualified organization).
The only benefit of membership is that you have c. Preferred access to goods or services,
the right to buy one season ticket for a seat in a and
designated area of the stadium at the univer- d. Discounts on the purchase of goodssity's home football games. You can deductContributions and services.$240 (80% of $300) as a charitable contribution.
You Can Deduct 2. Admission, while you are a member, to
Example 2. The facts are the same as in events that are open only to members ofGenerally, you can deduct your contributions of Example 1 except that your $300 payment in- the organization, if the organization rea-money or property that you make to, or for the cluded the purchase of one season ticket for the sonably projects that the cost per personuse of, a qualified organization. A gift or contri- stated ticket price of $120. You must subtract (excluding any allocated overhead) is notbution is ªfor the use ofº a qualified organization the usual price of a ticket ($120) from your $300 more than $8.90.when it is held in a legally enforceable trust for payment. The result is $180. Your deductible
the qualified organization or in a similar legal charitable contribution is $144 (80% of $180).
arrangement. Token items. You can deduct your entire pay-
ment to a qualified organization as a charitableIf you give property to a qualified organiza- Charity benefit events. If you pay a qualified
contribution if both of the following are true.tion, you generally can deduct the fair market organization more than fair market value for the
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 155

Table 24-2. Volunteers' Questions and Answers
If you do volunteer work for a qualified organization, the following questions and answers may apply to you. All of the rules explained in
this chapter also apply. See, in particular, Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services.
Question Answer
I do volunteer work 6 hours a week in the office of a qualified No, you cannot deduct the value of your time or services.
organization. The receptionist is paid $10 an hour to do the same
work I do. Can I deduct $60 a week for my time?
The office is 30 miles from my home. Can I deduct any of my car Yes, you can deduct the costs of gas and oil that are directly related
expenses for these trips? to getting to and from the place where you are a volunteer. If you
don't want to figure your actual costs, you can deduct 14 cents for
each mile.
I volunteer as a Red Cross nurse's aide at a hospital. Can I deduct Yes, you can deduct the cost of buying and cleaning your uniforms
the cost of uniforms that I must wear? if the hospital is a qualified organization, the uniforms are not
suitable for everyday use, and you must wear them when
volunteering.
I pay a babysitter to watch my children while I do volunteer work for No, you cannot deduct payments for child care expenses as a
a qualified organization. Can I deduct these costs? charitable contribution, even if they are necessary so you can do
volunteer work for a qualified organization. (If you have child care
expenses so you can work for pay, see chapter 32.)
• You get a small item or other benefit of Table 24-2 contains questions and answersExpenses Paid for Studenttoken value. that apply to some individuals who volunteer
Living With You their services.• The qualified organization correctly deter-
mines that the value of the item or benefit You may be able to deduct some expenses of Conventions. If you are a chosen representa-
you received is not substantial and informs having a student live with you. You can deduct tive attending a convention of a qualified organi-
you that you can deduct your payment in qualifying expenses for a foreign or American zation, you can deduct actual unreimbursed
full. student who: expenses for travel and transportation, including
a reasonable amount for meals and lodging,
1. Lives in your home under a written agree- while away from home overnight in connectionWritten statement. A qualified organization ment between you and a qualified organi- with the convention. However, see Travel, later.must give you a written statement if you make a zation as part of a program of the You cannot deduct personal expenses forpayment to it that is more than $75 and is partly organization to provide educational oppor- sightseeing, fishing parties, theater tickets, ora contribution and partly for goods or services. tunities for the student, nightclubs. You also cannot deduct travel, mealsThe statement must tell you that you can deduct
and lodging, and other expenses for youronly the amount of your payment that is more 2. Is not your relative or dependent, and
spouse or children.than the value of the goods or services you 3. Is a full-time student in the twelfth or any  You cannot deduct your expenses in attend-received. It must also give you a good faith lower grade at a school in the United ing a church convention if you go only as aestimate of the value of those goods or services. States. member of your church rather than as a chosenThe organization can give you the statement
representative. You can deduct unreimbursedeither when it solicits or when it receives the You can deduct up to $50 a month for expenses that are directly connected with givingpayment from you. each full calendar month the student services for your church during the convention.Exception. An organization will not have to lives with you. Any month when condi-
TIP
give you this statement if one of the following is tions (1) through (3) above are met for 15 days Uniforms. You can deduct the cost and up-
true. or more counts as a full month. keep of uniforms that are not suitable for every-
day use and that you must wear whileFor additional information, see Expenses1. The organization is: performing donated services for a charitable or-Paid for Student Living With You in Publication
ganization.526.a. The type of organization described in
(5) under Types of Qualified Organiza- Foster parents. You may be able to deduct astions, earlier, or Mutual exchange program. You cannot de- a charitable contribution some of the costs ofduct the costs of a foreign student living in your being a foster parent (foster care provider) if youb. Formed only for religious purposes, and home under a mutual exchange program have no profit motive in providing the foster carethe only benefit you receive is an intan- through which your child will live with a family in and are not, in fact, making a profit. A qualifiedgible religious benefit (such as admis- a foreign country. organization must designate the individuals yousion to a religious ceremony) that
take into your home for foster care.generally is not sold in commercial
You can deduct expenses that meet both oftransactions outside the donative con- Out-of-Pocket Expenses in the following requirements.text.
Giving Services
1. They are unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex-2. You receive only items whose value is not
penses to feed, clothe, and care for theYou may be able to deduct some amounts yousubstantial. See Token items, earlier.
foster child.pay in giving services to a qualified organization.
3. You receive only membership benefits that The amounts must be: 2. They must be mainly to benefit the quali-can be disregarded, as described earlier.
fied organization.• Unreimbursed,
Unreimbursed expenses that you cannot de-• Directly connected with the services,
duct as charitable contributions may be consid-• Expenses you had only because of the ered support provided by you in determiningservices you gave, and whether you can claim the foster child as a
• Not personal, living, or family expenses. dependent. For details, see chapter 3.
Page 156 Chapter 24 Contributions

Example.  You cared for a foster child be- you cannot claim the cost of your evening at the deduction for your son's unreimbursed ex-
cause you wanted to adopt her, not to benefit the penses related to his contribution of serv-theater.
agency that placed her in your home. Your un- ices.Daily allowance (per diem). If you providereimbursed expenses are not deductible as • Payments to a hospital that are for a spe-services for a charitable organization and re-charitable contributions. cific patient's care or for services for aceive a daily allowance to cover reasonable
specific patient. You cannot deduct theseCar expenses. You can deduct unreimbursed travel expenses, including meals and lodging
payments even if the hospital is operatedout-of-pocket expenses, such as the cost of gas while away from home overnight, you must in-
by a city, a state, or other qualified organi-and oil, that are directly related to the use of your clude in income the amount of the allowance
zation.car in giving services to a charitable organiza- that is more than your deductible travel ex-
tion. You cannot deduct general repair and penses. You can deduct your necessary travel
maintenance expenses, depreciation, registra- expenses that are more than the allowance.
tion fees, or the costs of tires or insurance. Contributions toDeductible travel expenses. These in-  If you do not want to deduct your actual Nonqualifiedclude:expenses, you can use a standard mileage rate
of 14 cents a mile to figure your contribution. Organizations• Air, rail, and bus transportation,
You can deduct parking fees and tolls
• Out-of-pocket expenses for your car, You cannot deduct contributions to organiza-whether you use your actual expenses or the
tions that are not qualified to receivestandard mileage rate. • Taxi fares or other costs of transportation tax-deductible contributions, including the fol-You must keep reliable written records of between the airport or station and your lowing.your car expenses. For more information, see hotel,
Car expenses under Records To Keep, later. 1. Certain state bar associations if:• Lodging costs, and
Travel. Generally, you can claim a charitable
• The cost of meals. a. The state bar is not a political subdivi-contribution deduction for travel expenses nec-
sion of a state,essarily incurred while you are away from home Because these travel expenses are not busi-
performing services for a charitable organization ness-related, they are not subject to the same b. The bar has private, as well as public,
only if there is no significant element of personal purposes, such as promoting the pro-limits as business-related expenses. For infor-
pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the travel. fessional interests of members, andmation on business travel expenses, see TravelThis applies whether you pay the expenses di- Expenses in chapter 26. c. Your contribution is unrestricted andrectly or indirectly. You are paying the expenses
can be used for private purposes.indirectly if you make a payment to the charita-
ble organization and the organization pays for
2. Chambers of commerce and other busi-your travel expenses.
ness leagues or organizations (but seeContributionsThe deduction for travel expenses will not be
chapter 28).denied simply because you enjoy providing
You Cannot Deductservices to the charitable organization. Even if 3. Civic leagues and associations.you enjoy the trip, you can take a charitable
There are some contributions you cannot de-contribution deduction for your travel expenses 4. Communist organizations.
duct, such as those made to specific individualsif you are on duty in a genuine and substantial 5. Country clubs and other social clubs.and those made to nonqualified organizations.sense throughout the trip. However, if you have
only nominal duties, or if for significant parts of (See Contributions to Individuals and Contribu- 6. Foreign organizations other than:
the trip you do not have any duties, you cannot tions to Nonqualified Organizations, next.)
deduct your travel expenses. a. A U.S. organization that transfers fundsThere are others you can deduct only part of, as
to a charitable foreign organization ifdiscussed later under Contributions From Which
Example 1. You are a troop leader for a the U.S. organization controls the useYou Benefit.
tax-exempt youth group and you help take the of the funds or if the foreign organiza-
group on a camping trip. You are responsible for tion is only an administrative arm of theContributions tooverseeing the setup of the camp and for provid- U.S. organization, or
ing adult supervision for other activities during Individuals b. Certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexicanthe entire trip. You participate in the activities of charitable organizations. See Certainthe group and really enjoy your time with them. You cannot deduct contributions to specific indi- foreign charitable organizations underYou oversee the breaking of camp and you help viduals, including the following. Organizations That Qualify To Receivetransport the group home. You can deduct your • Contributions to fraternal societies made Deductible Contributions, earlier.travel expenses. for the purpose of paying medical or burial
expenses of deceased members. 7. Homeowners' associations.Example 2. You sail from one island to an-
other and spend 8 hours a day counting whales • Contributions to individuals who are needy 8. Labor unions (but see chapter 28).
and other forms of marine life. The project is or worthy. This includes contributions to a 9. Political organizations and candidates.sponsored by a charitable organization. In most qualified organization if you indicate thatcircumstances, you cannot deduct your ex- your contribution is for a specific person.penses. But you can deduct a contribution that you Contributions Fromgive to a qualified organization that in turnExample 3. You work for several hours helps needy or worthy individuals if you do Which You Benefiteach morning on an archaeological dig spon- not indicate that your contribution is for asored by a charitable organization. The rest of If you receive or expect to receive a financial orspecific person.the day is free for recreation and sightseeing. economic benefit as a result of making a contri-You cannot take a charitable contribution deduc- • Payments to a member of the clergy that bution to a qualified organization, you cannottion even though you work very hard during can be spent as he or she wishes, such as deduct the part of the contribution that repre-those few hours. for personal expenses. sents the value of the benefit you receive. These
contributions include the following.• Expenses you paid for another person whoExample 4. You spend the entire day at-
provided services to a qualified organiza- • Contributions for lobbying. This includestending a charitable organization's regional
tion. amounts that you earmark for use in, or inmeeting as a chosen representative. In the eve-
connection with, influencing specific legis-Example. Your son does missionary work.ning you go to the theater. You can claim your
lation.travel expenses as charitable contributions, but You pay his expenses. You cannot claim a
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 157

• Contributions to a retirement home that Form 1098-C. You must attach to your re-
are clearly for room, board, maintenance, turn the copy of the Form 1098-C, ContributionsContributionsor admittance. Also, if the amount of your of Motor Vehicles, Boats, and Airplanes, (or
contribution depends on the type or size of other statement containing the same informa-of Propertyapartment you will occupy, it is not a chari- tion as Form 1098-C) you received from the
table contribution. organization. The Form 1098-C (or other state-If you contribute property to a qualified organiza- ment) will show the gross proceeds from thetion, the amount of your charitable contribution• Costs of raffles, bingo, lottery, etc. You sale of the vehicle.is generally the fair market value of the propertycannot deduct as a charitable contribution If you do not attach Form 1098-C (or otherat the time of the contribution. However, if theamounts you pay to buy raffle or lottery statement), you cannot deduct your contribu-property has increased in value, you may havetickets or to play bingo or other games of tion. You must get Form 1098-C (or other state-to make some adjustments to the amount ofchance. For information on how to report ment) within 30 days of the sale of the vehicle.your deduction. See Giving Property That Hasgambling winnings and losses, see chap- But if exception 1 or 2 (described next) applies,Increased in Value, later.ters 12 and 28. you must get Form 1098-C (or other statement)For information about the records you must• Dues to fraternal orders and similar within 30 days of your donation.keep and the information you must furnish withgroups. However, see Membership fees or your return if you donate property, see Records Exceptions. There are two exceptions to thedues, earlier, under Contributions You To Keep and How To Report, later. rules just described for deductions of more thanCan Deduct. $500.Clothing and household items. You cannot• Tuition, or amounts you pay instead of tui- Exception 1Ðvehicle used or improved bytake a deduction for clothing or household itemstion, even if you pay them for children to organization. If the qualified organizationyou donate unless the clothing or householdattend parochial schools or qualifying non- makes a significant intervening use of or mate-items are in good used condition or better.profit day-care centers. You also cannot rial improvement to the vehicle before transfer-deduct any fixed amount you may be re- Household items. Household items in- ring it, and you claim a deduction of more thanquired to pay in addition to the tuition fee clude: $500, you generally can deduct the vehicle's fairto enroll in a private school, even if it is market value at the time of the contribution. But• Furniture,designated as a ªdonation.º if the vehicle's fair market value was more than• Furnishings, your cost or other basis, you may have to reduce
the fair market value to get the deductible• Electronics,Value of Time or Services amount, as described under Giving Property• Appliances, That Has Increased in Value, later. The FormYou cannot deduct the value of your time or
1098-C (or other statement) will show whether• Linens, andservices, including:
this exception applies.• Other similar items.• Blood donations to the Red Cross or to
Exception 2Ðvehicle given or sold toblood banks, and
needy individual. If the qualified organizationHousehold items do not include:• The value of income lost while you work will give the vehicle, or sell it for a price well• Food,as an unpaid volunteer for a qualified or- below fair market value, to a needy individual to
ganization. further the organization's charitable purpose,• Paintings, antiques, and other objects of
and you claim a deduction of more than $500,art,
you generally can deduct the vehicle's fair mar-• Jewelry and gems, andPersonal Expenses ket value at the time of the contribution. But if the
vehicle's fair market value was more than your• Collections.You cannot deduct personal, living, or family cost or other basis, you may have to reduce theexpenses, such as: fair market value to get the deductible amount,Appraisal for items more than $500. You
as described under Giving Property That Has• The cost of meals you eat while you per- can take a deduction for a contribution of an item
Increased in Value, later. The Form 1098-C (orform services for a qualified organization of clothing or household item that is not in good
other statement) will show whether this excep-unless it is necessary for you to be away used condition or better if you deduct more than
tion applies.from home overnight while performing the $500 for it and include a qualified appraisal of it
This exception does not apply if the organi-services, or with your return.
zation sells the vehicle at auction. In that case,• Adoption expenses, including fees paid to you cannot deduct the vehicle's fair marketCars, boats, and airplanes. The followingan adoption agency and the costs of keep- value.rules apply to any donation of a qualified vehicle.ing a child in your home before adoption is A qualified vehicle is:final (but see Adoption Credit in chapter 37, Example. Anita donates a used car to a• A car or any motor vehicle manufacturedand the instructions for Form 8839, Quali- qualified organization. She bought it 3 years agomainly for use on public streets, roads,fied Adoption Expenses). for $9,000. A used car guide shows the fairand highways,You also may be able to claim an exemp- market value for this type of car is $6,000. How-tion for the child. See Adopted child in ever, Anita gets a Form 1098-C from the organi-• A boat, orchapter 3. zation showing the car was sold for $2,900.• An airplane. Neither exception 1 nor exception 2 applies. If
Anita itemizes her deductions, she can deductDeduction more than $500. If you donate aAppraisal Fees $2,900 for her donation. She must attach Formqualified vehicle to a qualified organization and 1098-C and Form 8283 to her return.Fees that you pay to find the fair market value of you claim a deduction of more than $500, you
donated property are not deductible as contribu- can deduct the smaller of: Deduction $500 or less. If the qualified or-
tions (but see chapter 28). ganization sells the vehicle for $500 or less and• The gross proceeds from the sale of the exceptions 1 and 2 do not apply, you can deductvehicle by the organization, or the smaller of:
• The vehicle's fair market value on the date • $500, orof the contribution. If the vehicle's fair mar-
ket value was more than your cost or other • The vehicle's fair market value on the date
basis, you may have to reduce the fair of the contribution. But if the vehicle's fair
market value to figure the deductible market value was more than your cost or
amount, as described under Giving Prop- other basis, you may have to reduce the
erty That Has Increased in Value, later. fair market value to get the deductible
Page 158 Chapter 24 Contributions

amount, as described under Giving Prop- publish used car pricing guides, commonly Example. You donate stock that you held
erty That Has Increased in Value later. for 5 months to your church. The fair marketcalled ªblue books,º containing complete dealer
value of the stock on the day you donate it issale prices or dealer average prices for recent
If the vehicle's fair market value is at least $1,000, but you paid only $800 (your basis).model years. The guides may be published
$250 but not more than $500, you must have a Because the $200 of appreciation would bemonthly or seasonally and for different regions
written statement from the qualified organization short-term capital gain if you sold the stock, yourof the country. These guides also provide esti-
acknowledging your donation. The statement deduction is limited to $800 (fair market valuemates for adjusting for unusual equipment, unu-
must contain the information and meet the tests minus the appreciation).sual mileage, and physical condition. The prices
for an acknowledgment described under Deduc- are not ªofficialº and these publications are not Capital gain property. Property is capitaltions of At Least $250 But Not More Than $500 considered an appraisal of any specific donated gain property if its sale at fair market value onunder Records To Keep, later. property. But they do provide clues for making the date of the contribution would have resultedan appraisal and suggest relative prices forPartial interest in property. Generally, you in long-term capital gain. It includes capital as-comparison with current sales and offerings incannot deduct a charitable contribution of less sets held more than 1 year, as well as certainyour area.than your entire interest in property. real property and depreciable property used in
your trade or business and, generally, held moreRight to use property. A contribution of the Example. You donate a used car in poor than 1 year.right to use property is a contribution of less than condition to a local high school for use by stu-your entire interest in that property and is not Amount of deduction Ð general rule.dents studying car repair. A used car guidedeductible. For exceptions and more informa- When figuring your deduction for a gift of capitalshows the dealer retail value for this type of cartion, see Partial Interest in Property Not in Trust gain property, you usually can use the fair mar-in poor condition is $1,600. However, the guidein Publication 561. ket value of the gift.shows the price for a private party sale of the car
is only $750. The fair market value of the car isFuture interests in tangible personal prop- Exceptions. In certain situations, you must
considered to be $750.erty. You can deduct the value of a charitable reduce the fair market value by any amount that
contribution of a future interest in tangible per- would have been long-term capital gain if you
sonal property only after all intervening interests had sold the property for its fair market value.Large quantities. If you contribute a large
in and rights to the actual possession or enjoy- Generally, this means reducing the fair marketnumber of the same item, fair market value is the
ment of the property have either expired or been value to the property's cost or other basis.price at which comparable numbers of the item
turned over to someone other than yourself, a are being sold.
Bargain sales. A bargain sale of property to arelated person, or a related organization.
qualified organization (a sale or exchange forTangible personal property. This is any Giving Property That less than the property's fair market value) isproperty, other than land or buildings, that can partly a charitable contribution and partly a saleHas Decreased in Valuebe seen or touched. It includes furniture, books, or exchange. A bargain sale may result in ajewelry, paintings, and cars. taxable gain.If you contribute property with a fair market value
Future interest. This is any interest that is that is less than your basis in it, your deduction is
More information. For more information onto begin at some future time, regardless of limited to its fair market value. You cannot claim
donated appreciated property, see Giving Prop-whether it is designated as a future interest a deduction for the difference between the prop- erty That Has Increased in Value in Publicationunder state law. erty's basis and its fair market value. 526.
Determining Giving Property That
Fair Market Value Has Increased in Value When To DeductThis section discusses general guidelines for If you contribute property with a fair market value
determining the fair market value of various that is more than your basis in it, you may have You can deduct your contributions only in thetypes of donated property. to reduce the fair market value by the amount of year you actually make them in cash or otherFair market value is the price at which prop- appreciation (increase in value) when you figure property (or in a later carryover year, as ex-erty would change hands between a willing your deduction. plained later under Carryovers). This appliesbuyer and a willing seller, neither having to buy whether you use the cash or an accrual methodYour basis in property is generally what youor sell, and both having reasonable knowledge of accounting.paid for it. See chapter 13 if you need moreof all the relevant facts. Publication 561 contains
information about basis.a more complete discussion. Time of making contribution. Usually, youDifferent rules apply to figuring your deduc- make a contribution at the time of its uncondi-Used clothing and household items. Gener- tion, depending on whether the property is: tional delivery.ally, the fair market value of used clothing and
• Ordinary income property, orhousehold goods is far less than its original cost. Checks. A check that you mail to a charity is
For used clothing, you should claim as the • Capital gain property. considered delivered on the date you mail it.
value the price that buyers of used items actually
Credit card.  Contributions charged on yourpay in used clothing stores, such as consign-
Ordinary income property. Property is ordi- credit card are deductible in the year you makement or thrift shops. See Household Goods in
the charge.nary income property if its sale at fair marketPublication 561 for information on the valuation
value on the date it was contributed would haveof household goods, such as furniture, appli- Pay-by-phone account.  If you use aresulted in ordinary income or in short-term capi-ances, and linens. pay-by-phone account, the date you make atal gain. Examples of ordinary income property contribution is the date the financial institution
are inventory, works of art created by the donor,Example. Dawn Greene donated a coat to a pays the amount. This date should be shown on
manuscripts prepared by the donor, and capitalthrift store operated by her church. She paid the statement the financial institution sends to
assets held 1 year or less.$300 for the coat 3 years ago. Similar coats in you.
the thrift store sell for $50. The fair market value Amount of deduction. The amount you Stock certificate. A gift to a charity of aof the coat is reasonably determined to be $50. can deduct for a contribution of ordinary income properly endorsed stock certificate is completedDawn's donation is limited to $50. property is its fair market value minus the on the date of mailing or other delivery to the
amount that would be ordinary income orCars, boats, and aircraft. If you contribute a charity or to the charity's agent. However, if you
short-term capital gain if you sold the propertycar, boat, or aircraft to a charitable organization, give a stock certificate to your agent or to the
for its fair market value. Generally, this rule limitsyou must determine its fair market value.  Cer- issuing corporation for transfer to the name of
the deduction to your basis in the property.tain commercial firms and trade organizations the charity, your gift is not completed until the
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 159

date the stock is transferred on the books of the • Private nonoperating foundations that case) and together they are not more than the
corporation. make qualifying distributions of 100% of 50% limit ($25,000).
contributions within 21/2 months followingPromissory note. If you issue and deliver a For more information, see the rules for elect-the year they receive the contributions.promissory note to a charitable organization as ing the 50% limit for capital gain property under
a contribution, it is not a contribution until you • Certain private foundations whose contri- How To Figure Your Deduction When Limits
make the note payments. butions are pooled in a common fund, the Apply in Publication 526.
income and principal of which are paid toOption.  If you grant an option to buy real public charities.property at a bargain price to a charitable organi- 20% Limit
zation, you cannot take a deduction until the
This limit applies to all gifts of capital gain prop-organization exercises the option. 30% Limit erty to or for the use of qualified organizationsBorrowed funds. If you make a contribu- (other than gifts of capital gain property to 50%A 30% limit applies to the following gifts.tion with borrowed funds, you can deduct the limit organizations).contribution in the year you make it, regardless • Gifts to all qualified organizations otherof when you repay the loan. than 50% limit organizations. This includes Carryoversgifts to veterans' organizations, fraternal
societies, nonprofit cemeteries, and cer- You can carry over your contributions that youtain private nonoperating foundations. are not able to deduct in the current year be-
Limits on Deductions cause they exceed your adjusted-gross-income• Gifts for the use of any organization.
limits. You can deduct the excess in each of theHowever, if these gifts are of capital gain prop-If your total contributions for the year are 20% or next 5 years until it is used up, but not beyonderty, they are subject to the 20% limit, describedless of your adjusted gross income, you do not that time. For more information, see Carryoverslater, rather than the 30% limit.need to read this section. The limits discussed in Publication 526.
here do not apply to you.
Student living with you. Amounts you spendThe amount of your deduction is limited to on behalf of a student living with you are subject50% of your adjusted gross income and may be to the 30% limit. These amounts are consideredlimited to 30% or 20% of your adjusted gross a contribution for the use of a qualified organiza- Records To Keepincome, depending on the type of property you tion. See Expenses Paid for Student Living Withgive and the type of organization you give it to. You, earlier. You must keep records to prove the amount ofThese limits are described below.
the contributions you make during the year. TheIf your contributions are more than any of the
kind of records you must keep depends on theSpecial 30% Limit forlimits that apply, see Carryovers, later.
amount of your contributions and whether theyCapital Gain Property are:
50% Limit A special 30% limit applies to gifts of capital gain • Cash contributions,
property to 50% limit organizations. (For gifts ofThis limit applies to the total of all charitable • Noncash contributions, orcapital gain property to other organizations, seecontributions you make during the year. This
20% Limit, later.) However, the special 30% limit • Out-of-pocket expenses when donatingmeans that your deduction for charitable contri-
does not apply when you choose to reduce the your services.butions cannot be more than 50% of your ad-
fair market value of the property by the amountjusted gross income for the year.
that would have been long-term capital gain ifGenerally, the 50% limit is the only limit that you had sold the property. Instead, only the 50% Note. An organization generally must giveapplies to gifts to organizations listed below limit applies. you a written statement if it receives a paymentunder 50% limit organizations. But there is one from you that is more than $75 and is partly aexception. A 30% limit also applies to these gifts contribution and partly for goods or services.Qualified conservation contribution. Theif they are gifts of capital gain property for which (See Contributions From Which You Benefitspecial 30% limit does not apply to qualifiedyou figure your deduction using fair market under Contributions You Can Deduct, earlier.)conservation contributions (QCCs). Instead, avalue without reduction for appreciation. (See Keep the statement for your records. It may50% limit applies. For qualified farmers andSpecial 30% Limit for Capital Gain Property, satisfy all or part of the recordkeeping require-ranchers, QCCs are deductible up to 100% oflater.) ments explained in the following discussions.adjusted gross income. See Publication 526 for
details.
50% limit organizations. You can ask any Cash Contributionsorganization whether it is a 50% limit organiza- Two separate 30% limits. This special 30%tion and most will be able to tell you. Or you can Cash contributions include those paid by cash,limit for capital gain property is separate from thecheck IRS Publication 78 or call the IRS Tax check, electronic funds transfer, credit card, orother 30% limit. Therefore, the deduction of aExempt/Government Entities Customer Service payroll deduction.contribution subject to one 30% limit does notat the number listed earlier under Organizations reduce the amount you can deduct for contribu-that Qualify To Receive Deductible Contribu- You cannot deduct a cash contribution, re-tions subject to the other 30% limit. However,tions. The following is a partial list of the types of gardless of the amount, unless you keep one ofthe total you deduct cannot be more than 50% oforganizations that are 50% limit organizations. the following.your adjusted gross income.
• Churches and conventions or associations 1. A bank record that shows the name of the
Example. Your adjusted gross income isof churches. qualified organization, the date of the con-
$50,000. During the year, you gave capital gain tribution, and the amount of the contribu-• Educational organizations with a regular property with a fair market value of $15,000 to a tion. Bank records may include:faculty and curriculum that normally have 50% limit organization. You do not choose toa regularly enrolled student body attending reduce the property's fair market value by its a. A canceled check,classes on site. appreciation in value. You also gave $10,000 b. A bank or credit union statement, orcash to a qualified organization that is not a 50%• Hospitals and certain medical research or-
limit organization. The $15,000 gift of property isganizations associated with these hospi- c. A credit card statement.
subject to the special 30% limit. The $10,000tals. 
cash gift is subject to the other 30% limit. Both 2. A receipt (or a letter or other written com-• Publicly supported charities. gifts are fully deductible because neither is more munication) from the qualified organization
• Private operating foundations. than the 30% limit that applies ($15,000 in each showing the name of the organization, the
Page 160 Chapter 24 Contributions

date of the contribution, and the amount of 3. You must get it on or before the earlier of: Deductions of Less Than $250
the contribution.
a. The date you file your return for the If you make any noncash contribution, you must3. The payroll deduction records described year you make the contribution, or get and keep a receipt from the charitable organ-next. ization showing:b. The due date, including extensions, for
filing the return.Payroll deductions. If you make a contribu- 1. The name of the charitable organization,
tion by payroll deduction, you must keep: 2. The date and location of the charitableIf the acknowledgment does not show the
contribution, and1. A pay stub, Form W-2, or other document date of the contribution, you must also have a
furnished by your employer that shows the bank record or receipt, as described earlier, that 3. A reasonably detailed description of thedate and amount of the contribution, and does show the date of the contribution. If the property.
acknowledgment does show the date of the con-2. A pledge card or other document prepared
A letter or other written communicationtribution and meets the other tests just de-by or for the qualified organization that
from the charitable organization ac-scribed, you do not need any other records.shows the name of the organization.
knowledging receipt of the contribution
TIPIf your employer withheld $250 or more from a and containing the information in (1), (2), and (3)single paycheck, see Contributions of $250 or Payroll deductions. If you make a contribu- will serve as a receipt.More, next. tion by payroll deduction and your employer You are not required to have a receipt wherewithheld $250 or more from a single paycheck, it is impractical to get one (for example, if youyou must keep: leave property at a charity's unattended dropContributions of $250 or More site).1. A pay stub, Form W-2, or other document
You can claim a deduction for a contribution of furnished by your employer that shows the
Additional records. You must also keep reli-$250 or more only if you have an acknowledg- amount withheld as a contribution, andment of your contribution from the qualified or- able written records for each item of donated
2. A pledge card or other document preparedganization or certain payroll deduction records. property. Your written records must include the
by or for the qualified organization thatIf you made more than one contribution of following information.
$250 or more, you must have either a separate shows the name of the organization and • The name and address of the organizationacknowledgment for each or one acknowledg- states the organization does not provide to which you contributed.ment that lists each contribution and the date of goods or services in return for any contri-
each contribution and shows your total contribu- • The date and location of the contribution.bution made to it by payroll deduction.
tions. • A description of the property in detail rea-A single pledge card may be kept for all contribu-
sonable under the circumstances. For aAmount of contribution. In figuring whether tions made by payroll deduction regardless of
security, keep the name of the issuer, theyour contribution is $250 or more, do not com- amount as long as it contains all the required
type of security, and whether it is regularlybine separate contributions. For example, if you information. traded on a stock exchange or in angave your church $25 each week, your weekly If the pay stub, Form W-2, pledge card, or over-the-counter market.payments do not have to be combined. Each
other document does not show the date of thepayment is a separate contribution. • The fair market value of the property at thecontribution, you must also have another docu-If contributions are made by payroll deduc- time of the contribution and how you fig-ment that does show the date of the contribution.tion, the deduction from each paycheck is ured the fair market value. If it was deter-If the pay stub, Form W-2, pledge card, or othertreated as a separate contribution. mined by appraisal, keep a signed copy ofIf you made a payment that is partly for document does show the date of the contribu- the appraisal. goods and services, as described earlier under tion, you do not need any other records except
Contributions From Which You Benefit, your • The cost or other basis of the property ifthose just described in (1) and (2).
contribution is the amount of the payment that is you must reduce its fair market value by
more than the value of the goods and services. appreciation. Your records should also in-Noncash Contributions clude the amount of the reduction and howAcknowledgment. The acknowledgment you figured it. If you choose the 50% limitFor a contribution not made in cash, the recordsmust meet these tests. instead of the special 30% limit on certainyou must keep depend on whether your deduc- capital gain property, you must keep a re-1. It must be written. tion for the contribution is: cord showing the years for which you
2. It must include: made the choice, contributions for the cur-1. Less than $250,
rent year to which the choice applies, anda. The amount of cash you contributed, 2. At least $250 but not more than $500, carryovers from preceding years to which
b. Whether the qualified organization gave the choice applies. See How To Figure3. Over $500 but not more than $5,000, or
you any goods or services as a result of Your Deduction When Limits Apply in Pub-4. Over $5,000.your contribution (other than certain to- lication 526 for information on how to
ken items and membership benefits), make the capital gain property election.
c. A description and good faith estimate of • The amount you claim as a deduction forAmount of deduction. In figuring whether
the value of any goods or services de- the tax year as a result of the contribution,your deduction is $500 or more, combine yourscribed in (b) (other than intangible re- if you contribute less than your entire inter-claimed deductions for all similar items of prop-ligious benefits), and est in the property during the tax year.erty donated to any charitable organization dur-
Your records must include the amount youd. A statement that the only benefit you ing the year.
claimed as a deduction in any earlierreceived was an intangible religious If you received goods or services in return, years for contributions of other interests inbenefit, if that was the case. The ac- as described earlier in Contributions From this property. They must also include theknowledgment does not need to de- Which You Benefit, reduce your contribution by name and address of each organization toscribe or estimate the value of an the value of those goods or services. If you which you contributed the other interests,intangible religious benefit. An intangi-
figure your deduction by reducing the fair market the place where any such tangible prop-ble religious benefit is a benefit that
value of the donated property by its apprecia- erty is located or kept, and the name ofgenerally is not sold in commercial
tion, as described earlier in Giving Property That any person in possession of the property,transactions outside a donative (gift)
Has Increased in Value, your contribution is the other than the organization to which youcontext. An example is admission to a
reduced amount. contributed.religious ceremony.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 161

• The terms of any conditions attached to Out-of-Pocket Expensesthe gift of property.
If you render services to a qualified organization 25.and have unreimbursed out-of-pocket expensesDeductions of At Least $250
related to those services, the following threeBut Not More Than $500 rules apply.
If you claim a deduction of at least $250 but not Nonbusiness1. You must have adequate records to provemore than $500 for a noncash charitable contri- the amount of the expenses.bution, you must get and keep an acknowledg-
Casualty andment of your contribution from the qualified 2. You must get an acknowledgment from the
organization. If you made more than one contri- qualified organization that contains:
bution of $250 or more, you must have either a Theft Lossesa. A description of the services you pro-separate acknowledgment for each or one ac-
vided,knowledgment that shows your total contribu-
tion. b. A statement of whether or not the or-
The acknowledgment must contain the infor- ganization provided you any goods or Introduction
mation in items (1) through (3) listed under De- services to reimburse you for the ex- This chapter explains the tax treatment of per-ductions of Less Than $250, earlier, and your penses you incurred, sonal (not business related) casualty losses,written records must include the information theft losses, and losses on deposits.c. A description and a good faith estimatelisted in that discussion under Additional rec- of the value of any goods or services The chapter also explains the following top-ords.
(other than intangible religious benefits) ics.The acknowledgment must also meet these provided to reimburse you, andtests. • How to figure the amount of your loss.
d. A statement that the only benefit you • How to treat insurance and other reim-1. It must be written. received was an intangible religious bursements you receive.benefit, if that was the case. The ac-2. It must include:
• The deduction limits.knowledgment does not need to de-
a. A description (but not necessarily the scribe or estimate the value of an • When and how to report a casualty orvalue) of any property you contributed, intangible religious benefit (defined ear- theft.lier under Acknowledgment).b. Whether the qualified organization gave
you any goods or services as a result of Forms to file.   When you have a casualty or3. You must get the acknowledgment on oryour contribution (other than certain to- theft, you have to file Form 4684. You will alsobefore the earlier of:ken items and membership benefits), have to file one or both of the following forms.and a. The date you file your return for the • Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deduc-year you make the contribution, orc. A description and good faith estimate of tionsthe value of any goods or services de- b. The due date, including extensions, forscribed in (b). If the only benefit you • Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gainsfiling the return.received was an intangible religious and Losses
benefit (such as admission to a relig-
ious ceremony) that generally is not Condemnations. For information on condem-Car expenses. If you claim expenses directlysold in a commercial transaction nations of property, see Involuntary Conver-related to use of your car in giving services to aoutside the donative context, the ac- sions in chapter 1 of Publication 544.qualified organization, you must keep reliableknowledgment must say so and does written records of your expenses. Whether yournot need to describe or estimate the Workbook for casualties and thefts. Publi-records are considered reliable depends on allvalue of the benefit. cation 584 is available to help you make a list ofthe facts and circumstances. Generally, they
your stolen or damaged personal-use propertymay be considered reliable if you made them3. You must get it on or before the earlier of: and figure your loss. It includes schedules toregularly and at or near the time you had the
help you figure the loss on your home, its con-expenses.a. The date you file your return for the
tents, and your motor vehicles.year you make the contribution, or Your records must show the name of the
organization you were serving and the dateb. The due date, including extensions, for Other sources of information. For informa-each time you used your car for a charitablefiling the return. tion on a casualty or theft loss of business orpurpose. If you use the standard mileage rate of income-producing property, see Publication14 cents a mile, your records must show the 547.miles you drove your car for the charitable pur-
pose. If you deduct your actual expenses, yourDeductions Over $500 Useful Itemsrecords must show the costs of operating the car
You are required to give additional information if that are directly related to a charitable purpose. You may want to see:
you claim a deduction over $500 for noncash See Car expenses under Out-of-Pocket Ex-
charitable contributions. See Records To Keep Publicationpenses in Giving Services, earlier, for the ex-
in Publication 526 for more information. penses you can deduct. ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions
of Assets
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, andQualified Conservation
TheftsContribution How To Report
❏ 584 Casualty, Disaster, and TheftIf the gift was a qualified conservation contribu- Loss Workbook (Personal-UseReport your charitable contributions on Sched-tion, your records must also include the fair Property)ule A (Form 1040).market value of the underlying property before
If your total deduction for all noncash contri-and after the gift and the conservation purpose Form (and Instructions)butions for the year is over $500, you must alsofurthered by the gift. See Qualified conservation
file Form 8283. See How To Report  in Publica-contribution in Publication 526 for more informa- ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
tion 526 for more information.tion. Deductions
Page 162 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains Example. Your antique oriental rug was about stock sales, worthless stock, and capital
and Losses damaged by your new puppy before it was losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 550.
housebroken. Because the damage was not un-❏ 4684 Casualties and Thefts Mislaid or lost property. The simple disap-expected and unusual, the loss is not deductible pearance of money or property is not a theft.as a casualty loss. However, an accidental loss or disappearance
Progressive deterioration. Loss of prop- of property can qualify as a casualty if it results
erty due to progressive deterioration is not de- from an identifiable event that is sudden, unex-
Casualty ductible as a casualty loss. This is because the pected, or unusual. Sudden, unexpected, and
damage results from a steadily operating cause unusual events are defined earlier.
A casualty is the damage, destruction, or loss of or a normal process, rather than from a sudden
property resulting from an identifiable event that event. The following are examples of damage Example. A car door is accidentally
is sudden, unexpected, or unusual. due to progressive deterioration. slammed on your hand, breaking the setting of
your diamond ring. The diamond falls from the• A sudden event is one that is swift, not • The steady weakening of a building due to ring and is never found. The loss of the diamondgradual or progressive. normal wind and weather conditions. is a casualty.
• An unexpected event is one that is ordi- • The deterioration and damage to a water
narily unanticipated and unintended. heater that bursts. However, the rust and
water damage to rugs and drapes caused• An unusual event is one that is not a by the bursting of a water heater does Loss on Depositsday-to-day occurrence and that is not typi- qualify as a casualty.cal of the activity in which you were en-
A loss on deposits can occur when a bank, creditgaged. • Most losses of property caused by
union, or other financial institution becomes in-droughts. To be deductible, a
solvent or bankrupt. If you incurred this type ofdrought-related loss generally must be in-Deductible losses. Deductible casualty loss, you can choose one of the following wayscurred in a trade or business or in a trans-losses can result from a number of different to deduct the loss.action entered into for profit.causes, including the following.
• As a casualty loss.• Termite or moth damage.• Car accidents (but see Nondeductible
• As an ordinary loss.losses, next, for exceptions). • The damage or destruction of trees,
shrubs, or other plants by a fungus, dis- • As a nonbusiness bad debt.• Earthquakes. ease, insects, worms, or similar pests.
However, a sudden destruction due to an• Fires (but see Nondeductible losses, next,
Casualty loss or ordinary loss. You canunexpected or unusual infestation of beet-for exceptions).
choose to deduct a loss on deposits as a casu-les or other insects may result in a casu-• Floods. alty loss or as an ordinary loss for any year inalty loss.
which you can reasonably estimate how much of• Government-ordered demolition or reloca- your deposits you have lost in an insolvent ortion of a home that is unsafe to use be- bankrupt financial institution. The choice is gen-cause of a disaster as discussed under erally made on the return you file for that yearDisaster Area Losses in Publication 547. and applies to all your losses on deposits for theTheft
year in that particular financial institution. If you• Mine cave-ins.
treat the loss as a casualty or ordinary loss, youA theft is the taking and removing of money or• Shipwrecks. cannot treat the same amount of the loss as aproperty with the intent to deprive the owner of it.
nonbusiness bad debt when it actually becomesThe taking of property must be illegal under the• Sonic booms. worthless. However, you can take a nonbusi-laws of the state where it occurred and it must
• Storms, including hurricanes and torna- ness bad debt deduction for any amount of losshave been done with criminal intent.
does. that is more than the estimated amount youTheft includes the taking of money or prop- deducted as a casualty or ordinary loss. Onceerty by the following means.• Terrorist attacks. you make this choice, you cannot change it
• Blackmail. without permission from the Internal Revenue• Vandalism.
Service.• Burglary.• Volcanic eruptions. If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as a
• Embezzlement. miscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule
A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum amountNondeductible losses. A casualty loss is not • Extortion. you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you aredeductible if the damage or destruction is married filing separately) reduced by any ex-• Kidnapping for ransom.caused by the following. pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss is• Larceny.• Accidentally breaking articles such as subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
glassware or china under normal condi- limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinary• Robbery.
tions. loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.
The taking of money or property through fraud• A family pet (explained below). Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not chooseor misrepresentation is theft if it is illegal under to deduct the loss as a casualty loss or as an• A fire if you willfully set it or pay someone state or local law. ordinary loss, you must wait until the year theelse to set it. actual loss is determined and deduct the loss asDecline in market value of stock. You can-• A car accident if your willful negligence or a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.not deduct as a theft loss the decline in marketwillful act caused it. The same is true if the value of stock acquired on the open market for How to report. The kind of deduction youwillful act or willful negligence of someone investment if the decline is caused by disclosure choose for your loss on deposits determinesacting for you caused the accident. of accounting fraud or other illegal misconduct how you report your loss. If you choose:
by the officers or directors of the corporation that• Progressive deterioration (explained later). • Casualty loss Ð report it on Form 4684issued the stock. However, you can deduct as a first and then on Schedule A (Form 1040).Family pet. Loss of property due to damage capital loss the loss you sustain when you sell or
by a family pet is not deductible as a casualty exchange the stock or the stock becomes com- • Ordinary loss Ð report it on Schedule A
loss unless the requirements discussed earlier pletely worthless. You report a capital loss on (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized
under Casualty are met. Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information deduction.
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 163

• Nonbusiness bad debt Ð report it on deduction limits, discussed later, to determine • The appraiser's familiarity with your prop-
Schedule D (Form 1040). the amount of your deductible loss. erty before and after the casualty or theft.
• The appraiser's knowledge of sales ofLeased property. If you are liable for casualty comparable property in the area.More information. For more information, see damage to property you lease, your loss is the
Special Treatment for Losses on Deposits in amount you must pay to repair the property • The appraiser's knowledge of conditions inInsolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institutions in minus any insurance or other reimbursement the area of the casualty.the Instructions for Form 4684 or Deposit in you receive or expect to receive. • The appraiser's method of appraisal.Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institution in
Publication 550.
Decrease in Cost of cleaning up or making repairs. The
Fair Market Value cost of repairing damaged property is not part of
a casualty loss. Neither is the cost of cleaning up
Fair market value (FMV) is the price for which after a casualty. But you can use the cost ofProof of Loss you could sell your property to a willing buyer cleaning up or making repairs after a casualty as
when neither of you has to sell or buy and both of a measure of the decrease in FMV if you meetTo deduct a casualty or theft loss, you must be you know all the relevant facts. all the following conditions.able to prove that you had a casualty or theft.
The decrease in FMV used to figure theYou must be able to support the amount you • The repairs are actually made.amount of a casualty or theft loss is the differ-claim for the loss as discussed next.
ence between the property's fair market value • The repairs are necessary to bring the
immediately before and immediately after the property back to its condition before theCasualty loss proof. For a casualty loss, your
casualty or theft. casualty.records should show all the following.
• The amount spent for repairs is not exces-• The type of casualty (car accident, fire, FMV of stolen property. The FMV of property sive.storm, etc.) and when it occurred. immediately after a theft is considered to be
zero, since you no longer have the property. • The repairs take care of the damage only.• That the loss was a direct result of the
casualty. • The value of the property after the repairsExample. Several years ago, you pur- is not, due to the repairs, more than the• That you were the owner of the property chased silver dollars at face value for $150. This value of the property before the casualty.or, if you leased the property from some- is your adjusted basis in the property. Your silver
one else, that you were contractually liable dollars were stolen this year. The FMV of the Landscaping. The cost of restoring land-to the owner for the damage. coins was $1,000 just before they were stolen, scaping to its original condition after a casualtyand insurance did not cover them. Your theft• Whether a claim for reimbursement exists may indicate the decrease in FMV. You may beloss is $150.for which there is a reasonable expecta- able to measure your loss by what you spend ontion of recovery. the following.Recovered stolen property. Recovered sto-
len property is your property that was stolen and • Removing destroyed or damaged treesTheft loss proof. For a theft loss, your rec- later returned to you. If you recovered property and shrubs minus any salvage you re-ords should show all the following. after you had already taken a theft loss deduc- ceive.
tion, you must refigure your loss using the• When you discovered that your property • Pruning and other measures taken to pre-smaller of the property's adjusted basis (ex-was missing. serve damaged trees and shrubs.plained later) or the decrease in FMV from the
• That your property was stolen. time just before it was stolen until the time it was • Replanting necessary to restore the prop-
recovered. Use this amount to refigure your total erty to its approximate value before the• That you were the owner of the property. loss for the year in which the loss was deducted. casualty.• Whether a claim for reimbursement exists If your refigured loss is less than the loss youfor which there is a reasonable expecta- deducted, you generally have to report the dif- Car value.  Books issued by various automo-tion of recovery. ference as income in the recovery year. But bile organizations that list your car may be usefulreport the difference only up to the amount of the in figuring the value of your car. You can use theloss that reduced your tax. For more information It is important that you have records book's retail values and modify them by suchon the amount to report, see Recoveries inthat will prove your deduction. If you do factors as mileage and the condition of your carchapter 12.not have the actual records to support
RECORDS to figure its value. The prices are not official, butyour deduction, you can use other satisfactory they may be useful in determining value andevidence to support it. suggesting relative prices for comparison withFiguring Decrease in FMVÐ current sales and offerings in your area. If your
Items To Consider car is not listed in the books, determine its value
from other sources. A dealer's offer for your carTo figure the decrease in FMV because of a as a trade-in on a new car is not usually aFiguring a Loss casualty or theft, you generally need a compe- measure of its true value.tent appraisal. But other measures can also be
Figure the amount of your loss using the follow- used to establish certain decreases.
ing steps. Figuring Decrease in FMVÐAppraisal. An appraisal to determine the dif-
1. Determine your adjusted basis in the prop- Items Not To Considerference between the FMV of the property imme-
erty before the casualty or theft. diately before a casualty or theft and You generally should not consider the followingimmediately afterward should be made by a2. Determine the decrease in fair market items when attempting to establish the decreasecompetent appraiser. The appraiser must rec-value of the property as a result of the in FMV of your property.ognize the effects of any general market declinecasualty or theft.
that may occur along with the casualty. This Cost of protection. The cost of protecting3. From the smaller of the amounts you de- information is needed to limit any deduction to your property against a casualty or theft is nottermined in (1) and (2), subtract any insur- the actual loss resulting from damage to the part of a casualty or theft loss. The amount youance or other reimbursement you received property. spend on insurance or to board up your houseor expect to receive. Several factors are important in evaluating against a storm is not part of your loss.
For personal-use property and property used in the accuracy of an appraisal, including the fol- If you make permanent improvements to
performing services as an employee, apply the lowing. your property to protect it against a casualty or
Page 164 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

theft, add the cost of these improvements to payment until a later tax year. See Reimburse- gifts to you that were excludable from your in-
your basis in the property. An example would be ment Received After Deducting Loss, later. come. You used part of the cash gifts to pay for
the cost of a dike to prevent flooding. repairs to your home. There were no limits or
Failure to file a claim for reimbursement. If restrictions on how you could use the cash gifts.Exception. You cannot increase your basis your property is covered by insurance, you must Because it was an excludable gift, the moneyin the property by, or deduct as a business file a timely insurance claim for reimbursement you received and used to pay for repairs to yourexpense, any expenditures you made with re- of your loss. Otherwise, you cannot deduct this home does not reduce your casualty loss on thespect to qualified disaster mitigation payments. loss as a casualty or theft loss. However, this damaged home.See Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547. rule does not apply to the portion of the loss not
covered by insurance (for example, a deducti-Related expenses. Any incidental expenses Insurance payments for living expenses.ble).you have due to a casualty or theft, such as You do not reduce your casualty loss by insur-
expenses for the treatment of personal injuries, ance payments you receive to cover living ex-Example. You have a car insurance policyfor temporary housing, or for a rental car, are not penses in either of the following situations.with a $500 deductible. Because your insurancepart of your casualty or theft loss. did not cover the first $500 of an auto collision, • You lose the use of your main home be-
the $500 would be deductible (subject to theReplacement cost. The cost of replacing sto- cause of a casualty.
deduction limits discussed later). This is truelen or destroyed property is not part of a casualty
• Government authorities do not allow youeven if you do not file an insurance claim, be-or theft loss.
access to your main home because of acause your insurance policy would never have
Sentimental value. Do not consider senti- casualty or threat of one.reimbursed you for the deductible.
mental value when determining your loss. If a
family portrait, heirloom, or keepsake is dam- Gain from reimbursement. If your reim- Inclusion in income. If these insurance
aged, destroyed, or stolen, you must base your bursement is more than your adjusted basis in payments are more than the temporary increase
loss on its FMV. the property, you have a gain. This is true even if in your living expenses, you must include the
the decrease in the FMV of the property is excess in your income. Report this amount onDecline in market value of property in or near smaller than your adjusted basis. If you have a Form 1040, line 21. However, if the casualtycasualty area. A decrease in the value of your gain, you may have to pay tax on it, or you may occurs in a Presidentially declared disasterproperty because it is in or near an area that be able to postpone reporting the gain. See area, none of the insurance payments are tax-suffered a casualty, or that might again suffer a Publication 547 for more information on how to able. See Qualified disaster relief payments,casualty, is not to be taken into consideration. treat a gain from a reimbursement for a casualty under Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.You have a loss only for actual casualty damage or theft. A temporary increase in your living expensesto your property. However, if your home is in a
is the difference between the actual living ex-federally declared disaster area, see Disaster
penses you and your family incurred during theArea Losses in Publication 547. Types of Reimbursements period you could not use your home and your
Costs of photographs and appraisals. Pho- normal living expenses for that period. ActualThe most common type of reimbursement is antographs taken after a casualty will be helpful in living expenses are the reasonable and neces-insurance payment for your stolen or damagedestablishing the condition and value of the prop- sary expenses incurred because of the loss ofproperty. Other types of reimbursements areerty after it was damaged. Photographs showing your main home. Generally, these expenses in-discussed next. Also see the Instructions forthe condition of the property after it was re- clude the amounts you pay for the following.Form 4684.paired, restored, or replaced may also be help-
• Rent for suitable housing.ful. Employer's emergency disaster fund. If you   Appraisals are used to figure the decrease receive money from your employer's emergency • Transportation.in FMV because of a casualty or theft. See disaster fund and you must use that money to • Food.Appraisal, earlier, under Figuring Decrease in rehabilitate or replace property on which you areFMV Ð Items To Consider, for information claiming a casualty loss deduction, you must • Utilities.about appraisals. take that money into consideration in computing • Miscellaneous services.The costs of photographs and appraisals the casualty loss deduction. Take into consider-used as evidence of the value and condition of ation only the amount you used to replace your Normal living expenses consist of these sameproperty damaged as a result of a casualty are destroyed or damaged property. expenses that you would have incurred but didnot a part of the loss. You can claim these costs not because of the casualty or the threat of one.as a miscellaneous itemized deduction subject Example. Your home was extensively dam-to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit on aged by a tornado. Your loss after reimburse- Example. As a result of a fire, you vacatedSchedule A (Form 1040). For information about ment from your insurance company was your apartment for a month and moved to amiscellaneous deductions, see chapter 28. $10,000. Your employer set up a disaster relief motel. You normally pay $525 a month for rent.
fund for its employees. Employees receiving None was charged for the month the apartment
money from the fund had to use it to rehabilitateAdjusted Basis was vacated. Your motel rent for this month was
or replace their damaged or destroyed property. $1,200. You normally pay $200 a month for
Adjusted basis is your basis in the property (usu- You received $4,000 from the fund and spent food. Your food expenses for the month you
ally cost) increased or decreased by various the entire amount on repairs to your home. In lived in the motel were $400. You receivedevents, such as improvements and casualty figuring your casualty loss, you must reduce $1,100 from your insurance company to coverlosses. For more information, see chapter 13. your unreimbursed loss ($10,000) by the $4,000 your living expenses. You determine the pay-you received from your employer's fund. Your ment you must include in income as follows.casualty loss before applying the deduction lim-Insurance and Other its discussed later is $6,000. 1) Insurance payment for livingReimbursements expenses .................. $1,100Cash gifts. If you receive excludable cash 2) Actual expenses during theIf you receive an insurance payment or other gifts as a disaster victim and there are no limits month you are unable to usetype of reimbursement, you must subtract the on how you can use the money, you do not your home because of fire ... 1,600
reimbursement when you figure your loss. You reduce your casualty loss by these excludable 3) Normal living expenses ..... 725
do not have a casualty or theft loss to the extent cash gifts. This applies even if you use the 4) Temporary increase in living
you are reimbursed. money to pay for repairs to property damaged in expenses: Subtract line 3
If you expect to be reimbursed for part or all the disaster. from line 2 .................. 875
of your loss, you must subtract the expected 5) Amount of payment includible
reimbursement when you figure your loss. You Example. Your home was damaged by a in income: Subtract line 4
from line 1 .................. $ 225must reduce your loss even if you do not receive hurricane. Relatives and neighbors made cash
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 165

Table 25-1. How To Apply the Deduction Limits for Personal-Use Property
$100 Rule 10% Rule
General Application You must reduce each casualty or theft loss by You must reduce your total casualty or theft
$100 when figuring your deduction. Apply this loss by 10% of your adjusted gross income.
rule after you have figured the amount of your Apply this rule after you reduce each loss by
loss. $100 (the $100 rule).
Single Event Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces Apply this rule only once, even if many
of property are affected. pieces of property are affected.
More Than One Event Apply to the loss from each event. Apply to the total of all your losses from all
events.
More Than One PersonÐ Apply separately to each person. Apply separately to each person.
With Loss From the
Same Event
(other than a married couple filing jointly)
Filing Jointly Apply as if you were one person. Apply as if you were one person.Married CoupleÐ
With Loss From the Filing Separately Apply separately to each spouse. Apply separately to each spouse.Same Event
More Than One Owner Apply separately to each owner of jointly Apply separately to each owner of jointly
(other than a married owned property. owned property.
couple filing jointly)
Tax year of inclusion. You include the tax- section explains the adjustment you may have Actual reimbursement same as expected. If
to make.able part of the insurance payment in income for you receive exactly the reimbursement you ex-
the year you regain the use of your main home pected to receive, you do not have to includeActual reimbursement less than expected.or, if later, for the year you receive the taxable any of the reimbursement in your income andIf you later receive less reimbursement than youpart of the insurance payment. you cannot deduct any additional loss.expected, include that difference as a loss with
your other losses (if any) on your return for theExample. Your main home was destroyed Example. In December 2007, you had a col-year in which you can reasonably expect noby a tornado in August 2005. You regained use lision while driving your personal car. Repairs tomore reimbursement.of your home in November 2006. The insurance the car cost $950. You had $100 deductiblepayments you received in 2005 and 2006 were collision insurance. Your insurance companyExample. Your personal car had an FMV of$1,500 more than the temporary increase in $2,000 when it was destroyed in a collision with agreed to reimburse you for the rest of the dam-your living expenses during those years. You another car in 2006. The accident was due to the age. Because you expected a reimbursementinclude this amount in income on your 2006 negligence of the other driver. At the end of from the insurance company, you did not have aForm 1040. If, in 2007, you receive further pay- 2006, there was a reasonable prospect that the casualty loss deduction in 2007.ments to cover the living expenses you had in owner of the other car would reimburse you in2005 and 2006, you must include those pay- Due to the $100 rule (discussed later underfull. You did not have a deductible loss in 2006.ments in income on your 2007 Form 1040. Deduction Limits), you cannot deduct the $100In January 2007, the court awarded you a
you paid as the deductible. When you receivejudgment of $2,000. However, in July it becameDisaster relief. Food, medical supplies, and the $850 from the insurance company in 2008,apparent that you will be unable to collect anyother forms of assistance you receive do not do not report it as income.amount from the other driver. You can deductreduce your casualty loss unless they are the loss in 2007 subject to the limits discussedreplacements for lost or destroyed property. later.
Single Casualty onQualified disaster relief payments you
Actual reimbursement more than expected.receive for expenses you incurred as a Multiple PropertiesIf you later receive more reimbursement thanresult of a Presidentially declared dis-
TIP
you expected after you claimed a deduction foraster are not taxable income to you. For more
Personal property. Personal property is anythe loss, you may have to include the extrainformation, see Disaster Area Losses in Publi-
reimbursement in your income for the year you property that is not real property. If your personalcation 547.
receive it. However, if any part of the original property is stolen or is damaged or destroyed byDisaster unemployment assistance pay- deduction did not reduce your tax for the earlier a casualty, you must figure your loss separatelyments are unemployment benefits that are tax- year, do not include that part of the reimburse- for each item of property. Then combine theseable. ment in your income. You do not refigure your separate losses to determine your total lossGenerally, disaster relief grants and qualified tax for the year you claimed the deduction. Fordisaster mitigation payments made under the from that casualty or theft.more information, see Recoveries in chapter 12.Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer-
gency Assistance Act or the National Flood In- If the total of all the reimbursements Example. A fire in your home destroyed an
surance Act (as in effect on April 15, 2005) are you receive is more than your adjusted upholstered chair, an oriental rug, and an an-
not includible in your income. See Disaster Area basis in the destroyed or stolen prop- tique table. You did not have fire insurance to
CAUTION
!
Losses in Publication 547. erty, you will have a gain on the casualty or theft. cover your loss. (This was the only casualty or
If you have already taken a deduction for a loss theft you had during the year.) You paid $750 forand you receive the reimbursement in a later the chair and you established that it had an FMVyear, you may have to include the gain in yourReimbursement Received After of $500 just before the fire. The rug cost $3,000income for the later year. Include the gain asDeducting Loss and had an FMV of $2,500 just before the fire.ordinary income up to the amount of your deduc-
You bought the table at an auction for $100If you figured your casualty or theft loss using tion that reduced your tax for the earlier year.
before discovering it was an antique. It had beenyour expected reimbursement, you may have to See Publication 547 for more information on
appraised at $900 before the fire. You figureadjust your tax return for the tax year in which how to treat a gain from the reimbursement of a
your loss on each of these items as follows:you receive your actual reimbursement. This casualty or theft.
Page 166 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Chair Rug Table business or income-producing purposes, the Example 2. In March, you had a car acci-
dent that totally destroyed your car. You did notcasualty or theft loss deduction must be figured1) Basis (cost) ...... $750 $3,000 $100 have collision insurance on your car, so you didseparately for the personal-use part and for the
2) FMV before fire ... $500 $2,500 $900 not receive any insurance reimbursement. Yourbusiness or income-producing part. You must3) FMV after fire ..... ±0± ±0± ±0± loss on the car was $1,200. In November, a firefigure each loss separately because the $1004) Decrease in FMV .. $500 $2,500 $900 damaged your basement and totally destroyedrule and the 10% rule apply only to the loss on5) Loss (smaller of (1) or the furniture, washer, dryer, and other itemsthe personal-use part of the property.(4)) ............ $500 $2,500 $100 stored there. Your loss on the basement items
after reimbursement was $1,700. Your adjusted6) Total loss ....... $3,100 $100 Rule gross income for the year that the accident and
fire occurred is $25,000. You figure your casu-Real property. In figuring a casualty loss on After you have figured your casualty or theft loss alty loss deduction as follows.personal-use real property, treat the entire prop- on personal-use property, you must reduce that
erty (including any improvements, such as build- loss by $100. This reduction applies to each total Base-
ings, trees, and shrubs) as one item. Figure the casualty or theft loss. It does not matter how Car ment 
loss using the smaller of the adjusted basis or many pieces of property are involved in an 1) Loss .............. $1,200 $1,700the decrease in FMV of the entire property. event. Only a single $100 reduction applies. 2) Subtract $100 per incident 100 100
3) Loss after $100 rule .... $1,100 $1,600Example. You bought your home a few Example. A hailstorm damages your home
years ago. You paid $160,000 ($20,000 for the 4) Total loss ................ $2,700and your car. Determine the amount of loss, as
land and $140,000 for the house). You also 5) Subtract 10% × $25,000 AGI ... 2,500discussed earlier, for each of these items. Since 6) Casualty loss deduction ..... $200spent $2,000 for landscaping. This year a fire the losses are due to a single event, you com-destroyed your home. The fire also damaged bine the losses and reduce the combinedthe shrubbery and trees in your yard. The fire Gains and losses. If you had both gains andamount by $100.was your only casualty or theft loss this year. losses from casualties or thefts to personal-useCompetent appraisers valued the property as a property, you must compare your total gains toSingle event. Generally, events closely re-whole at $200,000 before the fire, but only your total losses. Do this after you have reducedlated in origin cause a single casualty. It is a$30,000 after the fire. (The loss to your house- each loss by any reimbursements and by $100,single casualty when the damage is from two orhold furnishings is not shown in this example. It but before you have reduced the losses by 10%more closely related causes, such as wind andwould be figured separately on each item, as of your adjusted gross income.flood damage caused by the same storm.explained earlier under Personal property.)
Casualty or theft gains do not includeShortly after the fire, the insurance company
gains you choose to postpone. Seepaid you $155,000 for the loss. You figure your 10% Rule Publication 547 for information on thecasualty loss as follows:
CAUTION
!
postponement of gain.You must reduce the total of all your casualty or
1) Adjusted basis of the entire theft losses on personal-use property by 10% of Losses more than gains. If your losses areproperty (land, building, and your adjusted gross income. Apply this rule after more than your recognized gains, subtract yourlandscaping) ............ $162,000 you reduce each loss by $100. If you have both gains from your losses and reduce the result by2) FMV of entire property before gains and losses from casualties or thefts, see 10% of your adjusted gross income. The rest, iffire ................... $200,000 Gains and losses, later in this discussion. any, is your deductible loss.3) FMV of entire property after fire 30,000
4) Decrease in FMV of entire Gains more than losses. If your recog-Example 1. In June, you discovered that
property ............... $170,000 nized gains are more than your losses, subtractyour house had been burglarized. Your loss
your losses from your gains. The difference isafter insurance reimbursement was $2,000.5) Loss (smaller of (1) or (4)) ... $162,000 treated as capital gain and must be reported onYour adjusted gross income for the year you6) Subtract insurance ........ 155,000 Schedule D (Form 1040). The 10% rule does not7) Amount of loss after discovered the theft is $29,500. You first apply apply to your gains.reimbursement .......... $7,000 the $100 rule and then the 10% rule. Figure your
theft loss deduction as follows.
1) Loss after insurance ........... $2,000
2) Subtract $100 ............... 100 When To ReportDeduction Limits 3) Loss after $100 rule ........... $1,900
4) Subtract 10% × $29,500 AGI ..... 2,950 Gains and LossesAfter you have figured your casualty or theft 5) Theft loss deduction ......... ±0±
loss, you must figure how much of the loss you You do not have a theft loss deduction be-
can deduct. If the loss was to property for your cause your loss after you apply the $100 rule Gains. If you receive an insurance or other
personal use or your family's use, there are two ($1,900) is less than 10% of your adjusted gross reimbursement that is more than your adjusted
limits on the amount you can deduct for your income ($2,950). basis in the destroyed or stolen property, you
casualty or theft loss. 
Table 25-2.  When To Deduct a Loss1. You must reduce each casualty or theft
loss by $100 ($100 rule). IF you have a loss...  THEN deduct it in the year...
2. You must further reduce the total of all from a casualty, the loss occurred.your casualty or theft losses by 10% of
your adjusted gross income (10% rule). in a Presidentially declared disaster the disaster occurred or the year immediately before the
area, disaster.You make these reductions on Form 4684.
These rules are explained next and Table from a theft,  the theft was discovered.
25-1 summarizes how to apply the $100 rule and
on a deposit treated as a:the 10% rule in various situations. For more
detailed explanations and examples, see Publi-  • casualty,  • a reasonable estimate can be made.
cation 547.
 • bad debt,  • deposits are totally worthless.
Property used partly for business and partly
 • ordinary loss,  • a reasonable estimate can be made.for personal purposes. When property is
used partly for personal purposes and partly for
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 167

have a gain from the casualty or theft. You must meet a postponed deadline, provided
include this gain in your income in the year you those records are maintained in a covered
receive the reimbursement, unless you choose disaster area. The main home or principal 26.to postpone reporting the gain as explained in place of business does not have to be
Publication 547. located in the covered disaster area.
If you have a loss, see Table 25-2. • Any estate or trust that has tax records
Car ExpensesLosses. Generally, you can deduct a casualty necessary to meet a postponed tax dead-
loss that is not reimbursable only in the tax year line, provided those records are main-
in which the casualty occurred. This is true even tained in a covered disaster area. and Otherif you do not repair or replace the damaged • The spouse on a joint return with a tax-property until a later year. payer who is eligible for postponements.You can deduct theft losses that are not Employee
reimbursable only in the year you discover your • Any other person determined by the IRS
property was stolen. to be affected by a Presidentially declared BusinessIf you are not sure whether part of your casu- disaster.
alty or theft loss will be reimbursed, do not de-
duct that part until the tax year when you Covered disaster area. This is an area of a Expenses
become reasonably certain that it will not be Presidentially declared disaster in which the IRS
reimbursed. has decided to postpone tax deadlines for up to
1 year.Loss on deposits. If your loss is a loss on What's Newdeposits in an insolvent or bankrupt financial
Abatement of interest and penalties. Theinstitution, see Loss on Deposits, earlier. Standard mileage rate. For 2007, the stan-IRS may abate the interest and penalties on
dard mileage rate for the cost of operating yourunderpaid income tax for the length of any post-
Disaster Area Loss car for business use is 481/2 cents per mile.ponement of tax deadlines.
Car expenses and use of the standard mile-
You generally must deduct a casualty loss in the age rate are explained under Transportation Ex-More information. For more information, seeyear it occurred. However, if you have a casualty penses, later.Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.loss from a disaster that occurred in an area
warranting public or individual assistance (or
both), you can choose to deduct the loss on your
tax return or amended return for either of the Introductionfollowing years. How To Report
You may be able to deduct the ordinary and• The year the disaster occurred. Gains and Losses necessary business-related expenses you have
• The year immediately preceding the year for:
the disaster occurred. Use Form 4684 to report a gain or a deductible • Travel,loss from a casualty or theft. If you have more
• Entertainment,than one casualty or theft, use a separate FormGains.  Special rules apply if you choose to
4684 to determine your gain or loss for eachpostpone reporting gain on property damaged or • Gifts, orevent. Combine the gains and losses on onedestroyed in a Presidentially declared disaster • Transportation.Form 4684. Follow the form instructions as toarea. For those special rules, see Publication
which lines to fill out. In addition, you must use547. An ordinary expense is one that is common andthe appropriate schedule to report a gain or loss. accepted in your field of trade, business, orPostponed tax deadlines. The IRS may The schedule you use depends on whether you profession. A necessary expense is one that ispostpone for up to 1 year certain tax deadlines of have a gain or loss. helpful and appropriate for your business. Antaxpayers who are affected by a Presidentially expense does not have to be required to bedeclared disaster. The tax deadlines the IRS If you have a: Report it on: considered necessary.may postpone include those for filing income Gain .......... Schedule D (Formand employment tax returns, paying income and This chapter explains the following.1040)employment taxes, and making contributions to Loss .......... Schedule A (Form • What expenses are deductible.a traditional IRA or Roth IRA. 1040)If any tax deadline is postponed, the IRS will • How to report your expenses on your re-
publicize the postponement in your area by pub- turn.
lishing a news release, revenue ruling, revenue Adjustments to basis. If you have a casualty • What records you need to prove your ex-procedure, notice, announcement, or other gui- or theft loss, you must decrease your basis in penses.dance in the Internal Revenue Bulletin (IRB). the property by any insurance or other reim-
• How to treat any expense reimbursementsbursement you receive, and by any deductibleWho is eligible. If the IRS postpones a tax you may receive.loss. Amounts you spend to restore your prop-deadline, the following taxpayers are eligible for erty after a casualty increase your adjusted ba-the postponement. sis. See Adjusted Basis in chapter 13 for more Who does not need to use this chapter. If• Any individual whose main home is lo- information. you are an employee, you will not need to readcated in a covered disaster area (defined this chapter if all of the following are true.next). Net operating loss (NOL). If your casualty or
• You fully accounted to your employer fortheft loss deduction is more than your income,• Any business entity or sole proprietor your work-related expenses.you may have an NOL. You can use an NOL towhose principal place of business is lo-
lower your tax in an earlier year, allowing you tocated in a covered disaster area. • You received full reimbursement for your
get a refund for tax you have already paid. Or, expenses.• Any individual who is a relief worker affili- you can use it to lower your tax in a later year.ated with a recognized government or phil- • Your employer required you to return anyYou do not have to be in business to have ananthropic organization who is assisting in excess reimbursement and you did so.NOL from a casualty or theft loss. For morea covered disaster area. information, see Publication 536, Net Operating • There is no amount shown with a code ªLº
Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and• Any individual, business entity, or sole in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and
Trusts.proprietor whose records are needed to Tax Statement.
Page 168 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

If you meet all of these conditions, there is no • You need to sleep or rest to meet the • The total time you ordinarily spend in each
need to show the expenses or the reimburse- demands of your work while away from place.
ments on your return. See Reimbursements, home. • The level of your business activity in eachlater, if you would like more information on reim- This rest requirement is not satisfied by merely place.bursements and accounting to your employer. napping in your car. You do not have to be away • Whether your income from each place isfrom your tax home for a whole day or from duskIf you meet these conditions and your significant or insignificant.to dawn as long as your relief from duty is longemployer included reimbursements on enough to get necessary sleep or rest.your Form W-2 in error, ask your em-
TIP Example. You live in Cincinnati where youployer for a corrected Form W-2. Example 1. You are a railroad conductor. have a seasonal job for 8 months each year and
You leave your home terminal on a regularly earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in
scheduled round-trip run between two cities and Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000.Useful Items
return home 16 hours later. During the run, you Cincinnati is your main place of work becauseYou may want to see:
have 6 hours off at your turnaround point where you spend most of your time there and earn
you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get most of your income there.Publication
necessary sleep before starting the return trip.
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car You are considered to be away from home. No main place of business or work. YouExpenses may have a tax home even if you do not have a
Example 2. You are a truck driver. You❏ 535 Business Expenses regular or main place of business or work. Your
leave your terminal and return to it later the tax home may be the home where you regularly❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates same day. You get an hour off at your turn- live.
around point to eat. Because you are not off to
Form (and Instructions) Factors used to determine tax home. Ifget necessary sleep and the brief time off is not
you do not have a regular or main place ofan adequate rest period, you are not traveling❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized business or work, use the following three factorsaway from home.Deductions to determine where your tax home is. 
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss
1. You perform part of your business in themember of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-From Business
area of your main home and use thatnent duty assignment overseas, you are not❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit home for lodging while doing business intraveling away from home. You cannot deductFrom Business the area.your expenses for meals and lodging. You can-
not deduct these expenses even if you have to❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss 2. You have living expenses at your mainmaintain a home in the United States for yourFrom Farming home that you duplicate because yourfamily members who are not allowed to accom- business requires you to be away from that❏ Form 2106 Employee Business pany you overseas. If you are transferred from home.Expenses one permanent duty station to another, you may
3. You have not abandoned the area in whichhave deductible moving expenses, which are❏ Form 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee
both your historical place of lodging andexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses.Business Expenses
your claimed main home are located; youA naval officer assigned to permanent duty
have a member or members of your familyaboard a ship that has regular eating and living
facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel living at your main home; or you often use
expense purposes. that home for lodging.
Travel Expenses If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home
Tax Home is the home where you regularly live. If youIf you temporarily travel away from your tax satisfy only two factors, you may have a taxhome, you can use this section to determine if To determine whether you are traveling away home depending on all the facts and circum-you have deductible travel expenses. This sec- from home, you must first determine the location stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are antion discusses: of your tax home. itinerant; your tax home is wherever you work
Generally, your tax home is your regular• Traveling away from home, and you cannot deduct travel expenses.
place of business or post of duty, regardless of
• Tax home, where you maintain your family home. It in- Example. You are single and live in Boston
cludes the entire city or general area in which• Temporary assignment or job, and in an apartment you rent. You have worked for
your business or work is located. your employer in Boston for a number of years.• What travel expenses are deductible. If you have more than one regular place of Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month execu-
business, your tax home is your main place ofIt also discusses the standard meal allowance, tive training program. You do not expect to re-
business. See Main place of business or work,rules for travel inside and outside the United turn to work in Boston after you complete your
later.States, and deductible convention expenses. training.
If you do not have a regular or a main place During your training, you do not do any workof business because of the nature of your work,Travel expenses defined. For tax purposes, in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom andthen your tax home may be the place where youtravel expenses are the ordinary and necessary on-the-job training throughout the United States.regularly live. See No main place of business orexpenses (defined earlier) of traveling away You keep your apartment in Boston and return towork, later.from home for your business, profession, or job. it frequently. You use your apartment to conduct If you do not have a regular place of busi-You will find examples of deductible travel your personal business. You also keep up yourness or post of duty and there is no place whereexpenses in Table 26-1. community contacts in Boston. When you com-you regularly live, you are considered an itiner- plete your training, you are transferred to Losant (a transient) and your tax home is wherever Angeles.Traveling Away From you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claim a You do not satisfy factor (1) because you didtravel expense deduction because you areHome not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-never considered to be traveling away from cause you had duplicate living expenses. Youhome.You are traveling away from home if: also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-
don your apartment in Boston as your main• Your duties require you to be away from Main place of business or work. If you have
home, you kept your community contacts, andthe general area of your tax home (defined more than one place of business or work, con-
you frequently returned to live in your apartment.later) substantially longer than an ordinary sider the following when determining which one
You have a tax home in Boston.day's work, and is your main place of business or work.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 169

Table 26-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
 This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you Temporary Assignment
travel away from home for business purposes. or Job
You may regularly work at your tax home andIF you have also work at another location. It may not beexpenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of... practical to return to your tax home from this
other location at the end of each work day.transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and
your business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign-you are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar ment. If your assignment or job away fromprogram, your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury your main place of work is temporary, your taxWater Travel and Cruise ships (under Conventions) in home does not change. You are considered toPublication 463 for additional rules and limits. be away from home for the whole period you are
away from your main place of work. You cantaxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you deduct your travel expenses if they otherwisebus, and airport between: qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporarylimousine • The airport or station and your hotel, and assignment in a single location is one that is
• The hotel and the work location of your customers or realistically expected to last (and does in fact
clients, your business meeting place, or your temporary last) for 1 year or less.
work location. However, if your assignment or job is indefi-
nite, the location of the assignment or job be-
baggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your comes your new tax home and you cannot
shipping regular and temporary work locations. deduct your travel expenses while there. An
assignment or job in a single location is consid-car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to lasthome on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the for more than 1 year, whether or not it actuallystandard mileage rate as well as business-related tolls and lasts for more than 1 year.parking. If you rent a car while away from home on business, If your assignment is indefinite, you mustyou can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses. include in your income any amounts you receive
from your employer for living expenses, even iflodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long
they are called travel allowances and you ac-enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly count to your employer for them. You may beperform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, able to deduct the cost of relocating to your newbeverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals and Incidental tax home as a moving expense. See PublicationExpenses for additional rules and limits. 521 for more information.
cleaning dry cleaning and laundry. Exception for federal crime investigations or
prosecutions. If you are a federal employeetelephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes
participating in a federal crime investigation orbusiness communication by fax machine or other
prosecution, you are not subject to the 1-yearcommunication devices.
rule. This means you may be able to deduct
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. travel expenses even if you are away from your
tax home for more than 1 year, provided youother other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your meet the other requirements for deductibility.business travel. These expenses might include transportation For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or
to or from a business meal, public stenographer's fees, his or her designee) must certify that you are
computer rental fees, and operating and maintaining a house traveling:
trailer. • For the federal government,
• In a temporary duty status, and
Tax home different from family home. If you Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts- • To investigate or prosecute, or provideburgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The(and your family) do not live at your tax home support services for the investigation orrest of the year you work for the same employer(defined earlier), you cannot deduct the cost of prosecution of a federal crime.in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurantstraveling between your tax home and your family
and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is thehome. You also cannot deduct the cost of meals same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti- Determining temporary or indefinite. Youand lodging while at your tax home. See Exam- more. must determine whether your assignment isple 1 that follows. Because you spend most of your working temporary or indefinite when you start work. If
If you are working temporarily in the same time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore, you expect an assignment or job to last for 1
city where you and your family live, you may be that city is your tax home. You cannot deduct year or less, it is temporary unless there are
considered as traveling away from home. See any expenses you have for meals and lodging facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.
there. However, when you return to work in An assignment or job that is initially temporaryExample 2, below.
Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax home may become indefinite due to changed circum-
even though you stay at your family home. You stances. A series of assignments to the sameExample 1. You are a truck driver and you
can deduct the cost of your round trip between location, all for short periods but that togetherand your family live in Tucson. You are em-
Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct cover a long period, may be considered an in-ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in
your part of your family's living expenses for definite assignment.Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you return
meals and lodging while you are living and work-to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend one Going home on days off. If you go back toing in Pittsburgh.night there before returning home. You cannot your tax home from a temporary assignment on
deduct any expenses you have for meals and your days off, you are not considered away from
lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from home while you are in your hometown. You
Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-
your tax home. ing there. However, you can deduct your travel
Page 170 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

expenses, including meals and lodging, while (2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel travel or business entertainment. The 50% limit
traveling between your temporary place of work expenses you have for that person. A business is explained later under Entertainment Ex-
and your tax home. You can claim these ex- associate is someone with whom you could rea- penses. Accountable and nonaccountable plans
penses up to the amount it would have cost you sonably expect to actively conduct business. A are discussed later under Reimbursements.
to stay at your temporary place of work. business associate can be a current or prospec-
If you keep your hotel room during your visit tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier, Actual cost. You can use the actual cost of
home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel employee, agent, partner, or professional advi- your meals to figure the amount of your expense
room. In addition, you can deduct your ex- sor. before reimbursement and application of the
penses of returning home up to the amount you 50% deduction limit. If you use this method, youBona fide business purpose. A bona fidewould have spent for meals had you stayed at must keep records of your actual cost.business purpose exists if you can prove a realyour temporary place of work. business purpose for the individual's presence.
Standard meal allowance. Generally, youIncidental services, such as typing notes or as-Probationary work period. If you take a job
sisting in entertaining customers, are not can use the ªstandard meal allowanceº methodthat requires you to move, with the understand-
enough to make the expenses deductible. as an alternative to the actual cost method. Iting that you will keep the job if your work is
allows you to use a set amount for your dailysatisfactory during a probationary period, the job
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- meals and incidental expenses (M&IE), insteadis indefinite. You cannot deduct any of your
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is of keeping records of your actual costs. The setexpenses for meals and lodging during the pro-
not Jerry's employee. Linda occasionally types amount varies depending on where and whenbationary period.
notes, performs similar services, and accompa- you travel. In this chapter, ªstandard meal allow-
nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per- anceº refers to the federal rate for M&IE, dis-What Travel Expenses Are formance of these services does not establish cussed later under Amount of standard meal
that her presence on the trip is necessary to theDeductible? allowance. If you use the standard meal allow-
conduct of Jerry's business. Her expenses are ance, you still must keep records to prove thenot deductible.Once you have determined that you are travel- time, place, and business purpose of your travel.
ing away from your tax home, you can determine Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A See Recordkeeping, later.
what travel expenses are deductible. single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the
Incidental expenses. The term ªincidentalYou can deduct ordinary and necessary ex- total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,
expensesº means:penses you have when you travel away from but only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he uses
home on business. The type of expense you can public transportation, he can deduct only his • Fees and tips given to porters, baggagededuct depends on the facts and your circum- fare. carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewardsstances. or stewardesses and others on ships, andTable 26-1 summarizes travel expenses you hotel servants in foreign countries,Meals and Incidental Expensesmay be able to deduct. You may have other
• Transportation between places of lodgingdeductible travel expenses that are not covered You can deduct the cost of meals in either of the
or business and places where meals arethere, depending on the facts and your circum- following situations.
taken, if suitable meals can be obtained atstances.
• It is necessary for you to stop for substan- the temporary duty site, andWhen you travel away from home on tial sleep or rest to properly perform your
business, you should keep records of • Mailing costs associated with filing travelduties while traveling away from home on
all the expenses you have and any vouchers and payment of em-
RECORDSbusiness.
advances you receive from your employer. You ployer-sponsored charge card billings.
• The meal is business-related entertain-can use a log, diary, notebook, or any other Incidental expenses do not include expenses forment.written record to keep track of your expenses. laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg-The types of expenses you need to record, ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephoneBusiness-related entertainment is discussedalong with supporting documentation, are de- calls.under Entertainment Expenses, later. The fol-scribed in Table 26-2, later.
lowing discussion deals only with meals (and Incidental expenses only method. You
incidental expenses) that are not busi-Separating costs. If you have one expense can use an optional method (instead of actual
ness-related entertainment.that includes the costs of meals, entertainment, cost) for deducting incidental expenses only.
and other services (such as lodging or transpor- The amount of the deduction is $3 a day forLavish or extravagant. You cannot deducttation), you must allocate that expense between incidental expenses paid or incurred for travelexpenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-the cost of meals and entertainment and the cost away from home in 2007. You can use thisgant. An expense is not considered lavish orof other services. You must have a reasonable method only if you did not pay or incur any mealextravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsbasis for making this allocation. For example, expenses. You cannot use this method on anyand circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in- day that you use the standard meal allowance.lowed merely because they are more than acludes one or more meals in its room charge.
fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res- Federal employees should refer to the
Travel expenses for another individual. If a taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts. Federal Travel Regulations at
spouse, dependent, or other individual goes with www.gsa.gov. Click on ªFederal Travel
CAUTION
!
you (or your employee) on a business trip or to a 50% limit on meals. You can figure your meal Regulation (FTR)º for changes affecting claims
business convention, you generally cannot de- expenses using either of the following methods. for reimbursement of these expenses.
duct his or her travel expenses. • Actual cost. 50% limit may apply. If you use the stan-Employee. You can deduct the travel ex- dard meal allowance method for meal expenses• The standard meal allowance.penses of someone who goes with you if that and you are not reimbursed or you are reim-person: Both of these methods are explained below. But, bursed under a nonaccountable plan, you can
regardless of the method you use, you generally generally deduct only 50% of the standard meal1. Is your employee, can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost allowance. If you are reimbursed under an ac-of your meals.2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the countable plan and you are deducting amountstravel, and that are more than your reimbursements, youIf you are reimbursed for the cost of your
can deduct only 50% of the excess amount. Themeals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the
50% limit is explained later under Entertainmentwhether your employer's reimbursement plantravel expenses.
Expenses. Accountable and nonaccountablewas accountable or nonaccountable. If you are
plans are discussed later under Reimburse-Business associate. If a business associ- not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether
ments.ate travels with you and meets the conditions in the unreimbursed meal expense is for business
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 171

There is no optional standard lodging if you work in the transportation industry. You Trip Primarily for Business
amount similar to the standard meal are in the transportation industry if your work:
You can deduct all your travel expenses if yourallowance. Your allowable lodging ex-
CAUTION
! • Directly involves moving people or goods trip was entirely business related. If your trip waspense deduction is your actual cost. by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or primarily for business and, while at your busi-truck, andWho can use the standard meal allowance. ness destination, you extended your stay for a
You can use the standard meal allowance vacation, made a personal side trip, or had other• Regularly requires you to travel away from
whether you are an employee or self-employed, personal activities, you can deduct your busi-home and, during any single trip, usually
and whether or not you are reimbursed for your ness-related travel expenses. These expensesinvolves travel to areas eligible for differ-
traveling expenses. include the travel costs of getting to and froment standard meal allowance rates.
your business destination and any busi-If this applies to you, you can claim a standardUse of the standard meal allowance for other ness-related expenses at your business desti-meal allowance of $52 a day ($58 for traveltravel. You can use the standard meal allow- nation.outside the continental United States) from Jan-ance to figure your meal expenses when you
uary 1 through December 31, 2007.travel in connection with investment and other Example. You work in Atlanta and take a
income-producing property. You can also use it business trip to New Orleans. On your wayUsing the special rate for transportation work-to figure your meal expenses when you travel for home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.ers eliminates the need for you to determine thequalifying educational purposes. You cannot You spend $1,070 for the 9 days you are awaystandard meal allowance for every area whereuse the standard meal allowance to figure the from home for travel, meals, lodging, and otheryou stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to usecost of your meals when you travel for medical travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-the special rate for any trip, you must use theor charitable purposes. bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, andspecial rate (and not use the regular standard
your total cost would have been $920. You canmeal allowance rates) for all trips you take thatAmount of standard meal allowance. The deduct $920 for your trip, including the cost ofyear.standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE round-trip transportation to and from New Orle-rate. For travel in 2007, the rate for most small ans. The deduction for your meals is subject toTravel for days you depart and return. Forlocalities in the United States is $39 a day from the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.both the day you depart for and the day youJanuary 1 through December 31, 2007.
return from a business trip, you must prorate theMost major cities and many other localities in
standard meal allowance (figure a reducedthe United States are designated as high-cost Trip Primarily foramount for each day). You can do so by one ofareas, qualifying for higher standard meal al- Personal Reasonstwo methods.lowances. Locations qualifying for these rates
are listed in Publication 1542 which is available • Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan- If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,on the Internet at www.irs.gov. dard meal allowance. such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a
nondeductible personal expense. However, youYou can also find this information (or- • Method 2: You can prorate using any can deduct any expenses you have while at yourganized by state) on the Internet method that you consistently apply and destination that are directly related to your busi-atwww.gsa.gov. Click on ªPer Diem
 that is in accordance with reasonable busi- ness.Rates,º then select ª2007º for the period January ness practice.
   A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be1, 2007 ± September 30, 2007, and select
a vacation even if the promoter advertises that itª2008º for the period October 1, 2007 ± Decem-
Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans is primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-ber 31, 2007. However, you can apply the rates
as a convention planner. In March, her employer dental business activities during a trip, such asin effect before October 1, 2007, for expenses of
sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingall travel within the United States for 2007 in-
attend a planning seminar. She left her home in with general subjects, will not change what isstead of the updated rates. You must consist-
New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and really a vacation into a business trip.ently use either the rates for the first 9 months
arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. Afterfor all of 2007 or the updated rates for the period
spending two nights there, she flew back to Newof October 1, 2007, through December 31,
Orleans on Friday and arrived back home at2007. Part of Trip Outside
8:00 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat amount the United StatesIf you travel to more than one location in one to cover her expenses and included it with herday, use the rate in effect for the area where you wages. If part of your trip is outside the United States,stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-
use the rules described later under TravelUnder Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days oftation industry, however, see Special rate for
Outside the United States for that part of the trip.the standard meal allowance for Washington,transportation workers, later.
For the part of your trip that is inside the UnitedDC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday and
Standard meal allowance for areas outside States, use the rules for travel in the UnitedFriday (the days she departed and returned),
the continental United States.  The standard States. Travel outside the United States doesand the full daily rate for Thursday.
meal allowance rates above do not apply to not include travel from one point in the UnitedUnder Method 2, Jen could also use anytravel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other location States to another point in the United States. Themethod that she applies consistently and that isoutside the continental United States. The De- following discussion can help you determinein accordance with reasonable business prac-partment of Defense establishes per diem rates whether your trip was entirely within the Unitedtice. For example, she could claim 3 days of thefor Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American Sa- States.standard meal allowance even though a federalmoa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana Is- employee would have to use method 1 and belands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island and Public transportation. If you travel by publiclimited to only 21/2 days.other non-foreign areas outside the continental transportation, any place in the United States
United States. The Department of State estab- where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is aTravel in thelishes per diem rates for all other foreign areas. point in the United States. Once the vehicle
leaves the last scheduled stop in the UnitedUnited StatesYou can access per diem rates for
States on its way to a point outside the Unitednon-foreign areas outside the conti-
The following discussion applies to travel in the States, you apply the rules under Travel Outsidenental United States at:
United States. For this purpose, the United the United States.http://perdiem.hqda.pentagon.mil/perdiem/
States includes the 50 states and the District ofperdiemrates.html. You can access all other for-
Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex- Example. You fly from New York to Puertoeign per diem rates at:
penses depends on how much of your trip was Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You returnwww.state.gov/travelandbusiness.
business related and on how much of your trip to New York nonstop. The flight from New York
occurred within the United States. See Part ofSpecial rate for transportation workers. to Miami is in the United States, so only the flight
Trip Outside the United States, later.You can use a special standard meal allowance from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United
Page 172 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

States. Because there are no scheduled stops  A self-employed person generally has sub- Your appointment or election as a dele-
between Puerto Rico and New York, all of the stantial control over arranging business trips. gate does not, in itself, determine
return trip is outside the United States. whether you can deduct travel ex-
CAUTION
!Exception 2 - Outside United States no penses. You can deduct your travel expensesmore than a week. Your trip is consideredPrivate car. Travel by private car in the United only if your attendance is connected to your ownentirely for business if you were outside theStates is travel between points in the United trade or business.United States for a week or less, combiningStates, even when you are on your way to a
business and nonbusiness activities. One weekdestination outside the United States. Convention agenda. The convention agendameans seven consecutive days. In counting the
or program generally shows the purpose of thedays, do not count the day you leave the UnitedExample. You travel by car from Denver to
convention. You can show your attendance atStates, but do count the day you return to theMexico City and return. Your travel from Denver
the convention benefits your trade or businessUnited States.to the border and from the border back to Den-
by comparing the agenda with the official dutiesver is travel in the United States, and the rules in Exception 3 - Less than 25% of time on and responsibilities of your position. The agendathis section apply. The rules under Travel personal activities. Your trip is considered does not have to deal specifically with your offi-Outside the United States apply to your trip from entirely for business if: cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enoughthe border to Mexico City and back to the border.
if the agenda is so related to your position that it• You were outside the United States for
more than a week, and shows your attendance was for business pur-
Travel Outside poses.• You spent less than 25% of the total timethe United States you were outside the United States on Conventions held outside the North Ameri-nonbusiness activities.If any part of your business travel is outside the can area. See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for
For this purpose, count both the day your tripUnited States, some of your deductions for the information on conventions held outside the
began and the day it ended.cost of getting to and from your destination may North American area.
be limited. For this purpose, the United States Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-includes the 50 states and the District of Colum- eration. Your trip is considered entirely forbia. business if you can establish that a personalHow much of your travel expenses you can vacation was not a major consideration, even if Entertainmentdeduct depends in part upon how much of your you have substantial control over arranging thetrip outside the United States was business re- trip. Expenseslated.
See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for informa- You may be able to deduct business-relatedtion on luxury water travel. Travel Primarily for Business entertainment expenses you have for entertain-
ing a client, customer, or employee.If you travel outside the United States primarily You can deduct entertainment expensesTravel Entirely for Business for business but spend some of your time on only if they are both ordinary and necessaryor Considered Entirely nonbusiness activities, you generally cannot de- (defined earlier in the Introduction) and meetduct all of your travel expenses. You can onlyfor Business one of the following tests.deduct the business portion of your cost of get-
You can deduct all your travel expenses of get- ting to and from your destination. You must • Directly-related test.
ting to and from your business destination if your allocate the costs between your business and • Associated test.trip is entirely for business or considered entirely nonbusiness activities to determine your de-
for business. ductible amount. These travel allocation rules Both of these tests are explained in chapter 2 of
are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication 463. Publication 463.Travel entirely for business. If you travel
You do not have to allocate your traveloutside the United States and you spend the The amount you can deduct for enter-expense deduction if you meet one ofentire time on business activities, you can de- tainment expenses may be limited.the four exceptions listed earlier underduct all of your travel expenses.
TIP Generally, you can deduct only 50% of
CAUTION
!Travel considered entirely for business. In those your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.Travel considered entirely for business. cases, you can deduct the total cost of getting to This limit is discussed next.Even if you did not spend your entire time on and from your destination.
business activities, your trip is considered en-
tirely for business if you meet at least one of the 50% Limitfollowing four exceptions. Travel Primarily for Personal
In general, you can deduct only 50% of yourException 1 - No substantial control. Reasons
business-related meal and entertainment ex-Your trip is considered entirely for business if
penses. (If you are subject to the Department ofIf you travel outside the United States primarilyyou did not have substantial control over arrang-
Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits, youfor vacation or for investment purposes, the en-ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing of
can deduct a higher percentage. See Individualstire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personalyour trip does not, by itself, mean that you have
subject to ªhours of serviceº limits, later.)expense. If you spend some time attending briefsubstantial control over arranging your trip.
professional seminars or a continuing educationYou do not have substantial control over The 50% limit applies to employees or their
program, you can deduct your registration feesyour trip if you: employers, and to self-employed persons (in-
and other expenses you have that are directly cluding independent contractors) or their clients,• Are an employee who was reimbursed or related to your business. depending on whether the expenses are reim-paid a travel expense allowance, bursed.
• Are not related to your employer, and Figure 26-A summarizes the general rulesConventions
explained in this section.• Are not a managing executive.
You can deduct your travel expenses when you The 50% limit applies to business meals or
attend a convention if you can show that your entertainment expenses you have while:ªRelated to your employerº is defined later in
attendance benefits your trade or business. Youthis chapter under Per Diem and Car Al- • Traveling away from home (whether eat-cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-lowances. ing alone or with others) on business,ily.A ªmanaging executiveº is an employee who
• Entertaining customers at your place ofhas the authority and responsibility, without be-  If the convention is for investment, political,
business, a restaurant, or other location,ing subject to the veto of another, to decide on social, or other purposes unrelated to your trade
orthe need for the business travel. or business, you cannot deduct the expenses.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 173

• Attending a business convention or recep- your tax home if the meals take place during or selling meals or entertainment, and charitable
tion, business meeting, or business lunch- sports events. These are discussed in Publica-incident to any period subject to the Department
eon at a club. tion 463.of Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. The
percentage is 75% for 2007.
Included expenses. Expenses subject to the Individuals subject to the Department of What Entertainment50% limit include: Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits include
Expenses Are Deductible?the following persons.• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal
or entertainment activity, • Certain air transportation workers (such as This section explains different types of entertain-
pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and ment expenses that you my be able to deduct.• Cover charges for admission to a night-
control tower operators) who are underclub,
Federal Aviation Administration regula- Entertainment.  Entertainment includes any• Rent paid for a room in which you hold a tions.dinner or cocktail party, and activity generally considered to provide enter-
• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples• Amounts paid for parking at a sports who are under Department of Transporta- include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-arena. tion regulations. cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at
However, the cost of transportation to and from sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-• Certain railroad employees (such as engi-a business meal or a business-related entertain- ing, vacation, and similar trips.neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.
ers, and control operations personnel) A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter-
who are under Federal Railroad Adminis- tainment includes the cost of a meal you provideApplication of 50% limit. The 50% limit on
tration regulations. to a customer or client, whether the meal is ameal and entertainment expenses applies if the
expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov- part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal• Certain merchant mariners who are underered by one of the exceptions discussed later in expense includes the cost of food, beverages,Coast Guard regulations.this section. taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter-
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal tainment-related meal, you or your employee
and entertainment expenses that are not busi- Other exceptions. There are also exceptions must be present when the food or beverages are
ness-related. It applies to meal and entertain- for the self-employed, advertising expenses, provided.ment expenses incurred for the production of
income, including rental or royalty income. It
also applies to the cost of meals included in
deductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the
50% limit after determining the amount that
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
have to determine the amount of meal and en-
tertainment expenses that would be deductible
under the other rules discussed in this chapter.
Example 1. You spend $200 for a busi-
ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is not
allowable because it is lavish and extravagant,
the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit.
Your deduction cannot be more than $45 (.50 ×
$90).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face
value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction
cannot be more than $80 (.50 × $160).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
Figure 26-A can help you determine if the 50%
limit applies to you.
Your meal or entertainment expense is not
subject to the 50% limit if the expense meets
one of the following exceptions.
Employee's reimbursed expenses. If you
are an employee, you are not subject to the 50%
limit on expenses for which your employer reim-
burses you under an accountable plan. Account-
able plans are discussed later under
Reimbursements.
Individuals subject to ªhours of serviceº lim-
its. You can deduct a higher percentage of
your meal expenses while traveling away from
Figure 26-A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. For more information, see
50% Limit.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not include
in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed, count only
reimbursements from clients or customers that are not
included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See How To Report.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed. . . For the excess amount. . .
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However,
since the reimbursement was
not treated as wages or as
other taxable income, you
cannot deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
Yes
No
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
/H17074/H17074
Page 174 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

You cannot claim the cost of your meal The purposes and activities of a club, not its Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as
both as an entertainment expense and engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,name, will determine whether or not you can
as a travel expense. and mailing, are generally not included in deter-deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid
CAUTION
!
mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25to:
limit.Separating costs. If you have one expense • Country clubs, A cost is incidental only if it does not addthat includes the costs of entertainment, and
• Golf and athletic clubs, substantial value to the gift. For example, theother services (such as lodging or transporta-
cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-tion), you must allocate that expense between • Airline clubs, ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket forthe cost of entertainment and the cost of other
• Hotel clubs, and packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if theservices. You must have a reasonable basis for
value of the basket is substantial compared tomaking this allocation. For example, you must • Clubs operated to provide meals under cir- the value of the fruit.allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter- cumstances generally considered to betainment in its lounge on the same bill with your conducive to business discussions. Exceptions. The following items are not con-room charge.
sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. 
Taking turns paying for meals or entertain- Entertainment facilities. Generally, you can-
1. An item that costs $4 or less and:ment. If a group of business acquaintances not deduct any expense for the use of an enter-
take turns picking up each others' meal or enter- tainment facility. This includes expenses for a. Has your name clearly and permanentlytainment checks without regard to whether any depreciation and operating costs such as rent, imprinted on the gift, andbusiness purposes are served, no member of utilities, maintenance, and protection.
the group can deduct any part of the expense. b. Is one of a number of identical itemsAn entertainment facility is any property you
you widely distribute. Examples includeown, rent, or use for entertainment. ExamplesLavish or extravagant expenses. You can- pens, desk sets, and plastic bags andinclude a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp,not deduct expenses for entertainment that are cases.swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car,lavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid-
airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in aered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable 2. Signs, display racks, or other promotionalvacation resort.considering the facts and circumstances. Ex- material to be used on the business prem-penses will not be disallowed just because they Out-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct ises of the recipient.are more than a fixed dollar amount or take out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food andplace at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs, beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that Gift or entertainment. Any item that might beor resorts. you provided during entertainment at a facility. considered either a gift or entertainment gener-These are not expenses for the use of an enter-Trade association meetings.  You can de- ally will be considered entertainment. However,tainment facility. However, these expenses areduct entertainment expenses that are directly if you give a customer packaged food or bever-subject to the directly-related and associatedrelated to, and necessary for, attending busi- ages that you intend the customer to use at atests and to the 50% limit discussed earlier.ness meetings or conventions of certain exempt later date, treat it as a gift.organizations if the expenses of your attend-  If you give a customer tickets to a theaterAdditional information. For more informationance are related to your active trade or busi- performance or sporting event and you do not goon entertainment expenses, including discus-ness. These organizations include business with the customer to the performance or event,sions of the directly-related and associatedleagues, chambers of commerce, real estate you have a choice. You can treat the cost of thetests, see chapter 2 of Publication 463.boards, trade associations, and professional as- tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-sociations. ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.
If you go with the customer to the event, youEntertainment tickets. Generally, you cannot
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-deduct more than the face value of an entertain-
ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,Gift Expensesment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For
to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.example, you cannot deduct service fees you
If you give gifts in the course of your trade orpay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
business, you can deduct all or part of the cost.over the face value of the tickets you pay to
This section explains the limits and rules forscalpers.
deducting the costs of gifts. Transportation
What Entertainment $25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25 ExpensesExpenses Are Not for business gifts you give directly or indirectly to
each person during your tax year. A gift to a This section discusses expenses you can de-Deductible? company that is intended for the eventual per- duct for business transportation when you are
sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a not traveling away from home as defined earlierThis section explains different types of entertain-
limited class of people will be considered an under Travel Expenses. These expenses in-ment expenses that you generally may not be
indirect gift to that particular person or to the clude the cost of transportation by air, rail, bus,able to deduct.
individuals within that class of people who re- taxi, etc., and the cost of driving and maintainingClub dues and membership fees. You can- ceive the gift. your car.not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for If you give a gift to a member of a customer's Transportation expenses include the ordi-membership in any club organized for: family, the gift is generally considered to be an nary and necessary costs of all of the following.
indirect gift to the customer. This rule does not• Business, • Getting from one workplace to another inapply if you have a bona fide, independent busi- the course of your business or profession• Pleasure, ness connection with that family member and when you are traveling within the area ofthe gift is not intended for the customer's even-• Recreation, or your tax home. (Tax home is defined ear-tual use. lier under Travel Expenses.)• Other social purpose. If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
• Visiting clients or customers.you are treated as one taxpayer. It does notThis rule applies to any membership organiza-
matter whether you have separate businesses,tion if one of its principal purposes is either: • Going to a business meeting away fromare separately employed, or whether each of your regular workplace.• To conduct entertainment activities for you has an independent connection with themembers or their guests, or recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner- • Getting from your home to a temporary
ship and the partners are treated as one tax-• To provide members or their guests with workplace when you have one or more
payer.access to entertainment facilities. regular places of work. These temporary
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 175

If the temporary work location is beyond the
general area of your regular place of work and
you stay overnight, you are traveling away from
home. You may have deductible travel ex-
penses as discussed earlier in this chapter.
No regular place of work. If you have no
regular place of work but ordinarily work in the
metropolitan area where you live, you can de-
duct daily transportation costs between home
and a temporary work site outside that metropol-
itan area.
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the
area within the city limits and the suburbs that
are considered part of that metropolitan area.
You cannot deduct daily transportation costs
between your home and temporary work sites
within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
ductible commuting expenses.
Two places of work. If you work at two places
in one day, whether or not for the same em-
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
from one workplace to the other. However, if for
some personal reason you do not go directly
from one location to the other, you cannot de-
duct more than the amount it would have cost
you to go directly from the first location to the
second.
Transportation expenses you have in going
between home and a part-time job on a day off
from your main job are commuting expenses.
You cannot deduct them.
Armed Forces reservists. A meeting of an
Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of
business if the meeting is held on a day on which
you work at your regular job. You can deduct the
expense of getting from one workplace to the
other as just discussed under Two places of
work.
You usually cannot deduct the expense if the
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you
do not work at your regular job. In this case, your
transportation generally is a nondeductible com-
muting expense. However, you can deduct your
transportation expenses if the location of the
meeting is temporary and you have one or more
regular places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-
Figure 26-B.
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible on
a day off from regular
or main job
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home .)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
itan area but not at any specific location and the
reserve meeting is held at a temporary location
workplaces can be either within the area transportation between your home and the tem- outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct
of your tax home or outside that area. porary location, regardless of distance. your transportation expenses.
If your employment at a work location is If you travel away from home overnight toTransportation expenses do not include ex-
attend a guard or reserve meeting, you canrealistically expected to last (and does in factpenses you have while traveling away from
deduct your travel expenses. These expenseslast) for one year or less, the employment ishome overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-
are discussed earlier under Travel Expenses.temporary unless there are facts and circum-penses, which are discussed earlier. However, if
If you travel more than 100 miles away fromstances that would indicate otherwise.you use your car while traveling away from
home in connection with your performance ofIf your employment at a work location ishome overnight, use the rules in this section to
services as a member of the reserves, you mayfigure your car expense deduction. See Car Ex- realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
be able to deduct some of your reserve-relatedpenses, later. or if there is no realistic expectation that the travel costs as an adjustment to income ratheremployment will last for 1 year or less, the em- than as an itemized deduction. See ArmedIllustration of transportation expenses. ployment is not temporary, regardless of Forces reservists traveling more than 100 milesFigure 26-B illustrates the rules for when you whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year. from home under Special Rules, later.can deduct transportation expenses when you If employment at a work location initially is
have a regular or main job away from your realistically expected to last for 1 year or less, Commuting expenses. You cannot deducthome. You may want to refer to it when deciding but at some later date the employment is realisti- the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi,whether you can deduct your transportation ex- cally expected to last more than 1 year, that or of driving a car between your home and yourpenses. employment will be treated as temporary (un- main or regular place of work. These costs are
less there are facts and circumstances thatTemporary work location. If you have one or personal commuting expenses. You cannot de-
would indicate otherwise) until your expectationmore regular work locations away from your duct commuting expenses no matter how far
changes. It will not be treated as temporary afterhome and you commute to a temporary work your home is from your regular place of work.
the date you determine it will last more than 1location in the same trade or business, you can You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if
year.deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip you work during the commuting trip.
Page 176 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Example. You had a telephone installed in Example 3. You have no regular office, and Standard Mileage Rate
your car. You sometimes use that telephone to you do not have an office in your home. In this
You may be able to use the standard mileagemake business calls while commuting to and case, the location of your first business contact
rate to figure the deductible costs of operatingfrom work. Sometimes business associates ride is considered your office. Transportation ex-
your car for business purposes. For 2007, thewith you to and from work, and you have a penses between your home and this first contact
standard mileage rate for each mile of businessbusiness discussion in the car. These activities are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-
use is 481/2 cents per mile.do not change the trip from personal to busi- portation expenses between your last business
ness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex- contact and your home are also nondeductible If you use the standard mileage rate forpenses. commuting expenses. Although you cannot de- a year, you cannot deduct your actual
duct the costs of these first and last trips, you car expenses for that year, but seeParking fees. Fees you pay to park your car
CAUTION
!
can deduct the costs of going from one client or Parking fees and tolls, later.at your place of business are nondeductible
customer to another.commuting expenses. You can, however, de- You generally can use the standard mileage
duct business-related parking fees when visiting rate whether or not you are reimbursed and
a customer or client. whether or not any reimbursement is more orCar Expenses
less than the amount figured using the standardAdvertising display on car. Putting display
mileage rate. See Reimbursements under HowIf you use your car for business purposes, youmaterial that advertises your business on your
To Report, later.may be able to deduct car expenses. You gener-car does not change the use of your car from
ally can use one of the two following methods topersonal use to business use. If you use this car Choosing the standard mileage rate. If youfigure your deductible expenses.for commuting or other personal uses, you still want to use the standard mileage rate for a carcannot deduct your expenses for those uses. • Standard mileage rate. you own, you must choose to use it in the first
Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of year the car is available for use in your business.• Actual car expenses.using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not Then in later years, you can choose to use either
include payments you receive from the passen- the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.If you use actual car expenses to figure yourgers in your income. These payments are con- If you want to use the standard mileage ratededuction for a car you lease, there are rulessidered reimbursements of your expenses. for a car you lease, you must use it for the entirethat affect the amount of your lease paymentsHowever, if you operate a car pool for a profit, lease period. For leases that began on or beforethat you can deduct. See Leasing a car underyou must include payments from passengers in December 31, 1997, the standard mileage rateActual Car Expenses, later.your income. You can then deduct your car must be used for the entire portion of the lease
expenses (using the rules in this chapter). In this chapter, ªcarº includes a van, pickup, period (including renewals) that is after 1997.
or panel truck. You must make the choice to use the stan-Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling dard mileage rate by the due date (includingtools or instruments in your car while commuting You may be entitled to a tax credit for extensions) of your return. You cannot revoketo and from work does not make your car ex- an alternative motor vehicle that you the choice. However, in a later year, you canpenses deductible. However, you can deduct place in service during the year. The
TIP switch from the standard mileage rate to theany additional costs you have for hauling tools or vehicle must meet certain requirements, and actual expenses method. If you change to theinstruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow you do not have to use it in your business to actual expense method in a later year, butwith your car). qualify for the credit. For more information, see before your car is fully depreciated, you have tochapter 37.Union members' trips from a union hall. If estimate the remaining useful life of the car and
you get your work assignments at a union hall use straight line depreciation.
and then go to your place of work, the costs of For more information about depreciation in-Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mailgetting from the union hall to your place of work cluded in the standard mileage rate, see thecarrier, you may be able to treat the amount ofare nondeductible commuting expenses. Al- exception in Methods of depreciation under De-qualified reimbursement you received as thethough you need the union to get your work preciation Deduction in chapter 4 of Publicationamount of your allowable expense. Because theassignments, you are employed where you 463.qualified reimbursement is treated as paid underwork, not where the union hall is located.
an accountable plan, your employer should not Standard mileage rate not allowed. Youinclude the amount of reimbursement in yourOffice in the home. If you have an office in cannot use the standard mileage rate if you:income.your home that qualifies as a principal place of
• Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),business, you can deduct your daily transporta- If your vehicle expenses are more than the
tion costs between your home and another work amount of your reimbursement, you can deduct • Use five or more cars at the same time (as
location in the same trade or business. (See in fleet operations),the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-chapter 28 for information on determining if your duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You must • Claimed a depreciation deduction for thehome office qualifies as a principal place of complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Form car using any method other than straightbusiness.) 1040. line depreciation,
A ªqualified reimbursementº is the reim-Examples of deductible transportation. The • Claimed a section 179 deduction on thebursement you receive that meets both of thefollowing examples show when you can deduct car,transportation expenses based on the location following conditions.
of your work and your home. • Claimed the special depreciation allow-• It is given as an equipment maintenance ance on the car,allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.Example 1. You regularly work in an office • Claimed actual car expenses after 1997Postal Service.in the city where you live. Your employer sends for a car you leased, oryou to a one-week training session at a different • It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-
office in the same city. You travel directly from • Are a rural mail carrier who received alective bargaining agreement. Any later
your home to the training location and return qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mailagreement cannot increase the qualified
each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily carriers, earlier.)reimbursement amount by more than the
round-trip transportation between your home rate of inflation.
Five or more cars. If you own or lease fiveand the training location.
See your employer for information on your reim- or more cars that are used for business at the
bursement.Example 2. Your principal place of business same time, you cannot use the standard mile-
is in your home. You can deduct the cost of age rate for the business use of any car. How-
If you are a rural mail carrier and re-round-trip transportation between your qualify- ever, you may be able to deduct your actual
ceived a qualified reimbursement, youing home office and your client's or customer's expenses for operating each of the cars in your
cannot use the standard mileage rate.
CAUTION
!place of business. business. See Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 177

of Publication 463 for information on how to Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct fines How To Prove Expensesfigure your deduction. you pay and forfeited collateral for traffic viola-
You are not using five or more cars for busi- tions. Table 26-2 is a summary of records you need toness at the same time if you alternate using (use prove each expense discussed in this chapter.at different times) the cars for business. You must be able to prove the elements listedDepreciation and section 179 deductions.
across the top portion of the chart. You proveGenerally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax andParking fees and tolls. In addition to using them by having the information and receiptsimprovements, is a capital expense. Becausethe standard mileage rate, you can deduct any (where needed) for the expenses listed in thethe benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener-business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parking first column.ally cannot deduct a capital expense. However,fees that you pay to park your car at your place
of work are nondeductible commuting ex- you can recover this cost through the section You cannot deduct amounts that you
penses.) 179 deduction (the deduction allowed by section approximate or estimate.
179 of the Internal Revenue Code), and depreci-
CAUTION
!
ation deductions. Depreciation allows you to re-
Actual Car Expenses cover the cost over more than 1 year by You should keep adequate records to provededucting part of it each year. The section 179 your expenses or have sufficient evidence thatIf you do not use the standard mileage rate, you deduction and the depreciation deduction are will support your own statement. You must gen-may be able to deduct your actual car expenses. discussed in more detail in chapter 4 of Publica- erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-
tion 463.If you qualify to use both methods, you ered adequate. This is because written evidence
may want to figure your deduction both is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-Generally, there are limits on these deduc-
ways to see which gives you a larger ever, if you prepare a record in a computer
TIPtions. Special rules apply if you use your car
deduction. memory device with the aid of a logging pro-50% or less in your work or business.
gram, it is considered an adequate record.
Actual car expenses include: Leasing a car. If you lease a car, truck, or van
that you use in your business, you can use theDepreciation Lease Registration What Are Adequate Records?standard mileage rate or actual expenses topayments fees
figure your deductible car expense.Garage rent Licenses Repairs You should keep the proof you need in an ac-
Gas Oil Tires count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-Deductible payments. If you choose to useInsurance Parking fees Tolls ilar record. You should also keep documentaryactual expenses, you can deduct the part of evidence that, together with your records, willeach lease payment that is for the use of the car support each element of an expense.Business and personal use. If you use your in your business. You cannot deduct any part of
car for both business and personal purposes, a lease payment that is for personal use of the Documentary evidence. You generally mustyou must divide your expenses between busi- car, such as commuting. have documentary evidence, such as receipts,ness and personal use. You can divide your You must spread any advance payments canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-expense based on the miles driven for each over the entire lease period. You cannot deduct penses.purpose. any payments you make to buy a car, even if the Exception. Documentary evidence is notpayments are called lease payments.Example. You are a contractor and drive needed if any of the following conditions apply.
your car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,000 If you lease a car for 30 days or more, you
• You have meals or lodging expensesmiles for business use and 8,000 miles for per- may have to reduce your lease payment deduc-
while traveling away from home for whichsonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷ tion by an ªinclusion amount.º For information on
you account to your employer under an20,000) of the cost of operating your car as a reporting lease inclusion amounts, see Leasing accountable plan and you use a per diembusiness expense. a Car in chapter 4 of Publication 463. allowance method that includes meals
and/or lodging. (Accountable plans andInterest on car loans. If you are an employee,
per diem allowances are discussed lateryou cannot deduct any interest paid on a car Sale, Trade-In, or Other Disposition under Reimbursements.)loan. This interest is treated as personal interest
and is not deductible. However, if you are If you sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your • Your expense, other than lodging, is lessself-employed and use your car in that business, car, you may have a taxable gain or a deductible than $75.see chapter 4 of Publication 535. loss. This is true whether you used the standard
• You have a transportation expense formileage rate or actual car expenses to deductIf you use a home equity loan to which a receipt is not readily available.the business use of your car. Publication 544purchase your car, you may be able to
has information on sales of property used in adeduct the interest. See chapter 23 for
TIP Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-trade or business, and details on how to reportmore information. dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if itthe disposition. shows the amount, date, place, and essentialTaxes paid on your car. If you are an em- character of the expense.ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes For example, a hotel receipt is enough topaid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enter support expenses for business travel if it has allthe amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Form of the following information.Recordkeeping1040). (See chapter 22 for more information on
taxes.) If you are not an employee, see your • The name and location of the hotel.
If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-form instructions for information on how to de- • The dates you stayed there.portation expenses, you must be able to proveduct personal property taxes paid on your car.
(substantiate) certain elements of the expense. • Separate amounts for charges such asSales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on your This section discusses the records you need to lodging, meals, and telephone calls.car are part of your car's basis and are recov- keep to prove these expenses.ered through depreciation, discussed later. A restaurant receipt is enough to prove anIf you keep timely and accurate rec-However, to the extent the car is not used in your expense for a business meal if it has all of theords, you will have support to show thetrade or business, you can choose to deduct the following information.IRS if your tax return is ever examined.nonbusiness part of the sales tax deduction on
RECORDS
You will also have proof of expenses that yourSchedule A (Form 1040). You can only choose • The name and location of the restaurant.
employer may require if you are reimbursedto deduct state and local sales taxes as an • The number of people served.under an accountable plan. These plans areitemized deduction if you choose not to deduct
discussed later under Reimbursements.state and local income taxes. • The date and amount of the expense.
Page 178 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Table 26-2. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Place or Business Purpose andIF you have
Amount Time Description Business Relationshipexpenses for...
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense for travel, lodging, and returned of your travel (name expense or the business benefit gained or
and meals. Incidental for each trip of city, town, or expected to be gained.
expenses may be totaled in and number of other designation).
reasonable categories such days spent on Relationship: N/A
as taxis, fees and tips, etc. business.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. Incidental entertainment. or location of place expense or the business benefit gained or
expenses such as taxis, (Also see of entertainment. expected to be gained. For entertainment,
telephones, etc., may be Business Type of the nature of the business discussion or
totaled on a daily basis. Purpose.) entertainment if not activity. If the entertainment was directly
otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the
(Also see Business date, place, nature, and duration of the
Purpose.) business discussion, and the identities of
the persons who took part in both theGifts Cost of the gift. Date of the gift. Description of the business discussion and thegift. entertainment activity.
Relationship: Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or
other designations) about the recipients
that shows their business relationship to
you. For entertainment, you must also
prove that you or your employee was
present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. For car expenses, expense. For destination. expense.
the cost of the car and any car expenses,
improvements, the date you the date of the Relationship: N/A
started using it for business, use of the car.
the mileage for each
business use, and the total
miles for the year.
If a charge is made for items other than food and You do not need to write down the elements information elsewhere at or near the time of the
beverages, the receipt must show that this is the expense and have it available to fully prove thatof every expense on the day of the expense. If
case. element of the expense.you maintain a log on a weekly basis which
accounts for use during the week, the log isCanceled check. A canceled check, to-
considered a timely-kept record.gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es- What If I Have Incompletetablishes the cost. However, a canceled check If you give your employer, client, or customer Records?by itself does not prove a business expense an expense account statement, it can also be
without other evidence to show that it was for a considered a timely-kept record. This is true if If you do not have complete records to prove anbusiness purpose. you copy it from your account book, diary, state- element of an expense, then you must prove the
ment of expense, or similar record. element with:Duplicate information. You do not have to
record information in your account book or other • Your own written or oral statement, con-record that duplicates information shown on a Proving business purpose. You must gener- taining specific information about the ele-receipt as long as your records and receipts ally provide a written statement of the business ment, andcomplement each other in an orderly manner. purpose of an expense. However, the degree of • Other supporting evidence that is sufficientYou do not have to record amounts your proof varies according to the circumstances in to establish the element.employer pays directly for any ticket or other each case. If the business purpose of an ex-travel item. However, if you charge these items pense is clear from the surrounding circum-to your employer, through a credit card or other- Destroyed records. If you cannot produce astances, then you do not need to give a writtenwise, you must keep a record of the amounts receipt because of reasons beyond your control,explanation.you spend. you can prove a deduction by reconstructing
your records or expenses. Reasons beyondTimely-kept records. You should record the
Confidential information. You do not need to your control include fire, flood, and other casu-elements of an expense or of a business use at
put confidential information relating to an ele- alty.or near the time of the expense or use and
ment of a deductible expense (such as thesupport it with sufficient documentary evidence.
place, business purpose, or business relation-A timely-kept record has more value than a
ship) in your account book, diary, or other re-statement prepared later when generally there is
cord. However, you do have to record thea lack of accurate recall.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 179

• You are related to your employer, as de- 2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your de-Separating and Combining
ductible gifts directly on line 21 of Schedule Afined later under Related to employer.Expenses
(Form 1040).
See the next section, How To Report, for aThis section explains when expenses must be Statutory employees.   If you received adiscussion of reimbursements, adequate ac-kept separate and when expenses can be com- Form W-2 and the ªStatutory employeeº box incounting, and nonaccountable plans.bined. box 13 was checked, report your income and
expenses related to that income on Schedule CSeparating expenses. Each separate pay- Additional information. Chapter 5 of Publi- or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Formment is generally considered a separate ex- cation 463 has more information on recordkeep- 2106 or 2106-EZ.pense. For example, if you entertain a customer ing, including examples.or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the Statutory employees include full-time life in-
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick- surance salespersons, certain agent or commis-
ets are two separate expenses. You must record sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain
them separately in your records. homeworkers.
How To ReportCombining items. You can make one daily If you are entitled to a reimbursement
entry in your record for reasonable categories of from your employer but you do notThis section explains where and how to reportexpenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone claim it, you cannot claim a deduction
CAUTION
!the expenses discussed in this chapter. It dis-calls, or other incidental travel costs. Meals for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-cusses reimbursements and how to treat themshould be in a separate category. You can in- bursement applies.under accountable and nonaccountable plans. Itclude tips for meal-related services with the also explains rules for independent contractorscosts of the meals. Reimbursement for personal expenses. Ifand clients, fee-basis officials, certain perform-Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur- your employer reimburses you for nondeduct-ing artists, Armed Forces reservists, and certaining the course of a single event are considered a ible personal expenses, such as for vacationdisabled employees. This section ends with ansingle expense. For example, if during entertain- trips, your employer must report the reimburse-illustration of how to report travel, entertainment,ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately for ment as wage income in box 1 of your Formgift, and car expenses on Form 2106-EZ.each serving of refreshments, the total expense W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.
for the refreshments is treated as a single ex- Self-employed. You must report your incomepense. and expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form Reimbursements
Allocating total cost. If you can prove the 1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched-
This section explains what to do when you re-total cost of travel or entertainment but you can- ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not
ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any ofnot prove how much it cost for each person who use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. See your form in-
the employee business expenses discussed inparticipated in the event, you may have to allo- structions for information on how to complete
this chapter.cate the total cost among you and your guests your tax return. You can also find information in
on a pro rata basis. An allocation would be Publication 535 if you are a sole proprietor, or in If you received an advance, allowance, or
needed, for example, if you did not have a busi- Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide, if you are reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-
ness relationship with all of your guests. a farmer. port this amount and your expenses depends on
whether the reimbursement was paid to youIf your return is examined. If your return is under an accountable plan or a nonaccountableBoth self-employed and an employee.   Ifexamined, you may have to provide additional plan.you are both self-employed and an employee,information to the IRS. This information could be
you must keep separate records for each busi- This section explains the two types of plans,needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or
ness activity. Report your business expenses for how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-reliability of information contained in your rec-
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F ing the amount of your expenses, and the taxords, statements, testimony, or documentary
(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your treatment of your reimbursements and ex-evidence before a deduction is allowed.
business expenses for your work as an em- penses.
ployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed
How Long To Keep next. No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed
or given an allowance for your expenses if youRecords and Receipts
are paid a salary or commission with the under-Employees. If you are an employee, you gen-
standing that you will pay your own expenses. InYou must keep records as long as they may be erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your
this situation, you have no reimbursement orneeded for the administration of any provision of travel, transportation, and entertainment ex-
allowance arrangement, and you do not have tothe Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this penses. However, you can use the shorter Form
read this section on reimbursements. Instead,means you must keep your records that support 2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all of
see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later,your deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years the following conditions.
for information on completing your tax return.from the date you file the income tax return on • You are an employee deducting expenseswhich the deduction is claimed. A return filed attributable to your job. Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. Aearly is considered filed on the due date. For a
reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-• You were not reimbursed by your em-more complete explanation, get Publication 583,
rangement is a system or plan that an employerployer for your expenses (amounts in-Starting a Business and Keeping Records.
uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notReimbursed for expenses. Employees who penses, advances, reimbursements, andconsidered reimbursements).give their records and documentation to their amounts charged to the employer for employee
• If you claim car expenses, you use theemployers and are reimbursed for their ex- business expenses. Arrangements include per
standard mileage rate.penses generally do not have to keep copies of diem and car allowances.
this information. However, you may have to   A per diem allowance is a fixed amount ofFor more information on how to report yourprove your expenses if any of the following con- daily reimbursement your employer gives youexpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, seeditions apply. for your lodging, meal, and incidental expensesCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later. when you are away from home on business.• You claim deductions for expenses that
(The term ªincidental expensesº is defined ear-Gifts.  If you did not receive any reimburse-are more than reimbursements.
lier under Meals and Incidental Expenses.) A carments (or the reimbursements were all included• Your expenses are reimbursed under a allowance is an amount your employer givesin box 1 of your Form W-2), the only businessnonaccountable plan. you for the business use of your car.expense you are claiming is for gifts, and the
rules for certain individuals (such as performing• Your employer does not use adequate ac- Your employer should tell you what method
artists) discussed later under Special Rules docounting procedures to verify expense ac- of reimbursement is used and what records you
not apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 orcounts. must provide.
Page 180 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

and some of which are not deductible. The reim- • The allowance is similar in form to and notAccountable Plans
more than the federal rate (discussedbursements you receive for the nondeductible
To be an accountable plan, your employer's later).expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountable
reimbursement or allowance arrangement must plans, and they are treated as paid under a • You prove the time (dates), place, andinclude all of the following rules. nonaccountable plan. business purpose of your expenses to
your employer (as explained in Table1. Your expenses must have a business con- Example. Your employer's plan reimburses 26-2) within a reasonable period of time.nection Ð that is, you must have paid or you for travel expenses while away from homeincurred deductible expenses while per- • You are not related to your employer (ason business and also for meals when you workforming services as an employee of your defined next). If you are related to yourlate at the office, even though you are not awayemployer. employer, you must be able to prove yourfrom home. The part of the arrangement that expenses to the IRS even if you have al-2. You must adequately account to your em- reimburses you for the nondeductible meals ready adequately accounted to your em-ployer for these expenses within a reason- when you work late at the office is treated as ployer and returned any excessable period of time. paid under a nonaccountable plan. reimbursement.3. You must return any excess reimburse- The employer makes the decision If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-ment or allowance within a reasonable pe- whether to reimburse employees ance practices are not based on reasonablyriod of time. under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-See Adequate Accounting and Returning countable plan. If you are an employee who ognition of cost differences in different areas forExcess Reimbursements, later. receives payments under a nonaccountable per diem amounts), you will not be considered to
plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-An excess reimbursement or allowance is have accounted to your employer. In this case,
any amount you are paid that is more than the ments under an accountable plan by voluntarily you must be able to prove your expenses to the
business-related expenses that you adequately accounting to your employer for the expenses IRS.
accounted for to your employer. and voluntarily returning excess reimburse-
The definition of reasonable period of time ments to the employer. Related to employer. You are related to your
depends on the facts and circumstances of your employer if: 
situation. However, regardless of the facts and
1. Your employer is your brother or sister,circumstances of your situation, actions that Adequate Accounting half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-take place within the times specified in the fol-
tor, or lineal descendant,lowing list will be treated as taking place within a One of the rules for an accountable plan is that
reasonable period of time. you must adequately account to your employer 2. Your employer is a corporation in which
for your expenses. You adequately account by you own, directly or indirectly, more than• You receive an advance within 30 days of
giving your employer a statement of expense, 10% in value of the outstanding stock, orthe time you have an expense.
an account book, a diary, or a similar record in 3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-• You adequately account for your ex- which you entered each expense at or near the duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,penses within 60 days after they were paid time you had it, along with documentary evi- a trust, and your employer.or incurred. dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage,
You may be considered to indirectly own stock,• You return any excess reimbursement and other employee business expenses. (See
for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in awithin 120 days after the expense was Table 26-2, earlier, for details you need to enter corporation, partnership, estate, or trust thatpaid or incurred. in your record and documents you need to prove owns the stock or if a member of your family orcertain expenses.) A per diem or car allowance• You are given a periodic statement (at your partner owns the stock.satisfies the adequate accounting requirementleast quarterly) that asks you to either re-
under certain conditions. See Per Diem and Car The federal rate. The federal rate can be fig-turn or adequately account for outstanding
Allowances, later. ured using any one of the following methods.advances and you comply within 120 days
of the statement. You must account for all amounts you re- 1. For per diem amounts:ceived from your employer during the year as
advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This a. The regular federal per diem rate.Employee meets accountable plan rules. If
includes amounts you charged to your employeryou meet the three rules for accountable plans, b. The standard meal allowance.by credit card or other method. You must giveyour employer should not include any reim-
c. The high-low rate.your employer the same type of records andbursements in your income in box 1 of your
Form W-2. If your expenses equal your reim- supporting information that you would have to
2. For car expenses:bursement, you do not complete Form 2106. give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deduction
You have no deduction since your expenses on your return. You must pay back the amount of a. The standard mileage rate.and reimbursement are equal. any reimbursement or other expense allowance
b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).for which you do not adequately account or thatIf your employer included reimburse-
is more than the amount for which you ac-ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 and
counted.you meet all the rules for accountable Regular federal per diem rate. The regular
TIP
plans, ask your employer for a corrected Form federal per diem rate is the highest amount that
W-2. the federal government will pay to its employees
Per Diem and Car Allowances for lodging, meal, and incidental expenses (or
Accountable plan rules not met. Even meal and incidental expenses only) while theyIf your employer reimburses you for your ex-though you are reimbursed under an accounta- are traveling away from home in a particularpenses using a per diem or car allowance, youble plan, some of your expenses may not meet area. The rates are different for different loca-can generally use the allowance as proof of theall the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet all tions. Your employer should have these rates
amount of your expenses. A per diem or carthree rules for accountable plans are treated as available. (Employers can get Publication 1542
allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-having been reimbursed under a nonaccount- on the Internet, which gives the rates in the
quirements for the amount of your expensesable plan (discussed later). continental United States for the current year.)
only if all of the following conditions apply.Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- The standard meal allowance. The stan-
• Your employer reasonably limits paymentspenses. You may be reimbursed under your dard meal allowance (discussed earlier) is the
of your expenses to those that are ordi-employer's accountable plan for expenses re- federal rate for meals and incidental expenses
nary and necessary in the conduct of thelated to that employer's business, some of which (M&IE). The rate for most small localities in the
are deductible as employee business expenses trade or business. United States is $39 a day from January 1
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 181

through December 31, 2007. Most major cities b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of the Allowance more than the federal rate. If
your allowance is more than the federal rate,standard meal allowance amount forand many other localities qualify for higher rates.
your employer must include the allowancethe preceding day.The rates for all localities within the continental
amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of yourUnited States are listed in Publication 1542. You
Form W-2. This amount is not taxable. However,2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-can also find this information on the Internet at
the excess allowance will be included in box 1 oflowance using any method that you con-www.gsa.gov.
your Form W-2. You must report this part of yoursistently apply and that is in accordanceYou receive an allowance only for meals and allowance as if it were wage income.with reasonable business practice.incidental expenses when your employer does If your actual expenses are less than orone of the following. The standard mileage rate. This is a set equal to the federal rate, you do not complete
• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in rate per mile that you can use to compute your Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on
kind). deductible car expenses. For 2007, the standard your return.
mileage rate for the cost of operating your car is However, if your actual expenses are more• Reimburses you, based on your receipts, 481/2 cents per mile. than the federal rate, you can complete Formfor the actual cost of your lodging. 2106 and deduct those excess expenses. YouFixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is an• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your must report on Form 2106 your reimbursementsallowance your employer may use to reimburselodging. up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of youryour car expenses. Under this method, your Form W-2) and all your expenses. You should• Does not have a reasonable belief that employer pays an allowance that includes a be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.you had (or will have) lodging expenses, combination of payments covering fixed and va-
such as when you stay with friends or rela- riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to Example. Joe lives and works in Austin. Incover your variable operating costs (such astives or sleep in the cab of your truck. May his employer sent him to San Diego for 4gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your days and paid the hotel directly for Joe's hotel• Figures the allowance on a basis similar to fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay- bill. The employer reimbursed Joe $75 a day forthat used in computing your compensa- ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer his meals and incidental expenses. The federaltion, such as number of hours worked or chooses to use this method, your employer will rate for San Diego is $64 a day.miles traveled. request the necessary records from you. Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses
totaled $380. His employer's accountable planHigh-low rate. This is a simplified method Reporting your expenses with a per diem or will not pay more than $75 a day for travel to Sanof computing the federal per diem rate for travel car allowance. If your reimbursement is in the Diego, so Joe does not give his employer thewithin the continental United States. It elimi- form of an allowance received under an ac- records that prove that he actually spent $380.nates the need to keep a current list of the per countable plan, the following facts affect your However, he does account for the time, place,diem rate for each city. reporting. and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe'sUnder the high-low method, the per diem only business trip this year.• The federal rate.amount for travel during January through Sep- Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 × 4 days),tember of 2007 is $246 (including $58 for M&IE) • Whether the allowance or your actual ex- which is $44 more than the federal rate of $256for certain high-cost locations. All other areas penses were more than the federal rate. ($64 × 4 days). His employer includes the $44 ashave a per diem amount of $148 (including $45 income on Joe's Form W-2 in box 1. His em-The following discussions explain where to re-for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542 ployer also enters $256 in box 12 of Joe's Formport your expenses depending upon how thewhich gives the areas eligible for the $246 per W-2.amount of your allowance compares to the fed-diem amount under the high-low method for all eral rate. Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-or part of this period.) ductible expenses. He enters the total of hisAllowance less than or equal to the federal actual expenses for the year ($380) on FormEffective October 1, 2007, the per diem rate. If your allowance is less than or equal to 2106. He also enters the reimbursements thatrate under this method for certain the federal rate, the allowance will not be in- were not included in his income ($256). His totalhigh-cost locations decreased to $237
CAUTION
! cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do not deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is(including $58 for M&IE). The rate for all other need to report the related expenses or the allow- $124. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-locations increased to $152 (including $45 for ance on your return if your expenses are equal reimbursed meals and entertainment, he willM&IE). However, an employer can continue to to or less than the allowance. include the balance, $62, as an itemized deduc-use the rates described in the preceding para-  However, if your actual expenses are more tion on Schedule A (Form 1040).graph for the remainder of 2007 if those rates than your allowance, you can complete Formand locations are used consistently during Octo- 2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-ber, November, and December for all employ- ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex- Returning Excessees. Employers who did not use the high-low penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the Reimbursementsmethod during the first 9 months of 2007 cannot total amount of your expenses and reimburse-begin to use it before 2008. See Revenue Pro- ments for the entire year. If you are using the Under an accountable plan, you are required tocedure 2007-63 for more information. Also see standard meal allowance or the standard mile- return any excess reimbursement or other ex-Publication 1542 on the Internet at www.irs.gov. age rate, you do not have to prove that amount. pense allowances for your business expenses
to the person paying the reimbursement or al-Prorating the standard meal allowance on Example. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a year lowance. Excess reimbursement means anypartial days of travel. The standard meal al- for business. Under her employer's accountable amount for which you did not adequately ac-lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If you plan, she accounts for the time (dates), place, count within a reasonable period of time. Fortravel for part of a day, such as on the days you example, if you received a travel advance andand business purpose of each trip. Her em-depart and return, you must prorate the full-day you did not spend all the money on busi-ployer pays her a mileage allowance of 35 centsM&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em- ness-related expenses, or you do not have proofa mile.ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or of all your expenses, you have an excess reim-Since Nicole's $4,850 expenses computedthe high-low rate. bursement.under the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles ×You can use either of the following methods ªAdequate accountingº and ªreasonable pe-481/2 cents) are more than her $3,500 reim-to figure the federal M&IE for that day. riod of timeº were discussed earlier in this chap-bursement (10,000 miles × 35 cents), she item-
ter.izes her deductions to claim the excess1. Method 1:
expenses. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show-
a. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the ing all of her expenses and reimbursements) Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-
standard meal allowance amount for and enters $1,350 ($4,850 − $3,500) as an item- vance if your employer provides you with an
that day. ized deduction. expense allowance before you actually have the
Page 182 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

$63 will be reported on your Form W-2 asTable 26-3. Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses and
wages.Reimbursements
IF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee Nonaccountable Plansother expense allowance) reports on Form reports on
arrangement is under: W-2: Form 2106: * A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or
expense allowance arrangement that does notAn accountable plan with: meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier
under Accountable Plans.Actual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount.
Adequate accounting made and excess In addition, even if your employer has an
accountable plan, the following payments will bereturned.
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable
Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount No amount. plan.
Adequate accounting and return of as wages in box 1. • Excess reimbursements you fail to returnexcess both required but excess not
to your employer.returned.
• Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-Per diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount. All expenses and penses related to your employer's busi-federal rate: reimbursements only ness. See Reimbursement ofAdequate accounting made and excess if excess expenses nondeductible expenses earlier under Ac-returned. are claimed. countable Plans.
Otherwise, form is not
filed. If you are not sure if the reimbursement or
expense allowance arrangement is an account-Per diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount No amount. able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-federal rate: as wages in box 1. ployer.Adequate accounting and return of The amount up to
excess both required but excess not the federal rate is Reporting your expenses under a nonac-
returned. reported only in box countable plan. Your employer will combine
12Ðit is not the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-
reported in box 1. pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-
countable plan with your wages, salary, or otherPer diem or mileage allowance exceeds The excess amount All expenses (and pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1the federal rate: as wages in box 1. reimbursement of your Form W-2.Adequate accounting up to the federal The amount up to reported on Form  You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZrate only and excess not returned. the federal rate is W-2, box 12) only if and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-reported only in box expenses in excess of penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-12Ðit is not the federal rate are tertainment. Your meal and entertainmentreported in box 1. claimed. Otherwise, expenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis-form is not required. cussed earlier under Entertainment Expenses.
Also, your total expenses will be subject to theA nonaccountable plan with:
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount All expenses. to most miscellaneous itemized deductions on
Schedule A (Form 1040).excess, or both, not required by plan as wages in box 1.
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount All expenses. Example. Kim's employer gives her $1,000
as wages in box 1. a month ($12,000 for the year) for her business
expenses. Kim does not have to provide any* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
proof of her expenses to her employer, and Kim
can keep any funds that she does not spend.
Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex- Per diem allowance more than federal rate. countable plan. Her employer will include theIf your employer's accountable plan pays you anpected to be no more than your expense. Under $12,000 on Kim's Form W-2 as if it were wages.allowance that is higher than the federal rate,an accountable plan, you are required to ade- If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses,you do not have to return the difference betweenquately account to your employer for this ad- she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ andthe two rates for the period you can prove busi-vance and to return any excess within a itemize her deductions.ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif-reasonable period of time. ference will be reported as wages on your Form
If you do not adequately account for or do not W-2. This excess amount is considered paid Completing Formsreturn any excess advance within a reasonable under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later). 2106 and 2106-EZperiod of time, the amount you do not account
for or return will be treated as having been paid Example. Your employer sends you on a This section briefly describes how employeesunder a nonaccountable plan (discussed later). 5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2007 complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 26-3and gives you a $400 ($80 × 5 days) advance to explains what the employer reports on FormUnproven amounts. If you do not prove cover your meals and incidental expenses. The W-2 and what the employee reports on Formthat you actually traveled on each day for which federal per diem for meals and incidental ex- 2106. The instructions for the forms have moreyou received a per diem or car allowance (prov- penses for Phoenix is $59. Your trip lasts only 3 information on completing them.ing the elements described in Table 26-2), you days. Under your employer's accountable plan,
must return this unproved amount of the travel If you are self-employed, do not fileyou must return the $160 ($80 × 2 days) ad-
advance within a reasonable period of time. If Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report yourvance for the 2 days you did not travel. You do
you do not do this, the unproved amount will be expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or Fnot have to return the $63 difference between
CAUTION
!
considered paid under a nonaccountable plan (Form 1040). See the instructions for the formthe allowance you received and the federal rate
that you must file.(discussed later). for Phoenix (($80 − $59) × 3 days). However, the
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 183

Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use the 2106-EZ.) This includes any reimbursement re- 1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer-
shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee ported under code L in box 12 of Form W-2. tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-
business expenses. You can use this form if you ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, youAllocating your reimbursement. If youmeet all of the following conditions. figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 ofwere reimbursed under an accountable plan and Form 2106-EZ. See 50% Limit under Entertain-• You are an employee deducting expenses want to deduct excess expenses that were not ment Expenses, earlier.attributable to your job. reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-
bursement. This is necessary if your employer 2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-• You were not reimbursed by your em- pays your reimbursement in the following man- tions. If you are an employee, deduct em-ployer for your expenses (amounts in- ner: ployee business expenses (as figured on Formcluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Schedule Aconsidered reimbursements). • Pays you a single amount that covers (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de-meals and/or entertainment, as well as• If you are claiming car expenses, you use ductions, including employee business ex-other business expenses, andthe standard mileage rate. penses, are subject to a 2% limit. This limit is
• Does not clearly identify how much is for figured on line 26 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
deductible meals and/or entertainment.Car expenses. If you used a car to perform 3. Limit on total itemized deductions. If
your job as an employee, you may be able to You must allocate that single payment so that your adjusted gross income (line 38 of Form
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener- you know how much to enter on Form 2106, line 1040) is more than $156,400 ($78,200 if you are
ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then 7, Column A and Column B. married filing separately), the total of certain
claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A. itemized deductions, including employee busi-
Example. Rob's employer paid him an ex-Car expenses using the standard mileage rate ness expenses, may be limited. See chapter 29
pense allowance of $12,000 this year under ancan also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com- for more information on this limit.
accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con-pleting Part II and Part I, line 1.
sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for enter- Special RulesTransportation expenses. Show your trans- tainment and car expenses. Rob's employer did
portation expenses that did not involve overnight not clearly show how much of the $7,000 was for This section discusses special rules that applytravel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on the cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu- to Armed Forces reservists, government offi-Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on this ally spent $14,000 during the year ($5,500 for cials who are paid on a fee basis, performingline business expenses you have for parking airfare, $4,500 for entertainment, and $4,000 for artists, and disabled employees with impair-fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper- car expenses). ment-related work expenses.ating your car or expenses of commuting be- Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-
tween your home and work. tified, Rob knows that $5,200 of the payment Armed Forces reservists traveling more than
goes in Column A, line 7 of Form 2106. To 100 miles from home. If you are a member of
Employee business expenses other than allocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses the a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the
meals and entertainment. Show your other worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106. United States and you travel more than 100
employee business expenses on Form 2106, His completed worksheet follows. miles away from home in connection with your
lines 3 and 4, Column A, or Form 2106-EZ, lines performance of services as a member of the
3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals and 1. Enter the total amount of reserves, you can deduct your travel expenses
entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex- reimbursements your employer gave as an adjustment to gross income rather than as
you that were not reported to you inpenses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui- a miscellaneous itemized deduction. The
box 1 of Form W-2 ............ $7,000tion and books), office-in-the-home expenses, amount of expenses you can deduct as an ad-
2. Enter the total amount of yourand trade and professional publications. justment to gross income is limited to the regularexpenses for the periods covered by federal per diem rate (for lodging, meals, andIf line 4 expenses are the only ones you this reimbursement ............ 8,500 incidental expenses) and the standard mileageare claiming, you received no reim- 3. Of the amount on line 2, enter your rate (for car expenses) plus any parking fees,bursements (or the reimbursements total expense for meals and
TIP ferry fees, and tolls. The federal rate is explainedwere all included in box 1 of your Form W-2), entertainment ............... 4,500 earlier under Per Diem and Car Allowances. Anyand the Special Rules discussed later do not 4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the expenses in excess of these amounts can beapply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or result as a decimal (rounded to at claimed only as a miscellaneous itemized de-least three places) ............ .5292106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on duction subject to the 2% limit.Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the type 5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter theand amount of each expense on the dotted lines Member of a reserve component. You areresult here and in Column B, line 7 3,703and include the total on line 21. a member of a reserve component of the Armed6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter the
Forces of the United States if you are in theresult here and in Column A, line 7 $3,297
Meal and entertainment expenses. Show Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or CoastOn line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297the full amount of your expenses for busi- Guard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) inness-related meals and entertainment on Form United States, the Air National Guard of theColumn A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Column2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals while United States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub-B.away from your tax home overnight and other lic Health Service.
business meals and entertainment. Enter 50% How to report. If you have reserve-relatedAfter you complete the form. After you haveof the line 8, column B, meal and entertainment travel that takes you more than 100 miles fromcompleted your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, followexpenses on line 9, Column B. home, you should first complete Form 2106 orthe directions on that form to deduct your ex-If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses forpenses on the appropriate line of your tax return.amount of your meals and entertainment on the reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up toFor most taxpayers, this is line 21 of Schedule Aline to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or(Form 1040). However, if you are a government50%. Enter the result on line 5. Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040,official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,
line 24. Subtract this amount from the total onHours of service limits. If you are subject an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-
Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, andto the Department of Transportation's ªhours of ployee with impairment-related work expenses,
deduct the balance as an itemized deduction onserviceº limits, use 75% instead of 50% for see Special Rules, later.
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21.meals while away from your tax home.
Limits on employee business expenses. You cannot deduct expenses of travel that
Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line Your employee business expenses may be sub- does not take you more than 100 miles from
7, the amounts your employer (or third party) ject to any of the three limits described next. home as an adjustment to gross income. In-
reimbursed you that were not included in box 1 These limits are figured in the following order on stead, you must complete Form 2106 or
of your Form W-2. (You cannot use Form the specified form. 2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an
Page 184 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), Where to report.  If you meet all of the new line of merchandise to Town Department
line 21. above requirements, you should first complete Store, an old customer. While in Troy, he talks
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for TownOfficials paid on a fee basis. Certain performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 of Department Store, to discuss the new line. Hefee-basis officials can claim their employee busi-
Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106-EZ in the total later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to dinnerness expenses whether or not they itemize their
on line 24 of Form 1040. to discuss Attire Co.'s buying Fashion's new lineother deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Fee-basis officials are persons who are em- of clothing.If you do not meet all of the above require-
ployed by a state or local government and who ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex- Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2004.are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They penses as an adjustment to gross income. He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-can deduct their business expenses in perform- Instead, you must complete Form 2106 or pense purposes. He records his total mileage,ing services in that job as an adjustment to gross 2106-EZ and deduct your employee business business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for theincome rather than as a miscellaneous itemized expenses as an itemized deduction on Schedule year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-deduction. A (Form 1040), line 21. nent information in a travel expense log (notIf you are a fee-basis official, include your
shown). He obtains receipts for his expenses foremployee business expenses from Form 2106,
Impairment-related work expenses of dis-line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Form 1040, lodging and for any other expenses of $75 or
line 24. abled employees. If you are an employee more.
with a physical or mental disability, your impair- During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000Expenses of certain performing artists. If ment-related work expenses are not subject toyou are a performing artist, you may qualify to miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap-deduct your employee business expenses as an He answers all the questions in Part II of Formplies to most other employee business ex-adjustment to gross income rather than as a 2106-EZ and figures his car expense to bepenses. After you complete Form 2106 ormiscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify, $9,700 (20,000 × 48 1/2 cents per mile).2106-EZ, enter your impairment-related workyou must meet all of the following requirements. His total employee business expenses areexpenses from Form 2106, line 10, or Form
shown in the following table.1. During the tax year, you perform services 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),
in the performing arts as an employee for line 28, and identify the type and amount of this
 Type of Expense Amountat least two employers. expense on the dotted line next to line 28. Enter
your employee business expenses that are un- Parking fees and tolls .... $ 5202. You receive at least $200 each from any
Car expenses .......... 9,700related to your disability from Form 2106, linetwo of these employers.
Meals ............... 3,86110, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A, line3. Your related performing-arts business ex- Lodging, laundry, dry21.penses are more than 10% of your gross cleaning ............. 18,318Impairment-related work expenses are yourincome from the performance of those Entertainment ......... 3,250allowable expenses for attendant care at yourservices. Gifts, education, etc. ..... 650
workplace and other expenses you have in con- Total ............... $36,2994. Your adjusted gross income is not more nection with your workplace that are necessarythan $16,000 before deducting these busi- Bill received an allowance of $33,000for you to be able to work. For more information,ness expenses. ($2,750 per month) to help offset his expenses.see chapter 21.
Bill did not have to account to his employer forSpecial rules for married persons. If you the reimbursement, and the $33,000 was in-Illustrated Exampleare married, you must file a joint return unless cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.you lived apart from your spouse at all times
Bill Wilson is an employee of Fashion Clothingduring the tax year. Because Bill's reimbursement was included
Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a typical travel week,If you file a joint return, you must figure re- in his income and he is using the standard mile-
Bill leaves his home on Long Island on Mondayquirements (1), (2), and (3) separately for both age rate for his car expenses, he files Form
morning and drives to Albany to exhibit theyou and your spouse. However, requirement (4) 2106-EZ with his tax return. His filled-in form is
Fashion line for 3 days to prospective custom-applies to your and your spouse's combined shown on the next page.ers. Then he drives to Troy to show Fashion'sadjusted gross income.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 185

Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
9,700
520
18,318
32,744
15 2004
20,000 2,600 2,400
3,556
650
7,111
OMB No. 1545-0074
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multiply line 8a by 48.5¢
(.485)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and
entertainment
4
4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ × 50% (.50). (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred
while away from home on business by 75% (.75) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21
(or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR, line 9)). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local
government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the
instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2007)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate
for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2007.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements for this purpose).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2007, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2007 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
2007
1
Page 186 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

benefits even if you do not meet the require- Education Required byments listed earlier.
Employer or by LawAlso, keep in mind that your work-related27.
education expenses may qualify you to claim Once you have met the minimum educational
more than one tax benefit. Generally, you may requirements for your job, your employer or the
claim any number of benefits as long as you use law may require you to get more education. ThisTax Benefits for different expenses to figure each one. additional education is qualifying work-related
education if all three of the following require-When you figure your taxes, you may
ments are met.Work-Related want to compare these tax benefits so
you can choose the method(s) that
TIP • It is required for you to keep your present
give you the lowest tax liability. First, figure your salary, status, or job,Education taxes using the expenses as business deduc-
• The requirement serves a business pur-tions. Then, figure your taxes again using any of
pose of your employer, andthe other deductions and credits for which you
What's New qualify. You may find that a combination of • The education is not part of a program that
credit(s) and deduction(s) gives you the lowest will qualify you for a new trade or busi-
Standard mileage rate. Generally, if you ness.tax.
claim a business deduction for work-related ed-
ucation and you drive your car to and from When you get more education than your em-Useful Itemsschool, the amount you can deduct for miles ployer or the law requires, the additional educa-
You may want to see:driven during 2007 is 481/2 cents a mile. This is tion can be qualifying work-related education
up from 441/2 cents a mile in 2006. See Trans- only if it maintains or improves skills required in
Publicationportation Expenses under What Expenses Can your present work. See Education To Maintain
Be Deducted, for more information. or Improve Skills, below.❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Example. You are a teacher who has satis-
❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education fied the minimum requirements for teaching.
Your employer requires you to take an additionalReminder Form (and Instructions) college course each year to keep your teaching
job. If the courses will not qualify you for a new❏ 2106 Employee Business ExpensesLimit on itemized deductions. If your ad-
trade or business, they are qualifyingjusted gross income for 2007 is more than ❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee work-related education even if you eventually$156,400 ($78,200 if you are married filing sep- Business Expenses receive a master's degree and an increase inarately), your itemized deductions may be lim-
salary because of this extra education.❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemizedited. See chapter 29 for more information about
Deductionsthis limit.
Education To Maintain
or Improve Skills
Introduction If your education is not required by your em-Qualifying Work- ployer or the law, it can be qualifying work-This chapter discusses work-related education
related education only if it maintains or improvesexpenses that you may be able to deduct as Related Education skills needed in your present work. This couldbusiness expenses.
include refresher courses, courses on currentTo claim such a deduction, you must: You can deduct the costs of qualifying work- developments, and academic or vocationalrelated education as business expenses. This is• Be working, courses.education that meets at least one of the follow-• Itemize your deductions on Schedule A ing two tests. Example. You repair televisions, radios,(Form 1040) if you are an employee,
and stereo systems for XYZ Store. To keep up• The education is required by your em-• File Schedule C (Form 1040), Schedule with the latest changes, you take specialployer or the law to keep your presentC-EZ (Form 1040), or Schedule F (Form courses in radio and stereo service. Thesesalary, status, or job. The required educa-1040) if you are self-employed, and courses maintain and improve skills required intion must serve a bona fide business pur-
• Have expenses for education that meet your work.pose of your employer.
the requirements discussed under Qualify-
ing Work-Related Education. • The education maintains or improves skills Maintaining skills vs. qualifying for new job.
needed in your present work. Education to maintain or improve skills needed
If you are an employee and able to itemize in your present work is not qualifying education if
your deductions, you may be able to claim a However, even if the education meets one or it will also qualify you for a new trade or busi-
deduction for the expenses you pay for your both of the above tests, it is not qualifying ness.
work-related education. Your deduction will be work-related education if it: Temporary absence. If you stop workingthe amount by which your qualifying
• Is needed to meet the minimum educa- for a year or less in order to get education towork-related education expenses plus other job
maintain or improve skills needed in your pres-tional requirements of your present tradeand certain miscellaneous expenses is greater
ent work and then return to the same generalor business, orthan 2% of your adjusted gross income. See
type of work, your absence is considered tempo-chapter 28. • Is part of a program of study that will qual- rary. Education that you get during a temporaryIf you are self-employed, you deduct your ify you for a new trade or business. absence is qualifying work-related education if itexpenses for qualifying work-related education
maintains or improves skills needed in yourdirectly from your self-employment income. You can deduct the costs of qualifying present work.Your work-related education expenses may work-related education as a business expensealso qualify you for other tax benefits, such as even if the education could lead to a degree. Example. You quit your biology researchthe tuition and fees deduction (see chapter 19)
Use Figure 27-A, later, as a quick check to job to become a full-time biology graduate stu-and the Hope and lifetime learning credits (see
see if your education qualifies. dent for one year. If you return to work in biologychapter 35). You may qualify for these other
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 187

research after completing the courses, the edu- when you become a faculty member. You gen- qualifying work-related education unless it is
erally will be considered a faculty member whencation is related to your present work even if you part of a program of study that will qualify you for
one or more of the following occurs.do not go back to work with the same employer. a new trade or business.
• You have tenure.Indefinite absence. If you stop work for
Example 2. Assume the same facts as inmore than a year, your absence from your job is • Your years of service count toward ob- Example 1 except that you have a bachelor'sconsidered indefinite. Education during an in- taining tenure.
degree and only six professional educationdefinite absence, even if it maintains or im-
• You have a vote in faculty decisions. courses. The additional four education coursesproves skills needed in the work from which you
can be qualifying work-related education. Al-are absent, is considered to qualify you for a • Your school makes contributions for you to
though you do not have all the required courses,a retirement plan other than social securitynew trade or business. Therefore, it is not quali-
or a similar program.fying work-related education. you have already met the minimum educational
requirements.
Example 1. The law in your state requiresEducation To Meet Example 3. Assume the same facts as inbeginning secondary school teachers to have aMinimum Requirements Example 1 except that you are hired with only 3bachelor's degree, including 10 professional ed-
years of college. The courses you take that leaducation courses. In addition, to keep the job, aEducation you need to meet the minimum edu- to a bachelor's degree (including those in edu-teacher must complete a fifth year of trainingcational requirements for your present trade or within 10 years from the date of hire. If the cation) are not qualifying work-related educa-business is not qualifying work-related educa- employing school certifies to the state Depart- tion. They are needed to meet the minimumtion. The minimum educational requirements ment of Education that qualified teachers cannot educational requirements for employment as aare determined by: be found, the school can hire persons with only 3 teacher.years of college. However, to keep their jobs,• Laws and regulations,
these teachers must get a bachelor's degree Example 4. You have a bachelor's degree• Standards of your profession, trade, or and the required professional education courses and you work as a temporary instructor at abusiness, and within 3 years. university. At the same time, you take graduateUnder these facts, the bachelor's degree,• Your employer. courses toward an advanced degree. The ruleswhether or not it includes the 10 professional of the university state that you can become aeducation courses, is considered the minimumOnce you have met the minimum educational faculty member only if you get a graduate de-educational requirement for qualification as arequirements that were in effect when you were gree. Also, you can keep your job as an instruc-teacher in your state.hired, you do not have to meet any new mini- tor only as long as you show satisfactoryIf you have all the required education exceptmum educational requirements. This means progress toward getting this degree. You havethe fifth year, you have met the minimum educa-that if the minimum requirements change after
not met the minimum educational requirementstional requirements. The fifth year of training isyou were hired, any education you need to meet
the new requirements can be qualifying educa-
tion.
You have not necessarily met the mini-
mum educational requirements of your
trade or business simply because you
CAUTION
!
are already doing the work.
Example 1. You are a full-time engineering
student. Although you have not received your
degree or certification, you work part time as an
engineer for a firm that will employ you as a
full-time engineer after you finish college. Al-
though your college engineering courses im-
prove your skills in your present job, they are
also needed to meet the minimum job require-
ments for a full-time engineer. The education is
not qualifying work-related education.
Example 2. You are an accountant and you
have met the minimum educational require-
ments of your employer. Your employer later
changes the minimum educational requirements
and requires you to take college courses to keep
your job. These additional courses can be quali-
fying work-related education because you have
already satisfied the minimum requirements that
were in effect when you were hired.
Requirements for Teachers
States or school districts usually set the mini-
mum educational requirements for teachers.
The requirement is the college degree or the
minimum number of college hours usually re-
quired of a person hired for that position.
If there are no requirements, you will have
met the minimum educational requirements
Figure 27-A. Does Your Work-Related Education Qualify?
Start Here
Yes
Is the education required
by your employer or the
law to keep your present
salary, status, or job?
Does the requirement
serve a bona fide
business requirement of
your employer?
Is the education needed to meet
the minimum educational
requirements of your present
trade or business?
Is the education part of a
program of study that will
qualify you for a new
trade or business?
Does the education
maintain or improve skills
needed in your present
work?
Your education is not
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Your education is
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
Page 188 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

to qualify you as a faculty member. The gradu- education. They are part of a program of study Attendance on a temporary basis. You go
ate courses are not qualifying work-related edu- to school on a temporary basis if either of thethat can qualify you for a new profession.
cation. following situations applies to you.
1. Your attendance at school is realisticallyCertification in a new state. Once you have Teaching and Related Duties
expected to last 1 year or less and doesmet the minimum educational requirements for
indeed last for 1 year or less.All teaching and related duties are consideredteachers for your state, you are considered to
have met the minimum educational require- the same general kind of work. A change in 2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis-ments in all states. This is true even if you must duties in any of the following ways is not consid- tically expected to last 1 year or less, butget additional education to be certified in an- ered a change to a new business. at a later date your attendance is reasona-other state. Any additional education you need bly expected to last more than 1 year. Your• Elementary school teacher to secondaryis qualifying work-related education. You have attendance will be considered temporaryschool teacher.already met the minimum requirements for up to the date you determine it will lastteaching. Teaching in another state is not a new • Teacher of one subject, such as biology, more than 1 year.trade or business. to teacher of another subject, such as art.
• Classroom teacher to guidance counselor.Example. You hold a permanent teaching Note. If you are in either situation (1) or (2)
certificate in State A and are employed as a above, your attendance is not temporary if facts• Classroom teacher to school administra-
teacher in that state for several years. You move and circumstances indicate otherwise.tor.
to State B and are promptly hired as a teacher. Attendance not on a temporary basis.You are required, however, to complete certain You do not go to school on a temporary basis ifprescribed courses to get a permanent teaching either of the following situations apply to you.certificate in State B. These additional courses
are qualifying work-related education because 1. Your attendance at school is realisticallyWhat Expenses Can Bethe teaching position in State B involves the expected to last more than 1 year. It doessame general kind of work for which you were not matter how long you actually attend.Deductedqualified in State A.
2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis-If your education meets the requirements de- tically expected to last 1 year or less, butscribed earlier under Qualifying Work-RelatedEducation That at a later date your attendance is reasona-Education, you can generally deduct your edu- bly expected to last more than 1 year. YourQualifies You for a cation expenses as business expenses. If you attendance is not temporary after the dateNew Trade or Business are not self-employed, you can deduct business you determine it will last more than 1 year.expenses only if you itemize your deductions.Education that is part of a program of study that You cannot deduct expenses related towill qualify you for a new trade or business is not
tax-exempt and excluded income.qualifying work-related education. This is true Deductible Transportation
even if you do not plan to enter that trade or Expensesbusiness. Deductible expenses. The following educa-
If you are an employee, a change of duties If you are regularly employed and go directlytion expenses can be deducted.
that involves the same general kind of work is from home to school on a temporary basis, you• Tuition, books, supplies, lab fees, and sim-not a new trade or business. can deduct the round-trip costs of transportationilar items. between your home and school. This is true
Example 1. You are an accountant. Your regardless of the location of the school, the• Certain transportation and travel costs.
employer requires you to get a law degree at distance traveled, or whether you attend school• Other education expenses, such as costsyour own expense. You register at a law school on nonwork days.of research and typing when writing a pa-for the regular curriculum that leads to a law Transportation expenses include the actualper as part of an educational program.degree. Even if you do not intend to become a costs of bus, subway, cab, or other fares, as welllawyer, the education is not qualifying because as the costs of using your car. Transportationthe law degree will qualify you for a new trade or Nondeductible expenses. You cannot de- expenses do not include amounts spent forbusiness. duct personal or capital expenses. For example, travel, meals, or lodging while you are away
you cannot deduct the dollar value of vacation from home overnight.Example 2. You are a general practitioner time or annual leave you take to attend classes.of medicine. You take a 2-week course to review This amount is a personal expense. Example 1. You regularly work in a nearbydevelopments in several specialized fields of town, and go directly from work to home. Youmedicine. The course does not qualify you for a Unclaimed reimbursement. If you do not also attend school every work night for 3 monthsnew profession. It is qualifying work-related edu- claim reimbursement that you are entitled to to take a course that improves your job skills.cation because it maintains or improves skills receive from your employer, you cannot deduct Since you are attending school on a temporaryrequired in your present profession. the expenses that apply to the reimbursement. basis, you can deduct your daily round-trip
transportation expenses in going between homeExample 3. While working in the private Example. Your employer agrees to pay and school. This is true regardless of the dis-practice of psychiatry, you enter a program to your education expenses if you file a voucher tance traveled.study and train at an accredited psychoanalytic showing your expenses. You do not file a
institute. The program will lead to qualifying you voucher, and you do not get reimbursed. Be- Example 2. Assume the same facts as into practice psychoanalysis. The psychoanalytic cause you did not file a voucher, you cannot Example 1 except that on certain nights you gotraining does not qualify you for a new profes- deduct the expenses on your tax return. directly from work to school and then home. Yousion. It is qualifying work-related education be-
can deduct your transportation expenses fromcause it maintains or improves skills required in
Transportation Expenses your regular work site to school and then home.your present profession.
If your education qualifies, you can deduct local Example 3. Assume the same facts as in
transportation costs of going directly from work Example 1 except that you attend the school forBar or CPA Review Course to school. If you are regularly employed and go 9 months on Saturdays, nonwork days. Since
to school on a temporary basis, you can also you are attending school on a temporary basis,Review courses to prepare for the bar examina-
deduct the costs of returning from school to you can deduct your round-trip transportationtion or the certified public accountant (CPA) ex-
home. expenses in going between home and school.amination are not qualifying work-related
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 189

Example 4. Assume the same facts as in She took one course, which is one-fourth of a law, for example, as a tuition and fees
Example 1 except that you attend classes twice full course load of study. She spent the rest of deduction. See chapter 19. 
a week for 15 months. Since your attendance in the time on personal activities. Her reasons for • Deduct work-related education expensesschool is not considered temporary, you cannot taking the course in Michigan were all personal. paid with tax-free scholarship, grant, ordeduct your transportation expenses in going Sue's trip is mainly personal because employer-provided educational assis-between home and school. If you go directly three-fourths of her time is considered personal tance. See Adjustments to Qualifyingfrom work to school, you can deduct the time. She cannot deduct the cost of her
Work-Related Education Expenses, be-one-way transportation expenses of going from round-trip train ticket to Michigan. She can de-
low.work to school. If you go from work to home to duct one-fourth of the meals (subject to the 50%
school and return home, your transportation ex- limit) and lodging costs for the time she attended
penses cannot be more than if you had gone the university. Adjustments to Qualifyingdirectly from work to school. Work-Related Education ExpensesExample 3. Dave works in Nashville and
Using your car. If you use your car (whether recently traveled to California to take a 2-week If you pay qualifying work-related education ex-you own or lease it) for transportation to school, seminar. The seminar is qualifying work-related penses with certain tax-free funds, you cannotyou can deduct your actual expenses or use the education. claim a deduction for those amounts. You muststandard mileage rate to figure the amount you While there, he spent an extra 8 weeks on reduce the qualifying expenses by the amount ofcan deduct. The standard mileage rate for miles personal activities. The facts, including the extra any tax-free educational assistance you re-driven during 2007 is 481/2 cents a mile. Which- 8-week stay, show that his main purpose was to ceived.ever method you use, you can also deduct park- take a vacation.
Tax-free educational assistance includes:ing fees and tolls. See chapter 26 for information Dave cannot deduct his round-trip airfare or
on deducting your actual expenses of using a his meals and lodging for the 8 weeks. He can • The tax-free part of scholarships and fel-car. deduct only his expenses for meals (subject to lowships (see chapter 1 of Publication
the 50% limit) and lodging for the 2 weeks he 970),attended the seminar.Travel Expenses • Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publication
Cruises and conventions. Certain cruises 970),You can deduct expenses for travel, meals (see and conventions offer seminars or courses as50% limit on meals, later), and lodging if you • Employer-provided educational assistancepart of their itinerary. Even if the seminars ortravel overnight mainly to obtain qualifying (see chapter 11 of Publication 970),courses are work related, your deduction forwork-related education. travel may be limited. This applies to: • Veterans' educational assistance (seeTravel expenses for qualifying work-related
chapter 1 of Publication 970), and• Travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or othereducation are treated the same as travel ex-
form of luxury water transportation, andpenses for other employee business purposes. • Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments
For more information, see chapter 26. (other than gifts or inheritances) received• Conventions outside the North American
for education assistance.area.You cannot deduct expenses for per-
sonal activities, such as sightseeing,
For a discussion of the limits on travel ex-visiting, or entertaining.
CAUTION
! Amounts that do not reduce qualifying
pense deductions that apply to cruises and con- work-related education expenses. Do notventions, see Luxury Water Travel and reduce the qualifying work-related education ex-Mainly personal travel. If your travel away Conventions in Publication 463.from home is mainly personal, you cannot de- penses by amounts paid with funds the student
duct all of your expenses for travel, meals, and receives as:50% limit on meals. You can deduct onlylodging. You can deduct only your expenses for 50% of the cost of your meals while traveling • Payment for services, such as wages,lodging and 50% of your expenses for meals away from home to obtain qualifyingduring the time you attend the qualified educa- • A loan,work-related education. You cannot have beentional activities. reimbursed for the meals. • A gift,Whether a trip's purpose is mainly personal Employees must use Form 2106 or Formor educational depends upon the facts and cir- • An inheritance, or2106-EZ to apply the 50% limit.cumstances. An important factor is the compari- • A withdrawal from the student's personalson of time spent on personal activities with time savings.spent on educational activities. If you spend Travel as Educationmore time on personal activities, the trip is con- Also, do not reduce the qualifyingsidered mainly educational only if you can show You cannot deduct the cost of travel as a form of work-related education expenses by any schol-a substantial nonpersonal reason for traveling to education even if it is directly related to your arship or fellowship reported as income on thea particular location. duties in your work or business. student's return or any scholarship which, by its
terms, cannot be applied to qualifyingExample 1. John works in Newark, New Example. You are a French language work-related education expenses.Jersey. He traveled to Chicago to take a deducti- teacher. While on sabbatical leave granted for
ble 1-week course at the request of his em- travel, you traveled through France to improve
ployer. His main reason for going to Chicago your knowledge of the French language. You
was to take the course. chose your itinerary and most of your activities
While there, he took a sightseeing trip, enter- to improve your French language skills. You Reimbursementstained some friends, and took a side trip to cannot deduct your travel expenses as educa-
Pleasantville for a day. tion expenses. This is true even if you spent How you treat reimbursements depends on theSince the trip was mainly for business, John most of your time learning French by visiting arrangement you have with your employer.can deduct his round-trip airfare to Chicago. He French schools and families, attending movies There are two basic types of reimbursementcannot deduct his transportation expenses of or plays, and engaging in similar activities. arrangementsÐaccountable plans and nonac-going to Pleasantville. He can deduct only the countable plans. You can tell the type of planmeals (subject to the 50% limit) and lodging No Double Benefit Allowed you are reimbursed under by the way the reim-connected with his educational activities.
bursement is reported on your Form W-2.
You cannot do either of the following. For information about how to treat reim-Example 2. Sue works in Boston. She went
bursements under both accountable and nonac-to a university in Michigan to take a course for • Deduct work-related education expenses
countable plans, see Reimbursements inwork. The course is qualifying work-related edu- as business expenses if you deduct these
chapter 26.cation. expenses under any other provision of the
Page 190 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

and for impairment-related work expenses are
explained below.)Deducting Business
Using Form 2106-EZ. This form is shorter 28.and easier to use than Form 2106. Generally,Expenses
you can use this form if:
Self-employed persons and employees report • All reimbursements, if any, are included inbusiness expenses differently. box 1 of your Form W-2, and Miscellaneous
The following information explains what • You are using the standard mileage rate ifforms you must use to deduct the cost of your you are claiming vehicle expenses. Deductionsqualifying work-related education as a business
expense. If you do not meet both of these requirements,
use Form 2106.
Self-Employed Persons What's NewPerforming Artists andIf you are self-employed, you must report the
Limit on itemized deductions. The amountcost of your qualifying work-related education on Fee-Basis Officials
of adjusted gross income allowed without limit-the appropriate form used to report your busi-
ing your itemized deductions has increased. Forness income and expenses (generally Schedule If you are a qualified performing artist, or a state
2007, if your adjusted gross income is more thanC, C-EZ, or F). If your educational expenses (or local) government official who is paid in
$156,400 ($78,200 if you are married filing sep-include expenses for a car or truck, travel, or whole or in part on a fee basis, you can deduct
arately), you may have to reduce the amount ofmeals, report those expenses the same way you the cost of your qualifying work-related educa-
certain itemized deductions, including most mis-report other business expenses for those items. tion as an adjustment to gross income rather
cellaneous deductions. For more informationSee the instructions for the form you file for than as an itemized deduction.
and a worksheet, see the instructions for Sched-information on how to complete it. Include the cost of your qualifying
ule A (Form 1040), line 29, or chapter 29.work-related education with any other employee
business expenses on Form 1040, line 24. YouEmployees do not have to itemize your deductions on
Schedule A (Form 1040), and, therefore, theIf you are an employee, you can deduct the cost
deduction is not subject to theof qualifying work-related education only if you: Introduction2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. You must
complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ to figure your1. Did not receive any reimbursement from This chapter explains which expenses you can
deduction, even if you meet the requirementsyour employer, claim as miscellaneous itemized deductions on
described earlier under Form not required. Schedule A (Form 1040). You must reduce the2. Were reimbursed under a nonaccountable For more information on qualified performing total of most miscellaneous itemized deductionsplan (amount is included in box 1 of Form artists, see Publication 463. by 2% of your adjusted gross income. This chap-W-2), or ter covers the following topics.
3. Received reimbursement under an ac- Impairment-Related Work • Deductions subject to the 2% limit.countable plan, but the amount received
Expenseswas less than your expenses. • Deductions not subject to the 2% limit.
If either (1) or (2) applies, you can deduct the • Expenses you cannot deduct.If you are disabled and have impairment-related
total qualifying cost. If (3) applies, you can de- work expenses that are necessary for you to be
duct only the qualifying costs that were more able to get qualifying work-related education, You must keep records to verify yourthan your reimbursement. you can deduct these expenses on Schedule A deductions. You should keep receipts,
(Form 1040), line 28. They are not subject to the canceled checks, substitute checks, fi-In order to deduct the cost of your qualifying
RECORDS
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. To deduct nancial account statements, and other docu-work-related education as a business expense,
these expenses, you must complete Form 2106 mentary evidence. For more information oninclude the amount with your deduction for any
or 2106-EZ, even if you meet the requirements, recordkeeping, get Publication 552, Record-other employee business expenses on Sched-
described earlier under Form not required. keeping for Individuals.ule A (Form 1040), line 21. (Special rules for
For more information on impairment-relatedexpenses of certain performing artists and
work expenses, see Publication 463.fee-basis officials and for impairment-related Useful Itemswork expenses are explained later.)
You may want to see:This deduction is subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies PublicationRecordkeepingto most miscellaneous itemized deductions. See
chapter 28. ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
ExpensesYou must keep records as proof of anyForm 2106 or 2106-EZ. To figure your deduc- deduction claimed on your tax return. ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductionstion for employee business expenses, including Generally, you should keep your rec-
RECORDSqualifying work-related education, you generally ❏ 535 Business Expensesords for 3 years from the date of filing the taxmust complete Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ. return and claiming the deduction. ❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home
Form not required. Do not complete either (Including Use by DaycareFor specific information about keeping rec-
Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ if: Providers)ords of business expenses, see Recordkeeping
in chapter 26.• All reimbursements, if any, were included ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
in box 1 of your Form W-2, and
Form (and Instructions)• You are not claiming travel, transportation,
meal, or entertainment expenses. ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions
If you meet both of these requirements, enter ❏ 2106 Employee Business Expensesthe expenses directly on Schedule A (Form
1040), line 21. (Special rules for expenses of ❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee
certain performing artists and fee-basis officials Business Expenses
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 191

can deduct the rest of those expenses that areBusiness Liability Insurance
ordinary and necessary as an itemized deduc-
Deductions Subject You can deduct insurance premiums you paid tion subject to the 2% limit. For information on
for protection against personal liability for educator expenses that you can take as an
to the 2% Limit wrongful acts on the job. adjustment to gross income, see chapter 26.
You can deduct certain expenses as miscellane-
ous itemized deductions on Schedule A Damages for Breach of Home Office
(Form 1040). You can claim the amount of ex- Employment Contract
If you use a part of your home regularly andpenses that is more than 2% of your adjusted
exclusively for business purposes, you may beIf you break an employment contract, you cangross income. You figure your deduction on
able to deduct a part of the operating expensesdeduct damages you pay your former employerSchedule A by subtracting 2% of your adjusted
and depreciation of your home.that are attributable to the pay you received fromgross income from the total amount of these
that employer. You can claim this deduction for the busi-expenses. Your adjusted gross income is the
ness use of a part of your home only if you useamount on Form 1040, line 38. that part of your home regularly and exclusively:
Generally, you apply the 2% limit after you Depreciation on Computers or Cell • As your principal place of business for anyapply any other deduction limit. For example, Phones trade or business,you apply the 50% (or 75%) limit on busi-
ness-related meals and entertainment (dis- You can claim a depreciation deduction for a • As a place to meet or deal with your pa-
computer or cell phone that you use in your work tients, clients, or customers in the normalcussed in chapter 26) before you apply the 2%
as an employee if its use is: course of your trade or business, orlimit.
Deductions subject to the 2% limit are dis- • For the convenience of your employer, • In the case of a separate structure not
cussed in the three categories in which you and attached to your home, in connection with
your trade or business.report them on Schedule A. • Required as a condition of your employ-
ment.• Unreimbursed employee expenses (line The regular and exclusive business use must21). be for the convenience of your employer and notFor more information about the rules and ex- just appropriate and helpful in your job. Get• Tax preparation fees (line 22). ceptions to the rules affecting the allowable de- Publication 587 for more detailed informationductions for a home computer or cell phone, see• Other expenses (line 23). and a worksheet.Publication 529.
Unreimbursed Employee Job Search ExpensesDues to Chambers of CommerceExpenses (Line 21) and Professional Societies You can deduct certain expenses you have in
looking for a new job in your present occupation,You can deduct only unreimbursed employee You may be able to deduct dues paid to profes- even if you do not get a new job. You cannotexpenses that are: sional organizations (such as bar associations deduct these expenses if:and medical associations) and to chambers of• Paid or incurred during your tax year,
• You are looking for a job in a new occupa-commerce and similar organizations, if member-• For carrying on your trade or business of tion,ship helps you carry out the duties of your job.being an employee, and Similar organizations include: • There was a substantial break between
• Ordinary and necessary. the ending of your last job and your look-• Boards of trade,
ing for a new one, or• Business leagues, An expense is ordinary if it is common and
• You are looking for a job for the first time.accepted in your trade, business, or profession. • Civic or public service organizations,
An expense is necessary if it is appropriate and
• Real estate boards, andhelpful to your business. An expense does not Employment and outplacement agency fees.
You can deduct employment and outplacementhave to be required to be considered necessary. • Trade associations.
agency fees you pay in looking for a new job inExamples of unreimbursed employee ex- your present occupation.You cannot deduct dues paid to an organiza-penses are listed next. The list is followed by
tion if one of its main purposes is to:discussions of additional unreimbursed em- Employer pays you back. If, in a later year,
your employer pays you back for employmentployee expenses. • Conduct entertainment activities for mem-
agency fees, you must include the amount youbers or their guests, or• Business bad debt of an employee. receive in your gross income up to the amount of• Provide members or their guests with ac- your tax benefit in the earlier year. (See Recov-• Education that is work related. (See chap- cess to entertainment facilities. eries in chapter 12.)ter 27.)
Employer pays the employment agency.• Legal fees related to your job.  Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon
If your employer pays the fees directly to theclubs are not deductible. See Club Dues under• Licenses and regulatory fees. employment agency and you are not responsi-Nondeductible Expenses, later.
ble for them, you do not include them in your• Malpractice insurance premiums.
Lobbying and political activities. You may gross income.• Medical examinations required by an em- not be able to deduct that part of your dues thatployer. RÂ esumÂ e.You can deduct amounts you spendis for certain lobbying and political activities. See
for preparing and mailing copies of a rÂ esumÂ e toDues used for lobbying under Lobbying Ex-• Occupational taxes.
prospective employers if you are looking for apenses, later.• Passport for a business trip. new job in your present occupation.
• Subscriptions to professional journals and
Travel and transportation expenses. If youEducator Expenses over Limittrade magazines related to your work. travel to an area and, while there, you look for a
• Travel, transportation, entertainment, and If you were an eligible educator in 2007, and you new job in your present occupation, you may be
gifts related to your work. (See chapter had qualified educator expenses that you can- able to deduct travel expenses to and from the
26.) not take as an adjustment to gross income, you area. You can deduct the travel expenses if the
Page 192 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

trip is primarily to look for a new job. The amount You can also deduct assessments for benefit You can deduct the cost of your uniforms if
payments to unemployed union members. How-of time you spend on personal activity compared you are a civilian faculty or staff member of a
ever, you cannot deduct the part of the assess-to the amount of time you spend in looking for military school.
ments or contributions that provides funds forwork is important in determining whether the trip
the payment of sick, accident, or death benefits.is primarily personal or is primarily to look for a Tax Preparation FeesAlso, you cannot deduct contributions to a pen-new job.
sion fund, even if the union requires you to make (Line 22)Even if you cannot deduct the travel ex- the contributions.penses to and from an area, you can deduct the You can usually deduct tax preparation fees inYou may not be able to deduct amounts youexpenses of looking for a new job in your pres- pay to the union that are related to certain lobby- the year you pay them. Thus, on your 2007ent occupation while in the area. ing and political activities. See Lobbying Ex- return, you can deduct fees paid in 2007 forYou can choose to use the standard mileage penses under Nondeductible Expenses, later. preparing your 2006 return. These fees includerate to figure your car expenses. The rate for the cost of tax preparation software programsbusiness use of a vehicle is 481/2 cents per mile. and tax publications. They also include any feeSee chapter 26 for more information. Work Clothes and Uniforms you paid for electronic filing of your return. How-
ever, if you paid your tax by credit card, youYou can deduct the cost and upkeep of work cannot deduct the convenience fee you wereLicenses and Regulatory Fees clothes if the following two requirements are charged.met.
You can deduct the amount you pay each year
• You must wear them as a condition ofto state or local governments for licenses and Other Expenses (Line 23)your employment.regulatory fees for your trade, business, or pro-
fession. You can deduct certain other expenses as mis-• The clothes are not suitable for everyday
wear. cellaneous itemized deductions subject to the
2% limit. These are expenses you pay:
Occupational Taxes It is not enough that you wear distinc- 1. To produce or collect income that must be
tive clothing. The clothing must be spe-You can deduct an occupational tax charged at included in your gross income,cifically required by your employer. Nor
CAUTION
!a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of working 2. To manage, conserve, or maintain prop-is it enough that you do not, in fact, wear youror conducting a business in the locality. If you erty held for producing such income, orwork clothes away from work. The clothing mustare an employee, you can claim occupational not be suitable for taking the place of your regu- 3. To determine, contest, pay, or claim a re-taxes only as a miscellaneous deduction subject lar clothing. fund of any tax.to the 2% limit; you cannot claim them as a
Examples of workers who may be able todeduction for taxes elsewhere on your return. You can deduct expenses you pay for the pur-deduct the cost and upkeep of work clothes are:
poses in (1) and (2) above only if they are rea-delivery workers, firefighters, health care work-
sonably and closely related to these purposes.ers, law enforcement officers, letter carriers,Repayment of Income Aid Payment Some of these other expenses are explained inprofessional athletes, and transportation work-
the following discussions.ers (air, rail, bus, etc.).An ªincome aid paymentº is one that is received
Musicians and entertainers can deduct the If the expenses you pay produce income thatunder an employer's plan to aid employees who
cost of theatrical clothing and accessories that is only partially taxable, see Tax-Exempt Incomelose their jobs because of lack of work. If you
are not suitable for everyday wear. Expenses, later, under Nondeductible Ex-repay a lump-sum income aid payment that you
However, work clothing consisting of white penses.received and included in income in an earlier
cap, white shirt or white jacket, white bib over-year, you can deduct the repayment.
alls, and standard work shoes, which a painter is
required by his union to wear on the job, is not Appraisal Fees
distinctive in character or in the nature of aResearch Expenses of a College uniform. Similarly, the costs of buying and main- You can deduct appraisal fees if you pay them toProfessor taining blue work clothes worn by a welder at the figure a casualty loss or the fair market value of
request of a foreman are not deductible. donated property.If you are a college professor, you can deduct
research expenses, including travel expenses, Protective clothing. You can deduct the costfor teaching, lecturing, or writing and publishing of protective clothing required in your work, such Certain Casualty and Theft Losseson subjects that relate directly to your teaching as safety shoes or boots, safety glasses, hard
duties. You must have undertaken the research hats, and work gloves. You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as aas a means of carrying out the duties expected Examples of workers who may be required to miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to theof a professor and without expectation of profit wear safety items are: carpenters, cement work- 2% limit if you used the damaged or stolenapart from salary. However, you cannot deduct ers, chemical workers, electricians, fishing boat property in performing services as an employee.the cost of travel as a form of education. crew members, machinists, oil field workers, First report the loss in Section B of Form 4684,pipe fitters, steamfitters, and truck drivers. Casualties and Thefts. You may also have to
include the loss on Form 4797, Sales of Busi-Military uniforms. You generally cannot de-Tools Used in Your Work ness Property, if you are otherwise required toduct the cost of your uniforms if you are on
file that form. To figure your deduction, add allGenerally, you can deduct amounts you spend full-time active duty in the armed forces. How-
casualty or theft losses from this type of propertyfor tools used in your work if the tools wear out ever, if you are an armed forces reservist, you
included on Form 4684, lines 32 and 38b, orand are thrown away within 1 year from the date can deduct the unreimbursed cost of your uni-
Form 4797, line 18a. For other casualty and theftform if military regulations restrict you fromof purchase. You can depreciate the cost of
wearing it except while on duty as a reservist. In losses, see chapter 25.tools that have a useful life substantially beyond
figuring the deduction, you must reduce the costthe tax year. For more information about depre-
by any nontaxable allowance you receive forciation, see Publication 946.
these expenses. Clerical Help and Office Rent
If local military rules do not allow you to wear
You can deduct office expenses, such as rentfatigue uniforms when you are off duty, you canUnion Dues and Expenses
and clerical help, that you have in connectiondeduct the amount by which the cost of buying
You can deduct dues and initiation fees you pay with your investments and collecting the taxableand keeping up these uniforms is more than the
for union membership. income on them.uniform allowance you receive.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 193

the partnership's operating expenses as miscel- (Schedule C or C-EZ), rentals or royaltiesDepreciation on Home Computer
(Schedule E), or farm income and expenseslaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2%
You can deduct depreciation on your home (Schedule F) on the appropriate schedule. Youlimit. However, if the investment club partner-
computer if you use it to produce income (for deduct expenses of resolving nonbusiness taxship has investments that also produce nontax-
example, to manage your investments that pro- issues on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Taxable income, you cannot deduct your share of
duce taxable income). You generally must de- Preparation Fees, earlier.the partnership's expenses that produce thepreciate the computer using the straight line nontaxable income.method over the Alternative Depreciation Sys-
tem (ADS) recovery period. But if you work as an Loss on Deposits
Publicly offered mutual funds. Publicly of-employee and also use the computer in that
For information on whether, and if so, how, youfered mutual funds do not pass deductions forwork, see Publication 946.
may deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualifiedinvestment expenses through to shareholders.
financial institution, see Loss on Deposits inA mutual fund is ªpublicly offeredº if it is:
chapter 25.Excess Deductions of an Estate • Continuously offered pursuant to a public
offering,If an estate's total deductions in its last tax year
are more than its gross income for that year, the Repayments of Income• Regularly traded on an established securi-
beneficiaries succeeding to the estate's prop- ties market, or If you had to repay an amount that you includederty can deduct the excess. Do not include de-
• Held by or for at least 500 persons at all in income in an earlier year, you may be able toductions for the estate's personal exemption
times during the tax year. deduct the amount you repaid. If the amount youand charitable contributions when figuring the
had to repay was ordinary income of $3,000 orestate's total deductions. The beneficiaries can
A publicly offered mutual fund will send you a less, the deduction is subject to the 2% limit. If itclaim the deduction only for the tax year in
was more than $3,000, see Repayments UnderForm 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, orwhich, or with which, the estate terminates,
Claim of Right under Deductions Not Subject toa substitute form, showing the net amount ofwhether the year of termination is a normal year
the 2% Limit, later.or a short tax year. For more information, see dividend income (gross dividends minus invest-
Termination of Estate in Publication 559, Survi- ment expenses). This net figure is the amount
vors, Executors, and Administrators. you report on your return as income. You cannot
Repayments of Social Securitydeduct investment expenses.
Benefits
Fees to Collect Interest and
Information returns. You should receive in- For information on how to deduct your repay-Dividends formation returns from pass-through entities. ments of certain social security benefits, see
Repayments More Than Gross Benefits in chap-You can deduct fees you pay to a broker, bank, Partnerships and S corporations. These ter 11.trustee, or similar agent to collect your taxable entities issue Schedule K-1, which lists the itemsbond interest or dividends on shares of stock. and amounts you must report and identifies theBut you cannot deduct a fee you pay to a broker tax return schedules and lines to use. Safe Deposit Box Rentto buy investment property, such as stocks or
Nonpublicly offered mutual funds. Thesebonds. You must add the fee to the cost of the
You can deduct safe deposit box rent if you useproperty. funds will send you a Form 1099-DIV, or a sub-
the box to store taxable income-producingstitute form, showing your share of gross incomeYou cannot deduct the fee you pay to a stocks, bonds, or investment-related papers andand investment expenses. You can claim thebroker to sell securities. You can use the fee documents. You cannot deduct the rent if youexpenses only as a miscellaneous itemized de-only to figure gain or loss from the sale. See the use the box only for jewelry, other personalduction subject to the 2% limit.instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040), col- items, or tax-exempt securities.
umns (d) and (e), for information on how to
report the fee.
Investment Fees and Expenses Service Charges on Dividend
Reinvestment PlansYou can deduct investment fees, custodial fees,Hobby Expenses trust administration fees, and other expenses You can deduct service charges you pay as ayou paid for managing your investments thatYou can generally deduct hobby expenses, but subscriber in a dividend reinvestment plan.produce taxable income.only up to the amount of hobby income. A hobby These service charges include payments for:is not a business because it is not carried on to
• Holding shares acquired through a plan,make a profit. See Activity not for profit in chap-
Legal Expensester 12 under Other Income. • Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends,
andYou can usually deduct legal expenses that you
incur in attempting to produce or collect taxable • Keeping individual records and providingIndirect Deductions of
income or that you pay in connection with the detailed statements of accounts. Pass-Through Entities determination, collection, or refund of any tax.
Pass-through entities include partnerships, S You can also deduct legal expenses that are: Trustee's Administrative Fees forcorporations, and mutual funds that are not pub-
• Related to either doing or keeping your IRAlicly offered. Deductions of pass-through entities
job, such as those you paid to defendare passed through to the partners or sharehold- Trustee's administrative fees that are billed sep-yourself against criminal charges arisingers. The partners or shareholders can deduct arately and paid by you in connection with yourout of your trade or business,their share of passed-through deductions for individual retirement arrangement (IRA) are de-investment expenses as miscellaneous item- • For tax advice related to a divorce, if the ductible (if they are ordinary and necessary) as aized deductions subject to the 2% limit. bill specifies how much is for tax advice miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to the
and it is determined in a reasonable way, 2% limit. For more information about IRAs, seeExample. You are a member of an invest- or chapter 17.ment club that is formed solely to invest in secur-
• To collect taxable alimony.ities. The club is treated as a partnership. The
partnership's income is solely from taxable divi-
You can deduct expenses of resolving taxdends, interest, and gains from sales of securi-
issues relating to profit or loss from businessties. In this case, you can deduct your share of
Page 194 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Federal Estate Tax on Income in Loss From Other Activities From
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), Box 2Respect of a DecedentDeductions Not
If the amount reported in Schedule K-1 (FormYou can deduct the federal estate tax attributa-Subject to the 2% Limit 1065-B), box 2, is a loss, report it on Schedule Able to income in respect of a decedent that you
(Form 1040), line 28. It is not subject to theas a beneficiary include in your gross income.You can deduct the items listed below as miscel- passive activity limitations.Income in respect of the decedent is gross in-laneous itemized deductions. They are not sub- come that the decedent would have receivedject to the 2% limit. Report these items on had death not occurred and that was not prop-Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28. Repayments Under Claim of Righterly includible in the decedent's final income tax
return. See Publication 559 for more informa- If you had to repay more than $3,000 that yoution.List of Deductions included in your income in an earlier year be-
cause at the time you thought you had an un-Each of the following items is discussed in detail restricted right to it, you may be able to deductafter the list. Gambling Losses Up to the the amount you repaid or take a credit against
Amount of Gambling Winnings• Amortizable premium on taxable bonds. your tax. See Repayments in chapter 12 for
more information.• Casualty and theft losses from income- You must report the full amount of your gambling
producing property. winnings for the year on Form 1040, line 21. You
deduct your gambling losses for the year on Unrecovered Investment in• Federal estate tax on income in respect of Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28. You cannota decedent. Annuitydeduct gambling losses that are more than your
• Gambling losses up to the amount of gam- winnings. A retiree who contributed to the cost of an annu-
bling winnings. ity can exclude from income a part of eachYou cannot reduce your gambling win-
payment received as a tax-free return of the• Impairment-related work expenses of per- nings by your gambling losses and re-
retiree's investment. If the retiree dies before theport the difference. You must report thesons with disabilities.
CAUTION
!
entire investment is recovered tax free, any un-full amount of your winnings as income and• Loss from other activities from Schedule recovered investment can be deducted on theclaim your losses (up to the amount of winnings)K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 2. retiree's final income tax return. See chapter 10as an itemized deduction. Therefore, your rec- for more information about the tax treatment of• Repayments of more than $3,000 under a ords should show your winnings separately from pensions and annuities.your losses.claim of right.
• Unrecovered investment in an annuity. Diary of winnings and losses. You
must keep an accurate diary or similar
record of your losses and winnings. Nondeductible
RECORDSAmortizable Premium on Taxable Your diary should contain at least the followingBonds information. Expenses
In general, if the amount you pay for a bond is • The date and type of your specific wager
Examples of nondeductible expenses are listedgreater than its stated principal amount, the ex- or wagering activity. next. The list is followed by discussions of addi-cess is bond premium. You can elect to amortize • The name and address or location of the tional nondeductible expenses.the premium on taxable bonds. The amortization gambling establishment.of the premium is generally an offset to interest
• The names of other persons present with List of Nondeductibleincome on the bond rather than a separate de-
you at the gambling establishment.duction item. Expenses
• The amount(s) you won or lost.Part of the premium on some bonds may be
a miscellaneous deduction not subject to the 2% • Broker's commissions that you paid inSee Publication 529 for more information.limit. For more information, see Amortizable connection with your IRA or other invest-
Premium on Taxable Bonds in Publication 529, ment property.
and Bond Premium Amortization in chapter 3 of • Burial or funeral expenses, including theImpairment-Related WorkPublication 550, Investment Income and Ex- cost of a cemetery lot.  Expensespenses.
• Capital expenses.
If you have a physical or mental disability that • Fees and licenses, such as car licenses,limits your being employed, or substantially lim-Certain Casualty and Theft Losses marriage licenses, and dog tags.its one or more of your major life activities, such
as performing manual tasks, walking, speaking,You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as a • Hobby losses, but see Hobby Expenses,
breathing, learning, and working, you can de- earlier.miscellaneous itemized deduction not subject to
duct your impairment-related work expenses.the 2% limit if the damaged or stolen property • Home repairs, insurance, and rent.
Impairment-related work expenses are ordi-was income-producing property (property held
• Illegal bribes and kickbacksÐSee Bribesnary and necessary business expenses for at-for investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds,
and kickbacks in chapter 11 of Publicationtendant care services at your place of work andgold, silver, vacant lots, and works of art). First, 535.for other expenses in connection with your placereport the loss in Form 4684, Section B. You
of work that are necessary for you to be able to • Losses from the sale of your home, furni-may also have to include the loss on Form 4797
work. ture, personal car, etc.if you are otherwise required to file that form. To
figure your deduction, add all casualty or theft Self-employed. If you are self-employed, • Personal disability insurance premiums.
losses from this type of property included on enter your impairment-related work expenses • Personal, living, or family expenses.Form 4684, lines 32 and 38b, or Form 4797, line on the appropriate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E,
18a. For more information on casualty and theft or F) used to report your business income and • The value of wages never received or lost
losses, see chapter 25. expenses. vacation time.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 195

Unreimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier, andAdoption Expenses Meals While Working Late
Security System under Deducting Expenses in
You cannot deduct the expenses of adopting a You cannot deduct the cost of meals while work-Publication 587.
child, but you may be able to take a credit for ing late. However, you may be able to claim a
those expenses. See chapter 37. deduction if the cost of meals is a deductible
Investment-Related Seminars entertainment expense, or if you are traveling
away from home. See chapter 26 for informationYou cannot deduct any expenses for attending aCampaign Expenses on deductible entertainment expenses and ex-convention, seminar, or similar meeting for in-
penses while traveling away from home.You cannot deduct campaign expenses of a vestment purposes.
candidate for any office, even if the candidate is
running for reelection to the office. These in-
Personal Legal Expensesclude qualification and registration fees for pri- Life Insurance Premiums
mary elections. You cannot deduct personal legal expensesYou cannot deduct premiums you pay on yourLegal fees. You cannot deduct legal fees such as those for the following.life insurance. You may be able to deduct, aspaid to defend charges that arise from partici- alimony, premiums you pay on life insurance • Custody of children.pation in a political campaign. policies assigned to your former spouse. See
• Breach of promise to marry suit.chapter 18 for information on alimony.
• Civil or criminal charges resulting from aCheck-Writing Fees on Personal
personal relationship.Account Lobbying Expenses • Damages for personal injury, except forIf you have a personal checking account, you You generally cannot deduct amounts paid or certain unlawful discrimination andcannot deduct fees charged by the bank for the incurred for lobbying expenses. These include whistleblower claims.privilege of writing checks, even if the account expenses to:pays interest. • Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec-
• Influence legislation, tion of a title).
• Participate or intervene in any political • Preparation of a will.Club Dues campaign for, or against, any candidate
• Property claims or property settlement in afor public office,Generally, you cannot deduct the cost of mem- divorce.bership in any club organized for business, plea- • Attempt to influence the general public, or
sure, recreation, or other social purpose. This segments of the public, about elections, You cannot deduct these expenses even if aincludes business, social, athletic, luncheon, legislative matters, or referendums, or result of the legal proceeding is the loss of in-sporting, airline, hotel, golf, and country clubs. • Communicate directly with covered execu- come-producing property.
tive branch officials in any attempt to influ-
ence the official actions or positions ofCommuting Expenses those officials. Political Contributions
You cannot deduct commuting expenses (the Lobbying expenses also include any amounts You cannot deduct contributions made to a polit-cost of transportation between your home and paid or incurred for research, preparation, plan- ical candidate, a campaign committee, or ayour main or regular place of work). If you haul ning, or coordination of any of these activities. newsletter fund. Advertisements in conventiontools, instruments, or other items, in your car to
Dues used for lobbying. If a tax-exempt bulletins and admissions to dinners or programsand from work, you can deduct only the addi-
organization notifies you that part of the dues or that benefit a political party or political candidatetional cost of hauling the items such as the rent
other amounts you pay to the organization areon a trailer to carry the items. are not deductible.
used to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses,
you cannot deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex-
penses in Publication 529 for information onFines or Penalties Professional Accreditation Fees
exceptions.
You cannot deduct fines or penalties you pay to You cannot deduct professional accreditation
a governmental unit for violating a law. This fees such as the following.
includes an amount paid in settlement of your Lost or Mislaid Cash or Property • Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini-actual or potential liability for a fine or penalty
tial right to practice accounting.You cannot deduct a loss based on the mere(civil or criminal). Fines or penalties include
disappearance of money or property. However,parking tickets, tax penalties, and penalties de- • Bar exam fees and incidental expenses inan accidental loss or disappearance of propertyducted from teachers' paychecks after an illegal securing initial admission to the bar.can qualify as a casualty if it results from anstrike.
• Medical and dental license fees paid to getidentifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or
unusual. See chapter 25. initial licensing.
Health Spa Expenses
Example. A car door is accidentally
Professional ReputationYou cannot deduct health spa expenses, even if slammed on your hand, breaking the setting of
there is a job requirement to stay in excellent your diamond ring. The diamond falls from the You cannot deduct expenses of radio and TVphysical condition, such as might be required of ring and is never found. The loss of the diamond appearances to increase your personal prestigea law enforcement officer. is a casualty.
or establish your professional reputation.
Home Security System Lunches with Co-workers Relief Fund Contributions
You cannot deduct the cost of a home security You cannot deduct the expenses of lunches with
You cannot deduct contributions paid to a pri-system as a miscellaneous deduction. However, co-workers, except while traveling away from
vate plan that pays benefits to any covered em-you may be able to claim a deduction for a home home on business. See chapter 26 for informa-
ployee who cannot work because of any injury orsecurity system as a business expense if you tion on deductible expenses while traveling
have a home office. See Home Office under away from home. illness not related to the job.
Page 196 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Residential Telephone Service
Which ItemizedYou cannot deduct any charge (including taxes)
29.for basic local telephone service for the first Deductionstelephone line to your residence, even if it is
used in a trade or business. Are Not Limited?Limit on
The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-
Stockholders' Meetings tions are not subject to the overall limit on item-Itemized ized deductions. However, they are still subjectYou cannot deduct transportation and other ex- to other applicable limits.penses you pay to attend stockholders' meet- Deductions • Medical and dental expensesÐline 4.ings of companies in which you own stock but
have no other interest. You cannot deduct these • Investment interest expenseÐline 14.
expenses even if you are attending the meeting • Casualty and theft losses of personal useIntroductionto get information that would be useful in making propertyÐline 20.further investments. This chapter discusses the overall limit on item-
• Casualty and theft losses of in-ized deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
come-producing propertyÐline 28.The following topics are included.
Tax-Exempt Income Expenses • Gambling lossesÐline 28.• Who is subject to the limit.
You cannot deduct expenses to produce • Which itemized deductions are limited.
tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct interest
• How to figure the limit.on a debt incurred or continued to buy or carry
tax-exempt securities. How Do You Figure
If you have expenses to produce both tax- Useful Items
the Limit?able and tax-exempt income, but you cannot You may want to see:
identify the expenses that produce each type of
If your itemized deductions are subject to theForm (and Instructions)income, you must divide the expenses based on
limit, the total of all your itemized deductions isthe amount of each type of income to determine ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized reduced by the smaller of the following reducedthe amount that you can deduct. Deductions by one-third:
Example. During the year, you received • 80% of your itemized deductions that are
taxable interest of $4,800 and tax-exempt inter- affected by the limit. See Which Itemized
Deductions Are Limited, earlier, orest of $1,200. In earning this income, you had
total expenses of $500 during the year. You Are You Subject • 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-
cannot identify the amount of each expense item ceeds $156,400 ($78,200 if married filing
to the Limit?that is for each income item. Therefore, 80% separately).
($4,800/$6,000) of the expense is for the taxable
You are subject to the limit on certain itemizedinterest and 20% ($1,200/$6,000) is for the Before you figure the overall limit on itemized
deductions if your adjusted gross income (AGI) deductions, you first must complete Schedule Atax-exempt interest. You can deduct, subject to is more than $156,400 ($78,200 if you are mar- (Form 1040), lines 1 through 28, including anythe 2% limit, expenses of $400 (80% of $500). ried filing separately). Your AGI is the amount on related forms (such as Form 2106, Form 4684,
Form 1040, line 38. etc.).
The overall limit on itemized deductions isTravel Expenses for Another
figured after you have applied any other limit onIndividual the allowance of any itemized deduction. These
Which Itemized other limits include charitable contribution limitsYou generally cannot deduct travel expenses
(chapter 24), the limit on certain meal and enter-you pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, or
Deductions tainment expenses (chapter 26), and the 2%-of-other individual who accompanies you (or your
adjusted-gross-income limit on certain miscella-employee) on business or personal travel. See Are Limited? neous deductions (chapter 28).chapter 26 for more information on deductible
travel expenses. Itemized Deductions Worksheet. After youThe following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-
have completed Schedule A (Form 1040)tions are subject to the overall limit on itemized
through line 28, you can use the Itemized De-deductions.Voluntary Unemployment ductions Worksheet in the Instructions for• Taxes paidÐline 9.Benefit Fund Contributions Schedule A (Form 1040) to figure your limit.
Enter the result on Schedule A (Form 1040), line• Interest paidÐlines 10, 11, 12, and 13.You cannot deduct voluntary unemployment 29. Keep the worksheet for your records.• Gifts to charityÐline 19.benefit fund contributions you make to a union
You should compare the amount offund or a private fund. However, you can deduct • Job expenses and certain miscellaneous your standard deduction to the amountcontributions as taxes if state law requires you to deductionsÐline 27. of your itemized deductions after ap-
TIPmake them to a state unemployment fund that • Other miscellaneous deductionsÐline 28, plying the limit. Use the greater amount whencovers you for the loss of wages from unemploy- excluding gambling and casualty or theft completing Form 1040, line 40. See chapter 20ment caused by business conditions. losses. for information on how to figure your standard
deduction.
Wristwatches
Example
You cannot deduct the cost of a wristwatch,
even if there is a job requirement that you know For tax year 2007, Bill and Terry Willow are filing
the correct time to properly perform your duties. a joint return on Form 1040. Their adjusted
Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions Page 197

gross income on line 38 is $259,600. Their The Willows use the Itemized Deductions
Job expensesÐline 27 ........ 17,240Schedule A itemized deductions are as follows: Worksheet in the Schedule A (Form 1040) in-
structions to figure their overall limit. Their com-
Total .................. $142,140 pleted worksheet is shown as Table 29-1.Taxes paidÐline 9 .......... $ 17,900 Of their $142,140 total itemized deductions,
the Willows can deduct only $140,076Interest paidÐlines 10, 11, 12,
($142,140 − $2,064). They enter $140,076 onThe Willows' investment interest expenseand 13 ................... 45,000
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 29.deduction ($41,000 from Schedule A (Form
Investment interest expense 1040), line 14) is not subject to the overall limit
Ðline 14 ................. 41,000 on itemized deductions.
Gifts to charityÐline 19 ....... 21,000
Table 29-1. Itemized Deductions WorksheetÐLine 28
1. Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule A, lines 4, 9, 15, 19, 20, 27, and 28. ................. 1. 142,140
2. Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule A, lines 4, 14, and 20, plus any gambling and casualty or
theft losses included on line 28. ................................................... . 2. 41,000
Be sure your total gambling and casualty or theft losses are clearly identified on the dotted
lines next to line 28.
CAUTION
!
3. Is the amount on line 2 less than the amount on line 1?
 No. Your deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above on Schedule A, line 29.
STOP
ú Yes. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ................................................ . 3. 101,140
4. Multiply line 3 by 80% (.80) ........................................ . 4. 80,912
5. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38 ............................. . 5. 259,600
6. Enter: $156,400 ($78,200 if married filing separately) ..................... . 6. 156,400
7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the amount on line 5?
 No. Your deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above on
STOP
Schedule A, line 29.
ú Yes. Subtract line 6 from line 5 ................................. . 7. 103,200
8. Multiply line 7 by 3% (.03) ......................................... . 8. 3,096
9. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 8 ................................................. . 9. 3,096
10. Divide line 9 by 3.0 ............................................................. . 10. 1,032
11. Subtract line 10 from line 9 ....................................................... . 11. 2,064
12. Total itemized deductions. Subtract line 11 from line 1. Enter the result here and on Schedule A,
line 29 ...................................................................... . 12. 140,076
Page 198 Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions

Part Six.
The eight chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax and how to figureFiguring Your the tax of certain children who have more than $1,700 of investment income.
They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions are subtracted directlyTaxes and from your tax and reduce your tax, dollar for dollar. Chapter 36 discusses the
earned income credit and how you may be able to get part of the credit paid to
Credits you in advance throughout the year.
• Parents' election to report child's interest and refined coal produced at facilities
and dividends. (See chapter 31.) placed in service after October 22, 2004,
and Indian coal produced at facilities• Foreign earned income exclusion or the30. placed in service after August 8, 2005.housing exclusion. (See Form 2555, For- See Form 8835, Section B.eign Earned Income, or Form 2555-EZ,
Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.) • Work opportunity credit. See Form 5884.
How To Figure • Credit for employer social security and
Credits. After you figure your income tax and Medicare taxes paid on certain employee
any alternative minimum tax (discussed later), tips. See Form 8846.Your Tax
determine your tax credits. This chapter does • New York Liberty Zone business em-not explain whether you are eligible for these ployee credit. See Form 5884.credits. You can find that information in chapters
Introduction • Qualified zone academy bond credit. See32 through 37 and your form instructions. See
Form 8860.the following table for credits you may be able toAfter you have figured your income and deduc-
subtract from your income tax.tions as explained in Parts One through Five,
your next step is to figure your tax. This chapter Other taxes. After you subtract your tax cred-
discusses: CREDITS its, determine whether there are any other taxes
See you must pay. This chapter does not explain• The general steps you take to figure your For information on: chapter: these other taxes. You can find that informationtax,
in other chapters of this publication and yourAdoption .................. 37• An additional tax you may have to pay form instructions. See the following table forAlternative motor vehicle ....... 37called the alternative minimum tax, and other taxes you may need to add to your incomeAlternative fuel vehicle refueling
tax.property ................. 37• The conditions you must meet if you want
Child and dependent care ...... 32the IRS to figure your tax.
Child tax credit .............. 34 OTHER TAXESClean renewable energy bonds ... 37 SeeEducation ................. 35Figuring Your Tax For information on: chapter:Elderly or disabled ........... 33
Additional taxes on qualified retirementForeign tax ................ 37Your income tax is based on your taxable in- plans and IRAs .............. 10, 17Gulf tax credit bonds .......... 37come. After you figure your income tax and any Advance earned income creditMortgage interest ............ 37alternative minimum tax, subtract your tax cred- payments ................. 36Prior year minimum tax ........ 37its and add any other taxes you may owe. The Household employment taxes ..... 32Retirement savingsresult is your total tax. Compare your total tax Recapture of an education credit ... 35contributions .............. 37with your total payments to determine whether Social security and Medicare tax onResidential energy ........... 37you are entitled to a refund or owe additional tax. wages .................... 5Some credits (such as the earned incomeThis section provides a general outline of Social security and Medicare tax on
credit) are not listed above because they arehow to figure your tax. You can find step-by-step tips ...................... 6
treated as payments. See Payments, later.directions in the instructions for Forms 1040EZ, Uncollected social security and
There are other credits that are not dis-1040A, and 1040. If you are unsure of which tax Medicare tax on tips .......... 6
cussed in this publication. These include theform you should file, see Which Form Should I
Another tax you may have to pay, the alter-following credits.Use? in chapter 1.
native minimum tax, is discussed later in this
• General business credit, which is made up chapter.Tax. Most taxpayers use either the Tax Table of several separate business-related cred-or the Tax Computation Worksheet to figure There are other taxes that are not discussedits. These generally are reported on Formtheir income tax. However, there are special in this publication. These include the following3800, General Business Credit, and aremethods if your income includes any of the fol- items.discussed in chapter 4 of Publication 334,lowing items. Tax Guide for Small Business. 1. Self-employment tax. You must figure this
• A net capital gain. (See chapter 16.) tax if either of the following applies to you• Empowerment zone and renewal commu-
(or your spouse if you file a joint return).• Qualified dividends taxed at the same nity employment credit. See Publication
rates as a net capital gain. (See chapters 954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Com- a. Your net earnings from8 and 16.) munities. Also see Form 8844. self-employment from other than church
employee income were $400 or more.• Lump-sum distributions. (See chapter 10.) • District of Columbia first-time homebuyer
The term ªnet earnings fromcredit. See Form 8859.• Farming or fishing income. (See Schedule self-employmentº may include certainJ (Form 1040), Income Averaging for • Credit for alcohol used as fuel. See Form nonemployee compensation and otherFarmers and Fishermen.) 6478. amounts reported to you on Form
• Investment income over $1,700 for chil- • Renewable electricity, refined coal, and In- 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. If
dren under age 18. (See chapter 31.) dian coal production credit for electricity you received a Form 1099-MISC, see
Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax Page 199

the Instructions for Recipients on the meet the rules for these accounts. See
back. Also see the instructions for Publication 970 and Form 5329. AlternativeSchedule SE (Form 1040), 10. Tax on insider stock compensation from anSelf-Employment Tax; and Publication Minimum Taxexpatriated corporation. You may owe a334, Tax Guide for Small Business. 15% excise tax on the value of nonstatu-
b. You had church employee income of This section briefly discusses an additional taxtory stock options and certain other
$108.28 or more. you may have to pay.stock-based compensation held by you or
The tax law gives special treatment to somea member of your family from an expatri-2. Recapture taxes. You may have to pay kinds of income and allows special deductionsated corporation or its expanded affiliatedthese taxes if you previously claimed an and credits for some kinds of expenses. Taxpay-group in which you were an officer, direc-investment credit, a low-income housing ers who benefit from the law in these ways maytor, or more-than-10% owner. For more in-credit, a mortgage interest credit, a new have to pay at least a minimum amount of taxformation, see the instructions for Formmarkets credit, a qualified electric vehicle through an additional tax. This additional tax is1040, line 63.credit, a credit for employer-provided child called the alternative minimum tax (AMT).care facilities, an Indian employment 11. Additional tax on income you received You may have to pay the alternative mini-credit, or other credit listed in the instruc- from a nonqualified deferred compensation mum tax if your taxable income for regular taxtions for Form 1040, line 63. For more in- plan that fails to meet certain require- purposes, combined with certain adjustmentsformation, see the instructions for Form ments. This income should be shown in and tax preference items, is more than:1040, line 63. Form W-2, box 12, with code Z, or in Form
• $45,000 if your filing status is married filing1099-MISC, box 15b. For more informa-3. Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. If a joint return (or qualifying widow(er) withtion, see the instructions for Form 1040,you are (or were) a 5% owner of a busi-
dependent child),line 63.ness and you received a distribution that
exceeds the benefits provided for you • $33,750 if your filing status is single or12. Interest on the tax due on installment in-under the qualified pension or annuity plan head of household, orcome from the sale of certain residentialformula, you may have to pay this addi- lots and timeshares. For more information, • $22,500 if your filing status is married filingtional tax. See Tax on Excess Benefits in see the instructions for Form 1040, line 63. a separate return.chapter 4 of Publication 560, Retirement
Plans for Small Business (SEP, SIMPLE, 13. Interest on the deferred tax on gain from
and Qualified Plans). certain installment sales with a sales price At the time this publication went to
over $150,000. For more information, see print, Congress was considering legis-4. Uncollected social security and Medicare
lation that would increase the amountsthe instructions for Form 1040, line 63.
CAUTION
!tax on group-term life insurance. If your
above. To find out if legislation was enacted, andformer employer provides you with more
for more details, see the Instructions for Formthan $50,000 of group-term life insurance Payments. After you determine your total tax, 6251.coverage, you must pay the employee part figure the total payments you have alreadyof social security and Medicare taxes on made for the year. Include credits that arethose premiums. The amount should be Adjustments and tax preference items. Thetreated as payments. This chapter does not ex-shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with more common adjustments and tax preferenceplain these payments and credits. You can findcodes M and N. items include:that information in other chapters of this publica-
5. Tax on golden parachute payments. This • Addition of personal exemptions,tion and your form instructions. See the follow-
tax applies if you received an ªexcess par- ing table for amounts you can include in your • Addition of the standard deduction (ifachute paymentº (EPP) due to a change in total payments. claimed),a corporation's ownership or control. See
PAYMENTSthe instructions for Form 1040, line 63. • Addition of itemized deductions claimedSee for state and local taxes, certain interest,6. Tax on accumulation distribution of trusts. For information on: chapter: most miscellaneous deductions, and partThis applies if you are the beneficiary of a Child tax credit (additional) ...... 34 of medical expenses,trust that accumulated its income instead Earned income credit ......... 36of distributing it currently. See the instruc- • Subtraction of any refund of state and lo-Estimated tax paid ........... 4tions for Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation cal taxes included in gross income,Excess social securityDistribution of Trusts. and RRTA tax withheld ....... 37 • Changes to accelerated depreciation ofFederal income tax withheld ..... 47. Additional tax on HSAs or MSAs. If certain property,Health coverage tax credit ...... 37amounts contributed to, or distributed from,
• Difference between gain or loss on theRegulated investment companyyour health savings account or medical
credit ................... 37 sale of property reported for regular taxsavings account do not meet the rules for
Refundable credit for purposes and AMT purposes,these accounts, you may have to pay addi- prior year minimum tax .......  37tional taxes. See Publication 969, Health • Addition of certain income from incentiveTax paid with extension ........ 1Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored stock options,Health Plans; Form 8853, Archer MSAs Another credit that is treated as a payment is • Change in certain passive activity loss de-and Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts; the credit for federal excise tax paid on fuels. ductions,Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts This credit is for persons who have a nontaxable(HSAs); and Form 5329, Additional Taxes • Addition of certain depletion that is moreuse of certain fuels, such as diesel fuel andon Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) and than the adjusted basis of the property,kerosene. It is claimed on Form 1040, line 70.Other Tax-Favored Accounts. See Form 4136, Credit for Federal Tax Paid on • Addition of part of the deduction for certain8. Additional tax on Coverdell ESAs. This ap- Fuels. intangible drilling costs, andplies if amounts contributed to, or distrib-
• Addition of tax-exempt interest on certainuted from, your Coverdell ESA do not meet Refund or balance due. To determine
private activity bonds.the rules for these accounts. See Publica- whether you are entitled to a refund or owe
tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education, and additional tax, compare your total payments with
Form 5329. your total tax. If you are entitled to a refund, see More information. For more information
your form instructions for information on having about the alternative minimum tax, see the in-9. Additional tax on qualified tuition pro-
it directly deposited into one or more of your structions for Form 1040, line 45, and Formgrams. This applies to amounts distributed
accounts instead of receiving a paper check. 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐIndividuals.from qualified tuition programs that do not
Page 200 Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax

peel-off label. If you do not have a peel-off label, Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If you
can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33,fill in your name and address. Enter your socialTax Figured by IRS attach Schedule 3 (Form 1040A), Credit for thesecurity number in the space provided. If you are
Elderly or the Disabled for Form 1040A Filers.married, enter the social security numbers ofIf you file by April 15, 2008, you can have the Enter ªCFEº in the space to the left of line 30.you and your spouse even if you file separately.IRS figure your tax for you on Form 1040EZ, The IRS will figure this credit for you. On Sched-Complete the ªThird Party Designeeº area of theForm 1040A, or Form 1040. ule 3, check the box in Part I for your filing statusreturn if you would like another person to dis-If the IRS figures your tax and you paid too and age. Complete Part II and Part III, lines 11cuss your return with the IRS. Sign and datemuch, you will receive a refund. If you did not and 13, if they apply.your return and enter your occupation(s). If youpay enough, you will receive a bill for the bal-
are filing a joint return, both you and your spouseance. To avoid interest or the penalty for late Earned income credit. If you can take thismust sign it. Enter your daytime phone numberpayment, you must pay the bill within 30 days of credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS willin the space provided.the date of the bill or by the due date for your figure it for you. Enter ªEICº to the left of the entryAttach a copy of each of your Forms W-2 toreturn, whichever is later. space for line 40a. Enter the nontaxable combatyour return. Also attach any Form 1099-R youWhen the IRS cannot figure your tax. The pay you elect to include in earned income on linereceived that has withholding tax in box 4.IRS cannot figure your tax for you if any of the 40b. If you have a qualifying child, you must fill inMail your return to the Internal Revenuefollowing apply. Schedule EIC, Earned Income Credit, and at-Service Center for the area where you live. A list tach it to your return.of Service Center addresses is shown near the1. You want your refund directly deposited If your credit for any year after 1996 wasend of this publication.into your accounts. reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also
have to file Form 8862, Information To Claim2. You want any part of your refund applied
Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, withto your 2008 estimated tax. Form 1040EZ Line Entries your return. For details, see the Form 1040A
3. You had income for the year from sources instructions.Read lines 1 through 8b and fill in the lines thatother than wages, salaries, tips, interest, apply to you. Do not complete lines 9 throughdividends, taxable social security benefits, 12. If you are filing a joint return, use the spaceunemployment compensation, IRA distri- Form 1040 Line Entriesto the left of line 6 to separately show yourbutions, pensions, and annuities. taxable income and your spouse's taxable in- Read lines 1 through 43 and fill in the lines that4. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more. come. apply to you. Do not complete line 44.
5. You itemize deductions. If you are filing a joint return, use the spacePayments. Enter any federal income tax with- under the words ªAdjusted Gross Incomeº on6. You file any of the following forms. held on line 7. Federal income tax withheld is the front of your return to separately show yourshown on Form W-2, box 2. taxable income and your spouse's taxable in-a. Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income.
come.Earned income credit. If you can take thisb. Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Read lines 45 through 71. Fill in the lines thatcredit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS canExclusion. apply to you, but do not fill in lines 56, 63, andfigure it for you. Enter ªEICº in the space to the 72. Also, do not complete line 57 and lines 73c. Form 4137, Social Security and Medi- left of line 8a. Enter the nontaxable combat pay through 77. Do not fill in lines 48 and 66a if youcare Tax on Unreported Tip Income. you elect to include in earned income on line 8b. want the IRS to figure the credits shown onIf your credit for any year after 1996 wasd. Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Distri- those lines.reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsobution of Trusts. Fill in any forms or schedules asked for onhave to file Form 8862, Information To Claim the lines you completed, and attach them to youre. Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distribu- Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with return.tions. your return. For details, see the Form 1040EZ
f. Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. instructions. Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-
held that is shown on Form W-2, box 2, or theg. Form 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐ
appropriate box of Form 1099, on line 64. EnterIndividuals. Form 1040A Line Entries any estimated tax payments you made on
h. Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs. line 65.Read lines 1 through 27 and fill in the lines thati. Form 8615, Tax for Children Under Age apply to you. If you are filing a joint return, use Credit for child and dependent care ex-18 With Investment Income of More the space to the left of the entry space for line 27 penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-Than $1,700. to separately show your taxable income and cussed in chapter 32, complete Form 2441,
your spouse's taxable income. Do not completej. Form 8814, Parents' Election To Report Child and Dependent Care Expenses, and at-
line 28. Complete lines 29 through 33, 36, andChild's Interest and Dividends. tach it to your return. Enter the amount of the
38 through 41 if they apply to you. Do not fill in credit on line 47. The IRS will not figure thisk. Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex- lines 30 and 40a if you want the IRS to figure the credit.penses. credits shown on those lines. Also, enter any
write-in information that applies to you in the Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If youl. Form 8853, Archer MSAs and
space to the left of line 42. Do not complete lines can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33,Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts.
34, 35, 37, and 43 through 47. attach Schedule R, Credit for the Elderly or them. Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts Disabled. Enter ªCFEº on the dotted line next to(HSAs). Payments. Enter any federal income tax with- Form 1040, line 48. The IRS will figure the credit
held that is shown on Form W-2, box 2, or the for you. On Schedule R check the box in Part In. Form 8915, Qualified Hurricane Retire-
appropriate box of Form 1099, on line 38. Enter for your filing status and age. Complete Part IIment Plan Distributions and Repay-
any estimated tax payments you made on line and Part III, lines 11 and 13, if they apply.ments.
39.o. Form 8919, Uncollected Social Security Earned income credit. If you can take thisand Medicare Tax on Wages. Credit for child and dependent care ex- credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS will
penses. If you can take this credit, as dis- figure it for you. Enter ªEICº on the dotted line
cussed in chapter 32, complete Schedule 2 next to Form 1040, line 66a. Enter the nontax-
(Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex- able combat pay you elect to include in earnedFiling the Return
penses for Form 1040A Filers, and attach it to income on line 66b. If you have a qualifying
your return. Enter the amount of the credit onAfter you complete the line entries for the tax child, you must fill in Schedule EIC and attach it
line 29. The IRS will not figure this credit.form you are filing, as discussed next, attach the to your return.
Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax Page 201

If your credit for any year after 1996 was • Neither of the child's parents were living at that joint return. Do not use the return of the
the end of the tax year, or noncustodial parent.reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also
have to file Form 8862, Information To Claim If the custodial parent and the stepparent are• The child files a joint return for the year.Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with married, but file separate returns, use the return
your return. For details, see the Form 1040 in- of the one with the greater taxable income. If the
structions. custodial parent and the stepparent are marriedUseful Items
but not living together, the earlier discussionYou may want to see:
under Parents not living together applies.
Publication Parents never married. If a child's parents
did not marry each other, but lived together all❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and
year, use the return of the parent with theDependents
greater taxable income. If the parents did not live31.
together all year, the rules explained earlierForm (and Instructions)
under Parents are divorced apply.
❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 18 With
Investment Income of More Than Widowed parent remarried. If a widow orTax on $1,700 widower remarries, the new spouse is treated as
the child's other parent. The rules explained❏ 8814 Parents' Election To Report Child's earlier under Custodial parent remarried apply.Investment Interest and Dividends
Income of
Parent's ElectionWhich Parent'sCertain Minor To Report Child'sReturn To UseChildren Interest and Dividends
If a child's parents are married to each other and
file a joint return, use the joint return to figure the You may be able to elect to include your child's
tax on the investment income of a child under interest and dividend income (including capitalWhat's New for 2008 age 18. The tax rate and other return information gain distributions) on your tax return. If you do,
from that return are used to figure the child's tax your child will not have to file a return.Increase in age of children whose invest- as explained later under Tax for Children Under You can make this election for 2007 only if allment income is taxed at parent's rate. The Age 18 Who Have Investment Income of More the following conditions are met.rules regarding the age of a child whose invest- Than $1,700.
ment income may be taxed at the parent's tax • Your child was under age 18 at the end of
rate will change for 2008. These rules will con- 2007. (A child born on January 1,1990, isParents Who Do Not File atinue to apply to a child under age 18 at the end considered to be age 18 at the end of
2007. You cannot make the election forof the year but, beginning in 2008, will also apply Joint Return
this child.)to a child who is age 18 at the end of the year, or
For parents who do not file a joint return, thea student under age 24 at the end of the year, • Your child had income only from interestfollowing discussions explain which parent's taxwhose earned income is not more than half of and dividends (including capital gain distri-return must be used to figure the tax.the child's support. butions and Alaska Permanent Fund divi-Only the parent whose tax return is used can dends).make the election described under Parent's
• The dividend and interest income was lessElection To Report Child's Interest and Divi-
than $8,500.dends. 
Introduction • Your child is required to file a return forParents are married. If the child's parents fileThis chapter discusses the following two rules 2007, unless you make this election.separate returns, use the return of the parentthat may affect the tax on certain investment
with the greater taxable income. • The child does not file a joint return forincome of a child under age 18. 2007.Parents not living together. If the child's1. If the child's interest and dividend income parents are married to each other but not living • No estimated tax payment was made for(including capital gain distributions) total together, and the parent with whom the child 2007 and no 2006 overpayment was ap-less than $8,500, the child's parent may be lives (the custodial parent) is considered unmar- plied to 2007 under your child's name andable to choose to include that income on ried, use the return of the custodial parent. If the social security number.the parent's return rather than file a return custodial parent is not considered unmarried, • No federal income tax was taken out offor the child. (See Parent's Election To Re- use the return of the parent with the greater your child's income under the backup with-port Child's Interest and Dividends, later.) taxable income. holding rules.For an explanation of when a married person2. If the child's interest, dividends, and other
• You are the parent whose return must beliving apart from his or her spouse is consideredinvestment income total more than $1,700,
used when applying the special tax rulesunmarried, see Head of Household in chapter 2.part of that income may be taxed at the
for children under age 18. (See Whichparent's tax rate instead of the child's tax
Parents are divorced. If the child's parents Parent's Return To Use, earlier.)rate. (See Tax for Children Under Age 18
are divorced or legally separated, and the parentWho Have Investment Income of More These conditions are also shown in Figure 31-A.who had custody of the child for the greater partThan $1,700, later.)
of the year (the custodial parent) has not remar- How to make the election. Make the electionFor these rules, the term ªchildº includes a le- ried, use the return of the custodial parent. by attaching Form 8814 to your Form 1040. (Ifgally adopted child and a stepchild. These rules
Custodial parent remarried. If the custo- you make this election, you cannot file Formapply whether or not the child is a dependent.
dial parent has remarried, the stepparent (rather 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) Attach a separateThese rules do not apply if: than the noncustodial parent) is treated as the Form 8814 for each child for whom you make
• The child is not required to file a tax re- child's other parent. Therefore, if the custodial the election. You can make the election for one
turn, parent and the stepparent file a joint return, use or more children and not for others.
Page 202 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Effect of Making the
Election
The federal income tax on your child's income
may be more if you make the Form 8814 elec-
tion.
Rate may be higher. If your child received
qualified dividends or capital gain distributions,
you may pay up to $42.50 more tax if you make
this election instead of filing a separate tax re-
turn for the child. This is because the tax rate on
the child's income between $850 and $1,700 is
10% if you make this election. However, if you
file a separate return for the child, the tax rate
may be as low as 5% because of the preferential
tax rates for qualified dividends and capital gain
distributions.
Deductions you cannot take. By making the
Form 8814 election, you cannot take any of the
following deductions that the child would be enti-
tled to on his or her return.
• The higher standard deduction for a blind
child.
• The deduction for a penalty on an early
withdrawal of your child's savings.
• Itemized deductions (such as your child's
investment expenses or charitable contri-
butions).
Reduced deductions or credits. If you use
Form 8814, your increased adjusted gross in-
come may reduce certain deductions or credits
on your return including the following.
• Deduction for contributions to a traditional
individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
• Deduction for student loan interest.
• Itemized deductions for medical expenses,
casualty and theft losses, and certain mis-
cellaneous expenses.
• Total itemized deductions.
• Personal exemptions.
• Credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses.
• Child tax credit.
• Education tax credits.
• Earned income credit.
Penalty for underpayment of estimated tax.
If you make this election for 2007 and did not
have enough tax withheld or pay enough esti-
mated tax to cover the tax you owe, you may be
subject to a penalty. If you plan to make this
election for 2008, you may need to increase your
federal income tax withholding or your estimated
tax payments to avoid the penalty. See chapter
4 for more information.
Figure 31-A. Can You Include Your Child’s Income On Your Tax
Return?
Start Here
/H17074
Was your child under age 18 at the end
of 2007?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is your child required to file a tax return
for 2007 if you do not make this
election?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s only income interest and
dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends)?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s income less than
$8,500?
/H17074
No
Did the child make any estimated tax
payments for 2007?
/H17074
No
Did the child have an overpayment of tax
on his or her 2006 return applied to the
2007 estimated tax?
/H17074
No
Was any federal income tax withheld from
the child’s income (backup withholding)?
/H17074
No
Are you the parent whose return must
be used?*
/H17074
Yes
You can include your child’s income on
your tax return by completing Form 8814
and attaching it to your return. If you do,
your child is not required to file a return.
You cannot include
your child’s income
on your return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Is your child filing a joint return for 2007?
/H17074
Yes
Yes
/H17075
includes qualified dividends or capital gain distri- include the total amounts from line 12 of all yourFiguring Child's Income butions (discussed next), the same amount is Forms 8814 on Form 1040, line 21.
shown on Form 8814, line 12. Include theUse Form 8814, Part I, to figure your child's
amount from Form 8814, line 12, on Form 1040,interest and dividend income to report on your Capital gain distributions and qualified divi-
line 21. Enter ªForm 8814º in the space next toreturn. Only the amount over $1,700 is added to dends. If your child's dividend income in-
line 21. If you file more than one Form 8814,your income. The amount over $1,700 is shown cluded any capital gain distributions, see Capital
on Form 8814, line 6. Unless the child's income gain distributions under Figuring Child's Income
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children Page 203

enters the result, $1,950, on line 14. Because
that amount is not less than $850, she enters
$85 on line 15. This is the tax on the first $1,700
of Philip's income, which Linda did not have to
add to her income. She must add this additional
tax to the tax figured on her revised taxable
income.
The tax on her $75,400 revised taxable in-
come, figured using the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040
instructions, is $15,543. She adds $85, and en-
ters the $15,628 total on Form 1040, line 44, and
checks box a.
Linda attaches Form 8814 to her Form 1040.
Tax for Children Under
Age 18 Who Have
Investment Income of
More Than $1,700
Part of a child's 2007 investment income may be
subject to tax at the parent's tax rate if all of the
following statements are true.
• The child was under age 18 at the end of
2007. (A child born on January 1, 1990, is
considered to be age 18 at the end of
2007. This child's investment income is
not taxed at the parent's rate.)
• The child's investment income was more
than $1,700.
Figure 31-B. Do You Have To Use Form 8615 To Figure Your
Child’s Tax?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the child under age 18 at the end of 2007?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is the child required to file a tax return for 2007?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s investment income more than $1,700?
/H17074
Yes
Use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attach it to the
child’s return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Note: If the child’s parent* chooses to report the child’s income
by filing Form 8814, the child is not required to file a tax return.
Do not use Form 8615. (See Parent’s Election To Report Child’s
Interest and Dividends.)
Do not use
Form 8615 to
figure the
child’s tax.
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Is the child filing a joint return for 2007?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17075
• The child does not file a joint return forin Part 2 of Publication 929. If your child's divi- $56,700 and Linda's is $74,300. Because her 2007.taxable income is greater, Linda can elect todend income included any qualified dividends,
• The child is required to file a return forinclude Philip's income on her return. See Whichsee Qualified dividends under Figuring Child's
2007.Parent's Return To Use, earlier.Income in Part 2 of Publication 929.
On Form 8814 (see illustrated form), Linda These conditions are also shown in Figureenters her name and social security number, 31-B .Figuring Additional Tax then Philip's name and social security number.
If neither parent was alive on December 31,She enters Philip's taxable interest income,Use Form 8814, Part II, to figure the tax on the 2007, do not use Form 8615. Instead, figure the$1,650, on line 1a. Philip had no tax-exempt$1,700 of your child's interest and dividends that child's tax in the normal manner.interest income, so she leaves line 1b blank.you do not include in your income. This tax is She enters Philip's ordinary dividends, $1,150, If the parent does not or cannot choose toadded to the tax figured on your income. on line 2a. All of Philip's ordinary dividends were include the child's income on the parent's return,This additional tax is the smaller of: qualified dividends, so Linda also enters $1,150 use Form 8615 to figure the child's tax. Attach
on line 2b. Philip did not have any capital gain the completed form to the child's Form 1040 or1. 10% × (your child's gross income − $850),
distributions, so she leaves line 3 blank. Form 1040A.or
Linda adds lines 1a and 2a and enters the The following discussions explain the paren-2. $85. result, $2,800, on line 4. Because Philip had tal information needed for Form 8615 and the
qualified dividends, Linda must complete lines 7 steps to follow in figuring the child's tax. FormInclude the amount from line 15 of all your
through 11 of Form 8814. She includes the 8615 is illustrated later.Forms 8814 in the total on Form 1040, line 44.
amount from line 9 of Form 8814 ($452) on linesCheck box a on Form 1040, line 44.
9a and 9b of her Form 1040. On the dotted lines
Providing Parentalnext to lines 9a and 9b, she enters ªForm
Illustrated Example 8814±$452.º Information
Linda includes $648 in the total on line 21 ofDavid and Linda Parks are married and will file (Form 8615, lines A±C)her Form 1040 (not illustrated) and in the spaceseparate tax returns for 2007. Their only child, next to that line writes ªForm 8814±$648.º Ad- On Form 8615, lines A and B, enter the parent'sPhilip, is 8. Philip received a Form 1099-INT ding that amount, plus the $452 of qualified name and social security number. (If the parentsshowing $1,650 taxable interest income and a dividends, to her income increases each of the filed a joint return, enter the name and socialForm 1099-DIV showing $1,150 ordinary divi- amounts on lines 22, 37, 38, 41, and 43 of her security number listed first on the joint return.)dends. All the dividends were qualified divi- Form 1040 by $1,100. Linda is not claiming any On line C, check the box for the parent's filingdends. His parents decide to include that deductions that are affected by the increase to status.income on one of their returns so they will not her income. Therefore, her revised taxable in-have to file a return for Philip. See Which Parent's Return To Use at thecome on line 43 is $75,400 ($74,300 + $452 +
beginning of this chapter for information on$648).First, David and Linda each figure their tax-
which parent's return information must be usedable income (Form 1040, line 43) without regard On Form 8814, Linda subtracts the $850
on Form 8615.to Philip's income. David's taxable income is shown on line 13 from the $2,800 on line 4 and
Page 204 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Linda P arks
Philip P arks
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
000 00 0000
1,650
2,800
452
648
85
1,150
/H12011
1,150
1,100
1950
452
411
OMB No. 1545-0074Parents’ Election To Report
Child’s Interest and Dividends
Form 8814
/H17075See instructions.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 40/H17075Attach to parents’ Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on your return
Child’s social security numberChild’s name (first, initial, and last)
If more than one Form 8814 is attached, check here /H17075
Child’s Interest and Dividends To Report on Your Return
Enter your child’s taxable interest. If this amount is different from the amounts shown on the
child’s Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID, see the instructions
1a
1a
b Enter your child’s tax-exempt interest. Do not include this
amount on line 1a 1b
2a Enter your child’s ordinary dividends, including any Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. If your
child received any ordinary dividends as a nominee, see the instructions
Enter your child’s capital gain distributions. If your child received any capital gain distributions
as a nominee, see the instructions
Add lines 1a, 2a, and 3. If the total is $1,700 or less, skip lines 5 through 12 and go to line 13.
If the total is $8,500 or more, do not file this form. Your child must file his or her own return
to report the income
3
4
Base amount
4
5
Subtract line 5 from line 4 6
Tax on the First $1,700 of Child’s Interest and Dividends
Amount not taxed
15
1313
Subtract line 13 from line 4. If the result is zero or less, enter -0-
No. Enter $85 here and see the Note below.
Tax. Is the amount on line 14 less than $850?
14 14
Yes. Multiply line 14 by 10% (.10). Enter the result here and see the Note below.
Note. If you checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Otherwise, include the amount from line 15 in the tax you enter
on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41. Be sure to check box a on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3. Form 8814 (2007)Cat. No. 10750J
/H20854
A B
C
3
6
2a
5
Part I
Part II
15
Caution. The federal income tax on your child’s income, including qualified dividends and capital gain distributions, may be less
if you file a separate tax return for the child instead of making this election. This is because you cannot take certain tax be nefits
that your child could take on his or her own return. For details, see Tax benefits you cannot take on page 2.
2007
b Enter your child’s qualified dividends included on line 2a. See the
instructions 2b
If both lines 2b and 3 are zero or blank, skip lines 7 through 10, enter -0- on line 11, and
go to line 12. Otherwise, go to line 7.
Divide line 2b by line 4. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded
to at least three places) 7
7
Divide line 3 by line 4. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to
at least three places) 8
8
Multiply line 6 by line 7. Enter the result here. See the instructions
for where to report this amount on your return 9
9
Multiply line 6 by line 8. Enter the result here. See the instructions
for where to report this amount on your return 10
10
Add lines 9 and 10 1111
Subtract line 11 from line 6. Include this amount in the total on Form 1040, line 21, or Form
1040NR, line 21. In the space next to line 21, enter “Form 8814” and show the amount. If you
checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Go to line 13 below 12
12
.
.
1,700 00
850 00
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children Page 205

Parent with different tax year. If the parent to the child, regardless of when the property was sum of $850 and his directly-connected itemized
and the child do not have the same tax year, deductions of $300.transferred or purchased or who transferred it.
complete Form 8615 using the information on A child's investment income includes income
Example 2. Eleanor, age 8, has investmentthe parent's return for the tax year that ends in produced by property given as a gift to the child.
income of $16,000 and an early withdrawal pen-the child's tax year. This includes gifts to the child from grandparents
alty of $100. She has no other income. She hasor any other person and gifts made under theParent's return information not known itemized deductions of $1,050 (net of the 2%Uniform Gift to Minors Act.timely. If the information needed from the par- limit) that are directly connected with the produc-ent's return is not known by the time the child's tion of her investment income. Her adjustedExample. Amanda Black, age 13, receivedreturn is due (usually April 15), you can file the gross income, entered on line 1, is $15,900the following income.return using estimates. ($16,000 − $100). The amount on line 2 isYou can use any reasonable estimate. This • Dividends Ð $600 $1,900. This is the larger of:includes using information from last year's re- • Wages Ð $2,100turn. If you use an estimated amount on Form 1. $850 plus the $1,050 of directly connected
8615, enter ªEstimatedº on the line next to the • Taxable interest Ð $1,200 itemized deductions, or
amount. • Tax-exempt interest Ð $100 2. $1,700.When you get the correct information, file an
amended return on Form 1040X, Amended U.S. • Net capital gains Ð $100
Line 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 and enter theIndividual Income Tax Return. The dividends were qualified dividends on stock result on this line. If zero or less, do not completeInstead of using estimates, you can get an given to her by her grandparents. the rest of the form. However, you must stillautomatic 6-month extension of time to file if, by attach Form 8615 to the child's tax return. FigureAmanda's investment income is $1,900. Thisthe date your return is due, you file Form 4868, the tax on the child's taxable income in theis the total of the dividends ($600), taxable inter-Application for Automatic Extension of Time to normal manner.est ($1,200), and net capital gains ($100). HerFile U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. Exten-
wages are earned (not investment) income be-sions are discussed in chapter 1. Line 4 (child's taxable income). Enter on linecause they are received for work actually done. 4 the child's taxable income from Form 1040,Her tax-exempt interest is not included because line 43, or Form 1040A, line 27.Step 1. Figuring the it is nontaxable. However, if the child files Form 2555 orChild's Net Investment 2555-EZ to claim the foreign earned incomeTrust income. If a child is the beneficiary of
exclusion or housing exclusion, see the FormIncome a trust, distributions of taxable interest, divi-
8615 instructions.dends, capital gains, and other investment in-(Form 8615, Part I) come from the trust are investment income to Line 5 (net investment income). A child's netthe child.The first step in figuring a child's tax using Form investment income cannot be more than his or
However, for purposes of completing Form8615 is to figure the child's net investment in- her taxable income. Enter on Form 8615, line 5,
8615, a taxable distribution from a qualified disa-come. To do that, use Form 8615, Part I. the smaller of line 3 or line 4. This is the child's
bility trust is considered earned income, not in- net investment income.
vestment income.Line 1 (investment income). If the child had If zero or less, do not complete the rest of the
no earned income, enter on this line the adjusted form. However, you must still attach Form 8615
gross income shown on the child's return. Ad- Line 2 (deductions). If the child does not to the child's tax return. Figure the tax on the
justed gross income is shown on Form 1040, itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), child's taxable income in the normal manner.
line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22. Form 1040EZ enter $1,700 on line 2.
cannot be used if Form 8615 must be filed. If the child does itemize deductions, enter on Step 2. FiguringIf the child had earned income, figure the line 2 the larger of:
amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1, by using Tentative Tax at
1. $850 plus the portion of the child's item-the worksheet in the instructions for the form. the Parent's Tax Rateized deductions on Schedule A (FormHowever, if the child has excluded any for-
1040), line 29, that are directly connected (Form 8615, Part II)eign earned income or deducted either a loss
with the production of investment incomefrom self-employment or a net operating loss
entered on line 1, or The next step in completing Form 8615 is tofrom another year, use the Alternate Worksheet
figure a tentative tax on the child's net invest-for Form 8615, Line 1, in Publication 929 to 2. $1,700. ment income at the parent's tax rate. The tenta-figure the amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1.
tive tax at the parent's tax rate is the differenceDirectly connected. Itemized deductionsInvestment income defined. Investment between the tax on the parent's taxable incomeare directly connected with the production ofincome is generally all income other than sala- figured with the child's net investment incomeinvestment income if they are for expenses paidries, wages, and other amounts received as pay (plus the net investment income of any otherto produce or collect taxable income or to man-for work actually done. It includes taxable inter- child whose Form 8615 includes the tax returnage, conserve, or maintain property held forest, dividends, capital gains (including capital information of that parent) and the tax figuredproducing income. These expenses includegain distributions), the taxable part of social se- without it.custodian fees and service charges, servicecurity and pension payments, and certain distri- When figuring the tentative tax at the par-fees to collect taxable interest and dividends,butions from trusts. Investment income includes ent's tax rate, do not refigure any of the exclu-and certain investment counsel fees.amounts produced by assets the child obtained sions, deductions, or credits on the parent'sThese expenses are added to certain otherwith earned income (such as interest on a sav- return because of the child's net investment in-miscellaneous itemized deductions on Scheduleings account into which the child deposited come. For example, do not refigure the medicalA (Form 1040). Only the amount greater thanwages). expense deduction.2% of the child's adjusted gross income can be  Figure the tentative tax on Form 8615, linesNontaxable income. For this purpose, in- deducted. See chapter 28 for more information. 6 through 13.vestment income includes only amounts that the
child must include in total income. Nontaxable Example 1. Roger, age 12, has investment Note. If the child has any capital gains orinvestment income, such as tax-exempt interest income of $8,000, no other income, no adjust- losses, get Publication 929 for help in complet-and the nontaxable part of social security and ments to income, and itemized deductions of ing Form 8615, Part II.pension payments, is not included. $300 (net of the 2% limit) that are directly con-
nected with his investment income. His adjustedIncome from property received as a gift. Line 7 (net investment income of other chil-
gross income is $8,000, which is entered onA child's investment income includes all income dren). If the tax return information of the par-
Form 1040, line 38, and on Form 8615, line 1.produced by property belonging to the child. ent is also used on any other child's Form 8615,
Line 2 is $1,700 because that is more than theThis is true even if the property was transferred enter on line 7 the total of the amounts from line
Page 206 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

5 of all the other children's Forms 8615. Do not John enters his name and social securityStep 3. Figuringinclude the amount from line 5 of the Form 8615 number on Sara's Form 8615 because his name
the Child's Taxbeing completed. and number are listed first on the joint return he
and Laura are filing. He checks the box for(Form 8615, Part III)Example. Paul and Jane Persimmon have married filing jointly.three children, Sharon, Jerry, and Mike, who The final step in figuring a child's tax using Form He enters Sara's investment income,must attach Form 8615 to their tax returns. The 8615 is to determine the larger of: $2,800, on line 1. Sara does not itemize deduc-children's net investment income amounts on
line 5 of their Forms 8615 are: tions, so John enters $1,700 on line 2. He enters1. The total of
$1,100 ($2,800 − $1,700) on line 3.• Sharon Ð $800 a. The child's share of the tentative tax
Sara's taxable income, as shown on herbased on the parent's tax rate, plus• Jerry Ð $600
Form 1040A, line 27, is $2,500. This is her total
b. The tax on the child's taxable income in• Mike Ð $1,000 income ($4,300) minus her standard deductionexcess of net investment income, fig- ($1,800). Her standard deduction is limited toLine 7 of Sharon's Form 8615 will show ured at the child's tax rate, or the amount of her earned income plus $300.$1,600, the total of the amounts on line 5 of John enters $2,500 on line 4.Jerry's and Mike's Forms 8615. 2. The tax on the child's taxable income, fig-
Line 7 of Jerry's Form 8615 will show $1,800 ured at the child's tax rate. John compares lines 3 and 4 and enters the
($800 + $1,000). smaller amount, $1,100, on line 5.This is the child's tax. It is figured on FormLine 7 of Mike's Form 8615 will show $1,400 8615, lines 14 through 18. John enters $48,000 on line 6. This is the($800 + $600).
taxable income from line 43 of John and Laura's
Other children's information not available. joint Form 1040 return. Sara is an only child, soAlternative minimum tax. A child may beIf the net investment income of the other children line 7 is blank. He adds line 5 ($1,100), line 6subject to alternative minimum tax (AMT) if he oris not available when the return is due, either file ($48,000), and line 7 (blank), and entersshe has certain items given preferential treat-the return using estimates or get an extension of $49,100 on line 8.ment under the tax law. See Alternative Mini-time to file. See Parent's return information not
mum Tax in chapter 30.known timely, earlier. Using the column for married filing jointly in
For more information on who is liable for the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $49,100. HeLine 11 (tentative tax). Subtract line 10 from AMT and how to figure it, get Form 6251, Alter- enters the tax, $6,586, on line 9. He entersline 9 and enter the result on this line. This is the native Minimum TaxÐIndividuals. For informa- $6,421 on line 10. This is the tax from line 44 oftentative tax. tion on special limits that apply to a child who John and Laura's Form 1040. He enters $165 onIf line 7 is blank, skip lines 12a and 12b and
files Form 6251, see Alternative Minimum Tax inenter the amount from line 11 on line 13. Also line 11 ($6,586 − $6,421).
Publication 929.skip the discussion for lines 12a and 12b that Because line 7 is blank, John skips lines 12afollows. and 12b and enters $165 on line 13.Illustrated ExampleLines 12a and 12b (dividing the tentative John subtracts line 5 ($1,100) from line 4tax). If an amount is entered on line 7, divide The following example includes a completed ($2,500) and enters the result, $1,400, on linethe tentative tax shown on line 11 among the Form 8615. Form 1040A is not shown. 14. Using the column for single filing status inchildren according to each child's share of the
the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $1,400 andJohn and Laura Brown have one child, Sara.total net investment income. This is done on
enters this tax, $141, on line 15. He adds linesShe is 13 and has $2,800 taxable interest in-lines 12a, 12b, and 13. Add the amount on line 7
13 ($165) and 15 ($141) and enters $306 on lineto the amount on line 5 and enter the total on line come and $1,500 earned income. She does not
12a. Divide the amount on line 5 by the amount itemize deductions. John and Laura file a joint 16.
on line 12a and enter the result as a decimal on return with John's name and social security Using the column for single filing status in theline 12b. number listed first. They claim three exemp- Tax Table, John finds the tax on $2,500 (line 4)tions, including an exemption for Sara, on their and enters this tax, $251, on line 17.Example. In the earlier example under Line return.
7 (net investment income of other children), John compares lines 16 and 17 and entersBecause Sara is under age 18 and has moreSharon's Form 8615 shows $1,600 on line 7. the larger amount, $306, on line 18 of Sara'sthan $1,700 investment income, part of her in-The amount entered on line 12a is $2,400, the Form 8615. He also enters that amount on linecome may be subject to tax at her parents' rate.total of the amounts on lines 5 and 7 ($800 + 28 of Sara's Form 1040A.A completed Form 8615 must be attached to her$1,600). The decimal on line 12b is .333, figured return. John also completes Schedule 1 (Formas follows and rounded to three places.
Sara's father, John, fills out Sara's return for 1040A) for Sara.$800 her. He completes her Form 1040A through line= .333
 $2,400 27, then begins completing her Form 8615.
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children Page 207

Proof as of
November 15, 2007(subject to change)
Sara L. Brown
John J. Brown
1 1 7 00 1 1 1 1
007 00 0001
2,800
1,700
1,100
2,500
1,100
48,000
49,100
6,586
6,421
165
1,400
141
306
251
306
165
OMB No. 1545-0074Tax for Children Under Age 18
With Investment Income of More Than $1,700
Form 8615
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 33
/H17075Attach only to the child’s Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
Child’s social security numberChild’s name shown on return
Parent’s social security numberParent’s name (first, initial, and last). Caution: See instructions before completing.
Parent’s filing status (check one):
Child’s Net Investment Income
Enter the child’s investment income (see instructions)1 1
If the child did not itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR), enter
$1,700. Otherwise, see instructions
2
2
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero or less, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do
attach it to the child’s return
3
3
4
Enter the child’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; or Form 1040NR,
line 40. If the child files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions
4
Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4. If zero, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do
attach it to the child’s return
5
5
Tentative Tax Based on the Tax Rate of the Parent
Enter the parent’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; Form 1040EZ,
line 6; Form 1040NR, line 40; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14. If zero or less, enter -0-. If the parent
files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions
6
6
Enter the total, if any, from Forms 8615, line 5, of all other children of the parent named
above. Do not include the amount from line 5 above
7
7
8Add lines 5, 6, and 7 (see instructions)8
9
Enter the tax on the amount on line 8 based on the parent’s filing status above (see instructions).
If the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here /H17075
9
10 Enter the parent’s tax from Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A, line 28, minus any alternative
minimum tax; Form 1040EZ, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 41; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 15. Do not
include any tax from Form 4972, 8814, or 8889 or any tax from recapture of an education credit.
If the parent files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions. If the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or Schedule J (Form 1040) was used to
figure the tax, check here /H17075 10
Subtract line 10 from line 9 and enter the result. If line 7 is blank, also enter this amount on line
13 and go to Part III
11
11
12aAdd lines 5 and 712a
12b .Divide line 5 by line 12a. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at least three places)b
Multiply line 11 by line 12b13 13
Child’s Tax—If lines 4 and 5 above are the same, enter -0- on line 15 and go to line 16.
1414 Subtract line 5 from line 4
15
15 Enter the tax on the amount on line 14 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here /H17075
1616 Add lines 13 and 15
17
17 Enter the tax on the amount on line 4 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here /H17075
18 Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 here and on the child’s Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A,
line 28; or Form 1040NR, line 41. If the child files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions 18
Form 8615 (2007)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see the instructions.
A B
C
Single
Cat. No. 64113U
/H11003
Part III
Part I
Part II
(99) /H17075See separate instructions.
Before you begin: If the child, the parent, or any of the parent’s other children under age 18 must use the Schedule D Tax
Worksheet or has income from farming or fishing, see Pub. 929, Tax Rules for Children and Dependents. It
explains how to figure the child’s tax using the Schedule D Tax Worksheet or Schedule J (Form 1040).
Married filing jointly Married filing separately Head of household Qualifying widow(er)
2007
/H12011
Page 208 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

• How to claim the credit. 3. You must pay child and dependent care
expenses so you (and your spouse if you• Employment taxes you may have to pay are married) can work or look for work.as a household employer.32. (See Work-Related Expense Test, later.)
You may be able to claim the credit if you pay 4. You must make payments for child and
dependent care to someone you (and yoursomeone to care for your dependent who is
Child and spouse) cannot claim as a dependent. Ifunder age 13 or for your spouse or dependent
you make payments to your child, he orwho is not able to care for himself or herself. The
she cannot be your dependent and mustcredit can be up to 35% of your expenses. ToDependent Care be age 19 or older by the end of the year.qualify, you must pay these expenses so you
You cannot make payments to: can work or look for work.
Credit This credit should not be confused with a. Your spouse, or
the child tax credit discussed in chapter b. The parent of your qualifying child who34.
CAUTION
! is your qualifying person and under ageWhat's New 13.
Dependent care benefits. If you received any (See Payments to Relatives or Depen-New credit limit applies. The credit for child dependent care benefits from your employer dents under Work-Related Expense Test,and dependent care expenses is no longer al- during the year, you may be able to exclude from later.)lowed against the alternative minimum tax your income all or part of them. You must com-
(AMT). See Limit on credit for more information. 5. Your filing status must be single, head ofplete Part III of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form
household, qualifying widow(er) with de-1040A) before you can figure the amount of yourAt the time this publication went to
pendent child, or married filing jointly. Youcredit. See Dependent Care Benefits under Howprint, Congress was considering legis-
must file a joint return if you are married,To Figure the Credit, later.lation that would allow the credit
CAUTION
!
unless an exception applies to you. (Seeagainst the AMT. To find out if the legislation
Joint Return Test, later.)was enacted, and for more details, see the In- Useful Items
structions for Form 2441. 6. You must identify the care provider on yourYou may want to see:
tax return. (See Provider IdentificationNew definition of earned income. When you Test, later.)Publicationfigure your credit for child and dependent care
7. If you exclude or deduct dependent care❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction,expenses, your earned income no longer in-
benefits provided by a dependent careand Filing Informationcludes employee compensation that is nontax-
benefits plan, the total amount you excludeable. However, you can elect to include any ❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care or deduct must be less than the dollar limitnontaxable combat pay in earned income to Expenses for qualifying expenses (generally, $3,000figure your credit. See Earned Income Test.
❏ 926 Household Employer's Tax Guide if one qualifying person was cared for or
Part-time work and temporary absences $6,000 if two or more qualifying persons
from work. You may be able to figure your Form (and Instructions) were cared for). (If two or more qualifying
credit using expenses for care while you were persons were cared for, the amount you❏ 2441 Child and Dependent Caretemporarily absent from work or working exclude or deduct will always be less thanExpensespart-time. See Working or Looking for Work. the dollar limit, since the amount you can
❏ Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) Child and exclude or deduct is limited to $5,000. See
Dependent Care Expenses for Reduced Dollar Limit under How To Figure
Form 1040A Filers the Credit, later.)
Reminders ❏ Schedule H (Form 1040) Household These tests are presented in Figure 32-A and
Employment Taxes are also explained in detail in this chapter.
Taxpayer identification number needed for ❏ W-7 Application for IRS Individualeach qualifying person. You must include on Taxpayer Identification Number Qualifying Person Testline 2 of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A)
the name and taxpayer identification number ❏ W-10 Dependent Care Provider's Your child and dependent care expenses must(generally the social security number) of each Identification and Certification be for the care of one or more qualifying per-qualifying person. See Taxpayer identification sons.number under Qualifying Person Test, later.
A qualifying person is:
You may have to pay employment taxes. If
1. Your qualifying child who is your depen-you pay someone to come to your home and Tests To Claim dent and who was under age 13 when thecare for your dependent or spouse, you may be
care was provided (but see Note later),a household employer who has to pay employ- the Creditment taxes. Usually, you are not a household 2. Your spouse who was physically or men-employer if the person who cares for your de- tally not able to care for himself or herselfTo be able to claim the credit for child andpendent or spouse does so at his or her home or and lived with you for more than half thedependent care expenses, you must file Formplace of business. See Employment Taxes for year, or1040 or Form 1040A, not Form 1040EZ, andHousehold Employers, later. meet all the following tests. 3. A person who was physically or mentally
not able to care for himself or herself, lived1. The care must be for one or more qualify- with you for more than half the year, anding persons who are identified on the form either:you use to claim the credit. (See QualifyingIntroduction
Person Test.) a. Was your dependent, orThis chapter discusses the credit for child and
2. You (and your spouse if you are married)dependent care expenses and covers the fol- b. Would have been your dependent ex-
must have earned income during the year.lowing topics. cept that:
(However, see Rule for student-spouse or• Tests you must meet to claim the credit. spouse not able to care for self under i. He or she received gross income of
Earned Income Test, later.)• How to figure the credit. $3,400 or more,
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 209

Figure 32-A. Can You Claim the Credit?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the care for one or more qualifying persons?
No
No
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your spouse or to the parent of your
qualifying child who is your qualifying person and is under age 13?
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Did you1 have earned income during the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you pay the expenses to allow you 1 to work or look for work?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to someone you or your spouse could
claim as a dependent?
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your child who was under the age of
19 at the end of the year?
No
Yes
/H17075
Are you single? Are you filing a joint return?
Do you meet the requirements
to be considered unmarried?
Do you know the care provider’s name, address,
and identifying number?
Did you make a reasonable effort to get this
information? (See Due diligence.)
Did you have only one qualifying child and
exclude or deduct at least $3,000 of dependent
care benefits?
You CAN claim the child and dependent
care credit. Fill out Form 2441 or
Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).
You CANNOT claim the child
and dependent care credit. 2
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
This also applies to your spouse, unless your spouse was disabled or a full-time student.
If you had expenses that met the requirements for 2006, except that you did not pay them until 2007, you may be able to claim t hose expenses in 2007.
See Expenses not paid until the following year under How To Figure the Credit.
/H17075
Yes
1
2
Page 210 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

ii. He or she filed a joint return, or • The child received over half of his or her Rule for student-spouse or spouse not able
support during the calendar year from one to care for self. Your spouse is treated asiii. You, or your spouse if filing jointly, or both parents who are divorced or legally having earned income for any month that he orcould be claimed as a dependent on separated under a decree of divorce or she is:someone else's 2007 return. separate maintenance, are separated
1. A full-time student, orunder a written separation agreement, or
lived apart at all times during the last 6 2. Physically or mentally not able to care forNote. If you are divorced or separated, see months of the calendar year, himself or herself. (Your spouse also mustChild of divorced or separated parents or par- live with you for more than half the year.)• The child was in the custody of one orents living apart, later, to determine which par- both parents for more than half the year, Figure the earned income of the nonworkingent may treat the child as a qualifying person. and spouse described under (1) or (2) above as
Dependent defined. A dependent is a per- explained under Earned Income Limit, later.• You were the child's custodial parent (the
son, other than you or your spouse, for whom parent with whom the child lived for the This rule applies to only one spouse for any
you can claim an exemption. To be your depen- greater part of 2007). one month. If, in the same month, both you and
dent, a person must be your qualifying child (or your spouse do not work and are either full-time
your qualifying relative). The noncustodial parent cannot treat the child students or physically or mentally not able to
as a qualifying person even if that parent is care for yourselves, only one of you can beQualifying child. To be your qualifying entitled to claim the child as a dependent under treated as having earned income in that month.child, a child must live with you for more than the special rules for a child of divorced or sepa-half the year and meet other requirements. Full-time student. You are a full-time stu-rated parents.
dent if you are enrolled at a school for the num-More information. For more information
ber of hours or classes that the school considersabout who is a dependent or a qualifying child, Earned Income Test full time. You must have been a student forsee chapter 3.
some part of each of 5 calendar months duringTo claim the credit, you (and your spouse if youPhysically or mentally not able to care for the year. (The months need not be consecutive.)are married) must have earned income duringoneself. Persons who cannot dress, clean, or the year. School. The term ªschoolº includes elemen-feed themselves because of physical or mental tary schools, junior and senior high schools,problems are considered not able to care for Earned income. Earned income includes colleges, universities, and technical, trade, andthemselves. Also, persons who must have con- wages, salaries, tips, other taxable employee mechanical schools. A school does not includestant attention to prevent them from injuring compensation, and net earnings from an on-the-job training course, correspondencethemselves or others are considered not able to self-employment. A net loss from school, or school offering courses only throughcare for themselves. self-employment reduces earned income. the Internet.Earned income also includes strike benefits andPerson qualifying for part of year. You de- any disability pay you report as wages.termine a person's qualifying status each day. Work-RelatedGenerally, only taxable compensation is in-For example, if the person for whom you pay cluded. However, you can elect to include non- Expense Testchild and dependent care expenses no longer taxable combat pay in earned income. If you arequalifies on September 16, count only those filing a joint return and both you and your spouse Child and dependent care expenses must beexpenses through September 15. Also see received nontaxable combat pay, you can each work-related to qualify for the credit. ExpensesYearly Limit under Dollar Limit, later. make your own election. You should figure your are considered work-related only if both of the
credit both ways and make the election if it gives following are true.Taxpayer identification number. You must you a greater tax benefit.include on your return the name and taxpayer • They allow you (and your spouse if youidentification number (generally the social se- Members of certain religious faiths op- are married) to work or look for work.curity number) of the qualifying person(s). If the posed to social security. Certain income
• They are for a qualifying person's care.correct information is not shown, the credit may earned by persons who are members of certain
be reduced or disallowed. religious faiths that are opposed to participation
in Social Security Act programs and have anIndividual taxpayer identification number Working or Looking for WorkIRS-approved form that exempts certain income(ITIN) for aliens. If your qualifying person is a from social security and Medicare taxes may not To be work-related, your expenses must allownonresident or resident alien who does not have be considered earned income for this purpose. you to work or look for work. If you are married,and cannot get a social security number (SSN), See Earned Income Test in Publication 503. generally both you and your spouse must workuse that person's ITIN. The ITIN is entered
or look for work. Your spouse is treated as work-wherever an SSN is requested on a tax return. Not earned income. Earned income does notTo apply for an ITIN, see Form W-7. ing during any month he or she is a full-timeinclude:An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle student or is physically or mentally not able to
• Pensions and annuities,the holder to social security benefits or change care for himself or herself.
the holder's employment or immigration status Your work can be for others or in your own• Social security and railroad retirementunder U.S. law. business or partnership. It can be either full timebenefits,
or part time.Adoption taxpayer identification number • Workers' compensation, Work also includes actively looking for work.(ATIN). If your qualifying person is a child who
• Interest and dividends, However, if you do not find a job and have nowas placed in your home for adoption and for
whom you do not have an SSN, you must get an earned income for the year, you cannot take this• Unemployment compensation,ATIN for the child. File Form W-7A, Application credit. See Earned Income Test, earlier.
• Scholarship or fellowship grants, exceptfor Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending An expense is not considered work-related
for those reported on a Form W-2 andU.S. Adoptions. merely because you had it while you were work-
paid to you for teaching or other services, ing. The purpose of the expense must be toChild of divorced or separated parents or allow you to work. Whether your expenses allow• Nontaxable workfare payments,parents living apart. Even if you cannot claim you to work or look for work depends on theyour child as a dependent, he or she is treated • Income of nonresident aliens that is not facts.as your qualifying person if: effectively connected with a U.S. trade or
business, or Example 1. The cost of a babysitter while• The child was under age 13 or was physi-
you and your spouse go out to eat is not nor-cally or mentally not able to care for him- • Any amount received for work while an
self or herself, inmate in a penal institution. mally a work-related expense.
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 211

Example 2. You work during the day. Your a qualifying person even if another care provider is provided, that transportation is for the care of
spouse works at night and sleeps during the is available at no cost. the qualifying person. This includes transporta-
day. You pay for care of your 5-year-old child tion by bus, subway, taxi, or private car. How-Expenses are for the care of a qualifying
during the hours when you are working and your person only if their main purpose is the person's ever, transportation not provided by a care
spouse is sleeping. Your expenses are consid- well-being and protection. provider is not for the care of a qualifying person.
ered work-related. Also, if you pay the transportation cost for theExpenses for household services qualify if
care provider to come to your home, that ex-part of the services is for the care of qualifyingVolunteer work.  For this purpose, you are pense is not for care of a qualifying person.persons. See Household services, later.not considered to be working if you do unpaid
volunteer work or volunteer work for a nominal Expenses not for care. Expenses for care do Fees and deposits. Fees you paid to ansalary. not include amounts you pay for food, lodging, agency to get the services of a care provider,
clothing, education, and entertainment. How- deposits you paid to an agency or pre-school,Work for part of year. If you work or actively ever, you can include small amounts paid for application fees, and other indirect expenseslook for work during only part of the period cov- these items if they are incident to and cannot be are work-related expenses if you have to payered by the expenses, then you must figure your separated from the cost of caring for the qualify- them to get care, even though they are notexpenses for each day. For example, if you work ing person. directly for care. However, a forfeited deposit isall year and pay care expenses of $250 a month
not for the care of a qualifying person if care is($3,000 for the year), all the expenses are Education. Expenses for a child in nursery not provided.work-related. However, if you work or look for school, pre-school, or similar programs for chil-work for only 2 months and 15 days during the dren below the level of kindergarten are ex- Example 1. You paid a fee to an agency toyear and pay expenses of $250 a month, your penses for care. Expenses to attend get the services of the nanny who cares for yourwork-related expenses are limited to $625 (2 1/2
kindergarten or a higher grade are not expenses 2-year-old daughter while you work. The fee youmonths × $250). for care. Do not use these expenses to figure paid is a work-related expense.your credit.Temporary absence from work. You do not However, expenses for before- or af-have to figure your expenses for each day dur- Example 2. You placed a deposit with ater-school care of a child in kindergarten or aing a short, temporary absence from work, such pre-school to reserve a place for your 3-year-oldhigher grade may be expenses for care.as for vacation or a minor illness, if you have to child. You later sent your child to a differentSummer school and tutoring programs arepay for care anyway. Instead, you can figure pre-school and forfeited the deposit. The for-not for care.your credit including the expenses you paid for feited deposit is not for care and so is not a
the period of absence. work-related expense.Example 1. You take your 3-year-old childAn absence of 2 weeks or less is a short,
to a nursery school that provides lunch andtemporary absence. An absence of more than 2 Household services. Expenses you pay foreducational activities as a part of its preschoolweeks may be considered a short, temporary household services meet the work-related ex-childcare service. The lunch and educationalabsence, depending on the circumstances. pense test if they are at least partly for theactivities are incident to the childcare, and their well-being and protection of a qualifying person.cost cannot be separated from the cost of care.Example. You pay a nanny to care for your Household services are ordinary and usualYou can count the total cost when you figure the2-year-old son and 4-year-old daughter so you services done in and around your home that arecredit.can work. You become ill and miss 4 months of necessary to run your home. They include thework but receive sick pay. You continue to pay services of a housekeeper, maid, or cook. How-Example 2. You place your 10-year-oldthe nanny to care for the children while you are ever, they do not include the services of a chauf-child in a boarding school so you can work fullill. Your absence is not a short, temporary ab- feur, bartender, or gardener. See Householdtime. Only the part of the boarding school ex-sence, and your expenses are not considered Services in Publication 503 for more informa-pense that is for the care of your child is awork-related. tion.work-related expense. You can count that part
of the expense in figuring your credit if it can be In this chapter, the term housekeeper refersPart-time work. If you work part-time, you
separated from the cost of education. You can- to any household employee whose services in-generally must figure your expenses for each
not count any part of the amount you pay the clude the care of a qualifying person.day. However, if you have to pay for care
school for your child's education.weekly, monthly, or in another way that includes Taxes paid on wages. The taxes you payboth days worked and days not worked, you can on wages for qualifying child and dependentCare outside your home. You can count thefigure your credit including the expenses you care services are work-related expenses. Seecost of care provided outside your home if thepaid for days you did not work. Any day when Employment Taxes for Household Employers,care is for your dependent under age 13 or anyyou work at least 1 hour is a day of work. later.other qualifying person who regularly spends at
least 8 hours each day in your home.Example 1. You work 3 days a week. While
you work, your 6-year-old child attends a depen- Dependent care center. You can count Payments to Relatives ordent care center, which complies with all state care provided outside your home by a depen- Dependentsand local regulations. You can pay the center dent care center only if the center complies with$150 for any 3 days a week or $250 for 5 days a all state and local regulations that apply to these You can count work-related payments you makeweek. Your child attends the center 5 days a centers. to relatives who are not your dependents, even ifweek. Your work-related expenses are limited to A dependent care center is a place that pro- they live in your home. However, do not count$150 a week. vides care for more than six persons (other than any amounts you pay to:
persons who live there) and receives a fee,Example 2. The facts are the same as in 1. A dependent for whom you (or yourpayment, or grant for providing services for anyExample 1 except the center does not offer a spouse if you are married) can claim anof those persons, even if the center is not run for3-day option. The entire $250 weekly fee may be exemption,profit.a work-related expense.
2. Your child who was under age 19 at theCamp. The cost of sending your child to an
end of the year, even if he or she is notovernight camp is not considered a work-related
your dependent,expense. The cost of sending your child to a dayCare of a Qualifying Person
camp may be a work-related expense, even if 3. A person who was your spouse any timeTo be work-related, your expenses must be to the camp specializes in a particular activity, during the year, orprovide care for a qualifying person. such as computers or soccer.
4. The parent of your qualifying child who isYou do not have to choose the least expen-
your qualifying person and is undersive way of providing care. The cost of a paid Transportation. If a care provider takes a
age 13.care provider may be an expense for the care of qualifying person to or from a place where care
Page 212 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

ªTax-Exemptº in the space where the tax formJoint Return Test Figuring Totalcalls for the number.
Work-Related ExpensesGenerally, married couples must file a joint re- If you cannot provide all of the information or
turn to take the credit. However, if you are legally if the information is incorrect you must be able to To figure the credit for 2007 work-related ex-separated or living apart from your spouse, you show that you used due diligence (discussed penses, count only those you paid by Decembermay be able to file a separate return and still later) in trying to furnish the necessary informa- 31, 2007.take the credit. tion.
Expenses prepaid in an earlier year. If you
Legally separated. You are not considered pay for services before they are provided, youGetting the information. You can use Formmarried if you are legally separated from your can count the prepaid expenses only in the yearW-10 to request the required information fromspouse under a decree of divorce or separate the care is received. Claim the expenses for thethe care provider. If you do not use Form W-10,maintenance. You are eligible to take the credit later year as if they were actually paid in thatyou can get the information from:on a separate return. later year.
1. A copy of the provider's social securityMarried and living apart. You are not consid- Expenses not paid until the following year.
card,ered married and are eligible to take the credit if Do not count 2006 expenses that you paid in
all the following apply. 2007 as work-related expenses for 2007. You2. A copy of the provider's driver's license (if
may be able to claim an additional credit forthe license includes the social security1. You file a separate return. them on your 2007 return, but you must figure itnumber), separately. See Payments for previous year's2. Your home is the home of a qualifying per- 3. A copy of the provider's completed Form expenses under Amount of Credit in Publicationson for more than half the year. W-4 if he or she is your household em- 503.
3. You pay more than half the cost of keeping ployee, If you had expenses in 2007 that youup your home for the year.
4. A copy of the statement furnished by your did not pay until 2008, you cannot
4. Your spouse does not live in your home for employer if the provider is your employer's count them when figuring your 2007
TIP
the last 6 months of the year. dependent care plan, or credit. You may be able to claim a credit for them
on your 2008 return.5. A letter or invoice from the provider if itCosts of keeping up a home. The costs of
shows the information.keeping up a home normally include property Expenses reimbursed. If a state social serv-
taxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility charges, ices agency pays you a nontaxable amount toYou should keep this information withhome repairs, insurance on the home, and food reimburse you for some of your child and depen-your tax records. Do not send Formeaten at home. dent care expenses, you cannot count the ex-W-10 (or other document containingThe costs of keeping up a home do not
RECORDS penses that are reimbursed as work-relatedthis information) to the Internal Revenue Serv-include payments for clothing, education, medi- expenses.ice.cal treatment, vacations, life insurance, trans-
portation, or mortgage principal. Example. You paid work-related expenses
They also do not include the purchase, per- of $3,000. You are reimbursed $2,000 by a stateDue diligence. If the care provider informationmanent improvement, or replacement of prop- social services agency. You can use onlyyou give is incorrect or incomplete, your crediterty. For example, you cannot include the cost of $1,000 to figure your credit.may not be allowed. However, if you can showreplacing a water heater. However, you can in-
that you used due diligence in trying to supply Medical expenses. Some expenses for theclude the cost of repairing a water heater.
the information, you can still claim the credit. care of qualifying persons who are not able to
care for themselves may qualify as work-relatedDeath of spouse. If your spouse died during You can show due diligence by getting and
expenses and also as medical expenses. Youthe year and you do not remarry before the end keeping the provider's completed Form W-10 or
can use them either way, but you cannot use theof the year, you generally must file a joint return one of the other sources of information listed
same expenses to claim both a credit and ato take the credit. If you do remarry before the earlier. Care providers can be penalized if they medical expense deduction.end of the year, the credit can be claimed on do not provide this information to you or if they If you use these expenses to figure the credityour deceased spouse's separate return. provide incorrect information. and they are more than the earned income limit
Provider refusal. If the provider refuses to or the dollar limit, discussed later, you can addProvider give you their identifying information, you should the excess to your medical expenses. However,
report whatever information you have (such asIdentification Test if you use your total expenses to figure your
the name and address) on the form you use to medical expense deduction, you cannot use any
You must identify all persons or organizations claim the credit. Enter ªSee Attached Statementº part of them to figure your credit.
that provide care for your child or dependent. in the columns calling for the information you do Amounts excluded from your incomeUse Part I of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form not have. Then attach a statement explaining under your employer's dependent care1040A) to show the information. that you requested the information from the care benefits plan cannot be used to claim a
CAUTION
!provider, but the provider did not give you the medical expense deduction.Information needed. To identify the care pro- information. Be sure to write your name andvider, you must give the provider's: social security number on this statement. The
statement will show that you used due diligence1. Name, Dependent Care Benefitsin trying to furnish the necessary information.
2. Address, and If you receive dependent care benefits, your
3. Taxpayer identification number. dollar limit for purposes of the credit may be
reduced. See Reduced Dollar Limit, later. But,If the care provider is an individual, the tax- even if you cannot take the credit, you may beHow To Figurepayer identification number is his or her social able to take an exclusion or deduction for thesecurity number or individual taxpayer identifi- dependent care benefits.the Creditcation number. If the care provider is an organi-
zation, then it is the employer identification Dependent care benefits. Dependent careYour credit is a percentage of your work-relatednumber (EIN). benefits include:expenses. Your expenses are subject to theYou do not have to show the taxpayer identi-
earned income limit and the dollar limit. Thefication number if the care provider is one of 1. Amounts your employer paid directly to ei-
percentage is based on your adjusted grosscertain tax-exempt organizations (such as a ther you or your care provider for the care
income.church or school). In this case, enter of your qualifying person while you work,
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 213

2. The fair market value of care in a daycare 1. Your earned income for the year if you are $3,000 limit if you paid work-related expenses
single at the end of the year, orfacility provided or sponsored by your em- for the care of one qualifying person at any time
ployer, and during the year. Use $6,000 if you paid2. The smaller of your or your spouse's work-related expenses for the care of more thanearned income for the year if you are mar-3. Pre-tax contributions you made under a one qualifying person at any time during theried at the end of the year.dependent care flexible spending arrange-
year.ment. Earned income is defined under Earned Income
Test, earlier.Your salary may have been reduced to pay for
these benefits. If you received benefits as an Reduced Dollar LimitFor purposes of item (2), use youremployee, they should be shown on your W-2 spouse's earned income for the entireform. See Statement for employee, later. Bene- If you received dependent care benefits that youyear, even if you were married for only
TIPfits you received as a partner should be shown in exclude or deduct from your income, you mustpart of the year.box 13 of your Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) with subtract that amount from the dollar limit that
code N. Enter the amount of these benefits on applies to you. Your reduced dollar limit is fig-Separated spouse. If you are legally sepa-
the first line of Part III of Form 2441. ured in Part III of Form 2441 or Schedule 2rated or married and living apart from your
(Form 1040A). See Dependent Care Benefits,spouse (as described under Joint Return Test,
Exclusion or deduction. If your employer earlier), you are not considered married for pur- earlier, for information on excluding or deducting
provides dependent care benefits under a quali- poses of the earned income limit. Use only your these benefits.
fied plan, you may be able to exclude these income in figuring the earned income limit.
benefits from your income. Your employer can Example. George is a widower with oneSurviving spouse. If your spouse died duringtell you whether your benefit plan qualifies. To child and earns $24,000 a year. He paysthe year and you file a joint return as a survivingclaim the exclusion, you must complete Part III work-related expenses of $2,900 for the care ofspouse, you are not considered married for pur-of either Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form his 4-year-old child and qualifies to claim theposes of the earned income limit. Use only your1040A). You cannot use Form 1040EZ. credit for child and dependent care expenses.income in figuring the earned income limit.If you are self-employed and receive benefits His employer pays an additional $1,000 under a
from a qualified dependent care benefit plan, Community property laws. You should dis- dependent care benefit plan. This $1,000 is ex-
you are treated as both employer and employee. regard community property laws when you fig- cluded from George's income.
Therefore, you would not get an exclusion from ure earned income for this credit. Although the dollar limit for his work-relatedwages. Instead, you would get a deduction on expenses is $3,000 (one qualifying person),Student-spouse or spouse not able to careForm 1040, Schedule C, line 14; Schedule E, George figures his credit on only $2,000 of thefor self. Your spouse who is either a full-timeline 18 or 28; or Schedule F, line 17. To claim the $2,900 work-related expenses he paid. This isstudent or not able to care for himself or herselfdeduction, you must use Form 2441. because his dollar limit is reduced as shownis treated as having earned income. His or herThe amount you can exclude or deduct is next.earned income for each month is considered tolimited to the smallest of: be at least $250 if there is one qualifying person
George's Reduced Dollar Limitin your home, or at least $500 if there are two or1. The total amount of dependent care bene-
more. 1) Maximum allowable expensesfits you received during the year,
for one qualifying person ..... $3,000Spouse works. If your spouse works during2. The total amount of qualified expenses you 2) Minus: Dependent care benefitsthat month, use the higher of $250 (or $500) orincurred during the year, George excludes from income −1,000his or her actual earned income for that month. 3) Reduced dollar limit on3. Your earned income,
Spouse qualifies for part of month.  If expenses George can use for
4. Your spouse's earned income, or the credit ............... $2,000your spouse is a full-time student or not able to
care for himself or herself for only part of a5. $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately).
month, the full $250 (or $500) still applies for that
The definition of earned income for the exclu- Amount of Creditmonth.
sion or deduction is the same as the definition
Both spouses qualify. If, in the sameused when figuring the credit except that earned To determine the amount of your credit, multiply
month, both you and your spouse are eitherincome for the exclusion or deduction does not your work-related expenses (after applying thefull-time students or not able to care for your-include any dependent care benefits you re- earned income and dollar limits) by a percent-selves, only one spouse can be considered toceive. See the instructions for Form 2441 or age. This percentage depends on your adjustedhave this earned income of $250 (or $500) forSchedule 2 (Form 1040A). gross income shown on Form 1040, line 38, orthat month. Form 1040A, line 22. The following table shows
Statement for employee. Your employer the percentage to use based on adjusted gross
must give you a Form W-2 (or similar statement) Dollar Limit income.
showing in box 10 the total amount of dependent IF your adjusted gross THENThere is a dollar limit on the amount of yourcare benefits provided to you during the year income is: thework-related expenses you can use to figure theunder a qualified plan. Your employer will also But not percentagecredit. This limit is $3,000 for one qualifyinginclude any dependent care benefits over Over over is:person, or $6,000 for two or more qualifying$5,000 in your wages shown on your Form W-2
$ 0 $15,000 35%persons.in box 10.
15,000 17,000 34%If you paid work-related expenses for 17,000 19,000 33%Effect of exclusion. If you exclude dependent the care of two or more qualifying per- 19,000 21,000 32%care benefits from your income, the amount of sons, the $6,000 limit does not need to
TIP 21,000 23,000 31%the excluded benefits: be divided equally among them. For example, if 23,000 25,000 30%
your work-related expenses for the care of one 25,000 27,000 29%1. Is not included in your work-related ex- qualifying person are $3,200 and your 27,000 29,000 28%penses, and work-related expenses for another qualifying 29,000 31,000 27%
2. Reduces the dollar limit, discussed later. person are $2,800, you can use the total, 31,000 33,000 26%
33,000 35,000 25%$6,000, when figuring the credit.
35,000 37,000 24%
Yearly limit. The dollar limit is a yearly limit.Earned Income Limit 37,000 39,000 23%
The amount of the dollar limit remains the same 39,000 41,000 22%
The amount of work-related expenses you use no matter how long, during the year, you have a 41,000 43,000 21%
to figure your credit cannot be more than: 43,000 No limit 20%qualifying person in your household. Use the
Page 214 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

employment taxes. If the individuals who work in draft Form 2441 is shown at the end of this
chapter.your home are self-employed, you are not liableHow To Claim for any of the taxes discussed in this section. Illustrated example. Joan Thomas is di-Self-employed persons who are in business forthe Credit vorced and has two children, ages 3 and 9. Shethemselves are not household employees. Usu- works at ACME Computers. Her adjusted grossally, you are not a household employer if theTo claim the credit, you can file Form 1040 or income (AGI) is $29,000, and the entire amountperson who cares for your dependent or spouseForm 1040A. You cannot claim the credit on is earned income.does so at his or her home or place of business.Form 1040EZ. Joan's younger child (Susan) stays at her
If you use a placement agency that exercises employer's on-site childcare center while sheForm 1040. You must complete Form 2441 control over what work is done and how it will be works. The benefits from this childcare centerand attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit done by a babysitter or companion who works in qualify to be excluded from her income. Heron Form 1040, line 47. An example of a filled-in your home, the worker is not your employee. employer reports the value of this service asForm 2441 is at the end of this chapter. This control could include providing rules of con- $3,000 for the year. This $3,000 is shown on her
duct and appearance and requiring regular re-Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 2 Form W-2 in box 10, but is not included in tax-
ports. In this case, you do not have to pay(Form 1040A) and attach it to your Form 1040A. able wages in box 1.
employment taxes. But, if an agency merelyEnter the credit on your Form 1040A, line 29. A neighbor cares for Joan's older child (Seth)
gives you a list of sitters and you hire one from after school, on holidays, and during the sum-Limit on credit. The amount of credit you can that list, and pay the sitter directly, the sitter may mer. Joan pays her neighbor $2,400 for thisclaim is limited to your regular tax minus any be your employee. care.amount on line 31 of Form 6251. This limit is If you have a household employee, you may Joan figures her credit on Form 2441 asfigured on lines 10 through 13 of Form 2441 or be subject to: follows.Schedule 2 (Form 1040A). For more informa-
tion, see the instructions for Form 2441 or 1. Social security and Medicare taxes, 1) Work-related expenses JoanSchedule 2 (Form 1040A). paid ................... $ 2,4002. Federal unemployment tax, and 2) Dollar limit (2 or more qualifiedAt the time this publication went to
3. Federal income tax withholding. individuals) .............. $ 6,000print, Congress was considering legis-
3) Minus: Dependent care benefitslation that would change this limit. That
CAUTION
! Social security and Medicare taxes are gener- excluded from Joan's income .. -3,000legislation may also affect the line numbers on ally withheld from the employee's pay and 4) Reduced dollar limit ......... $ 3,000Form 2441 and Schedule 2 (Form 1040A). To matched by the employer. Federal unemploy- 5) Lesser of expenses paid ($2,400)find out if the legislation was enacted and for ment (FUTA) tax is paid by the employer only or dollar limit ($3,000) ....... $ 2,400more details, see the Instructions for Form 2441. and provides for payments of unemployment Percentage for AGI of $29,0006) .28compensation to workers who have lost their (28%) ..................Tax credit not refundable. You cannot get jobs. Federal income tax is withheld from the 7) Multiply the amount on line 5 bya refund for any part of the credit that is more employee's total pay if the employee asks you to the percentage on line 6 ($2,400than this limit. do so and you agree. x .28) .................. $ 672
Recordkeeping. You should keep rec- 8) Enter the amount from FormFor more information on a household em-
ords of your work-related expenses. 1040, line 44 ............. $ 1,098ployer's tax responsibilities, see Publication 926
Also, if your dependent or spouse is 9) Enter the amount from Formand Schedule H (Form 1040) and its instruc-
RECORDS
not able to care for himself or herself, your rec- 6251, line 31 ............. 0tions.
10) Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... $ 1,098ords should show both the nature and the length
11) Credit (Enter the smaller of line 7of the disability. Other records you should keep State employment tax. You may also have to
or line 10) ............... $ 672to support your claim for the credit are described pay state unemployment tax. Contact your state
earlier under Provider Identification Test. unemployment tax office for information. You
At the time this publication went toshould also find out whether you need to pay or
print, Congress was considering legis-collect other state employment taxes or carry
lation that would affect lines 8 throughworkers' compensation insurance. A list of state
CAUTION
!
10 above. To find out if the legislation was en-employment tax agencies, including addressesEmployment Taxes acted, and for more details, see the Instructionsand phone numbers, is in Publication 926.
for Form 2441.
for Household
Employers Example
If you pay someone to come to your home and
The following example shows how to figure thecare for your dependent or spouse, you may be
credit for child and dependent care expenses fora household employer. If you are a household
two children when employer-provided depen-employer, you will need an employer identifica-
dent care benefits are involved. The filled-intion number (EIN) and you may have to pay
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 215

Proof as of
October 23, 2007(subject to change)
Joan Thomas 559 00 3436
P at Green
ACME Computers
12 Ash Avenue
Hometown, TX 75240
(See W-2)
240-00-3811 2,400
2,400
29,000
29,000
2,400
672
Seth
Susan
2,400559 00 1234
559 00 5678
1,098
29,000
672
28
Thomas
Thomas
OMB No. 1545-0074Child and Dependent Care Expenses2441Form
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 21/H17075See separate instructions.
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Persons or Organizations Who Provided the Care— You must complete this part. 
(If you have more than two care providers, see the instructions.)
(b) Address
(number, street, apt. no., city, state, and ZIP code)
(d) Amount paid
(see instructions)1 (a) Care provider’s
name
Credit for Child and Dependent Care Expenses
2
Add the amounts in column (c) of line 2. Do not enter more than $3,000 for one qualifying
person or $6,000 for two or more persons. If you completed Part III, enter the amount from
line 35
Enter your earned income. See instructions
3
3
If married filing jointly, enter your spouse’s earned income (if your spouse was a student
or was disabled, see the instructions); all others, enter the amount from line 4
4 4
Enter the smallest of line 3, 4, or 5
5
5
6
7
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38, or Form
1040NR, line 36
7
/H11003
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
But not
overOver
But not
overOver
.27$29,000—31,000.35$0—15,000
.2631,000—33,000.3415,000—17,000
.2533,000—35,000.3317,000—19,000
.2435,000—37,000.3219,000—21,000
.2337,000—39,000.3121,000—23,000
.3023,000—25,000
Multiply line 6 by the decimal amount on line 8. If you paid 2006 expenses in 2007, see
the instructions
9
Form 2441 (2007)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4 of the instructions.
Before you begin: You need to understand the following terms. See Definitions on page 1 of the instructions.
Cat. No. 11862M
Part I
Part II
Enter on line 8 the decimal amount shown below that applies to the amount on line 7
Did you receive
dependent care benefits? Yes
No
8
Complete only Part II below.
Complete Part III on the back next.
/H17075
/H17075
Caution. If the care was provided in your home, you may owe employment taxes. See the instructions for Form 1040, line 62, or Form
1040NR, line 57.
.
(99)
Information about your qualifying person(s). If you have more than two qualifying persons, see the instructions.
(a) Qualifying person’s name
First Last
(b) Qualifying person’s social
security number
(c) Qualified expenses you
incurred and paid in 2007 for the
person listed in column (a)
8
6
● Dependent Care Benefits ● Qualifying Person(s) ● Qualified Expenses
10
25,000—27,000
27,000—29,000
.29
.28
39,000—41,000
41,000—43,000
43,000—No limit
.22
.21
.20
11
13
10
13
Enter the amount from Form 6251, line 31 (see instructions)
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 12
here and on Form 1040, line 47, or Form 1040NR, line 44
2007
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41
Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit
11
12 12
(c) Identifying number
(SSN or EIN)
9
1,098
-0-
Page 216 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Proof as of
October 23, 2007(subject to change)
3,000
3,000
-0-
5,400
3,000
29,000
29,000
3,000
5,000
-0-
3,000
-0-
3,000
2,400
2,400
3,000
3,000
-0-
3,000
6,000
Page 2Form 2441 (2007)
Dependent Care Benefits
Enter the total amount of dependent care benefits you received in 2007. Amounts you
received as an employee should be shown in box 10 of your Form(s) W-2. Do not include
amounts reported as wages in box 1 of Form(s) W-2. If you were self-employed or a partner,
include amounts you received under a dependent care assistance program from your sole
proprietorship or partnership
Enter the amount, if any, you carried over from 2006 and used in 2007 during the grace
period. See instructions
Enter the amount, if any, you forfeited or carried forward to 2008. See instructions
Enter the total amount of qualified expenses incurred
in 2007 for the care of the qualifying person(s)
15
18
19Enter the smaller of line 17 or 18
16
Enter your earned income. See instructions
18
20
Enter the amount shown below that applies
to you.
21
Enter the smallest of line 19, 20, or 21
19
22
Enter the amount from line 14 that you received from your sole proprietorship or partnership.
If you did not receive any such amounts, enter -0-
20
23
Taxable benefits. Subtract line 29 from line 24. If zero or less, enter -0-. Also, include this
amount on Form 1040, line 7, or Form 1040NR, line 8. On the dotted line next to Form
1040, line 7, or Form 1040NR, line 8, enter “DCB”
21
30
Part III
To claim the child and dependent care
credit, complete lines 31–35 below.
31
32
33
22
23
30
31 Enter $3,000 ($6,000 if two or more qualifying persons)
Subtract line 32 from line 31. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit. 
Exception. If you paid 2006 expenses in 2007, see the instructions for line 9
Enter the smaller of line 33 or 34. Also, enter this amount on line 3 on the front of this
form and complete lines 4–13
Add lines 26 and 29
35
32
33
35
15
16
14
14
Complete line 2 on the front of this form. Do not include in column (c) any benefits shown
on line 32 above. Then, add the amounts in column (c) and enter the total here
34
34
Form 2441 (2007)
● If married filing jointly, enter your
spouse’s earned income (if your spouse
was a student or was disabled, see the
instructions for line 5).
● If married filing separately, see the
instructions for the amount to enter.
● All others, enter the amount from line 20.
/H20854
Subtract line 23 from line 1724
Enter $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately and you were required to enter your
spouse’s earned income on line 21)
25
Deductible benefits. Enter the smallest of line 22, 23, or 25. Also, include this amount
on the appropriate line(s) of your return. See instructions
26
Enter the smaller of line 22 or 2527
Enter the amount from line 2628
Excluded benefits. Subtract line 28 from line 27. If zero or less, enter -0-29
27
28
24
25
26
29
1717 Combine lines 14 through 16. See instructions
()
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 217

and have taxable disability income (discussedQualified Individual later under Disability income). You are retired on
permanent and total disability if:You are a qualified individual for this credit if you33.
are a U.S. citizen or resident alien and either of • You were permanently and totally disabled
the following applies. when you retired, and
• You retired on disability before the close of1. You were age 65 or older at the end ofCredit for the
the tax year.2007.
2. You were under age 65 at the end of 2007Elderly or the Even if you do not retire formally, you may beand all three of the following statements considered retired on disability when you haveare true. stopped working because of your disability.Disabled If you retired on disability before 1977, anda. You retired on permanent and total dis-
were not permanently and totally disabled at theability (explained later).
time, you can qualify for the credit if you were
b. You received taxable disability incomeIntroduction permanently and totally disabled on January 1,
for 2007. 1976, or January 1, 1977.If you qualify, the law provides a number of
c. On January 1, 2007, you had notcredits that can reduce the tax you owe for a You are considered to be under age 65
reached mandatory retirement age (de-year. One of these credits is the credit for the at the end of 2007 if you were born
fined later under Disability income).elderly or the disabled. after January 1, 1943.
TIP
This chapter explains the following.
Permanent and total disability. You are per-Age 65. You are considered to be age 65 on• Who qualifies for the credit for the elderly
manently and totally disabled if you cannot en-the day before your 65th birthday. Therefore, ifor the disabled.
gage in any substantial gainful activity becauseyou were born on January 1, 1943, you are• How to figure this credit. of your physical or mental condition. A physicianconsidered to be age 65 at the end of 2007.
must certify that the condition has lasted or can You may be able to take this credit if: be expected to last continuously for 12 months
or more, or that the condition can be expected to• You are age 65 or older, or U.S. Citizen or Resident Alien
result in death. See Physician's statement, later.• You retired on permanent and total disabil- You must be a U.S. citizen or resident alien (or Substantial gainful activity. Substantiality and have taxable disability income. be treated as a resident alien) to take the credit. gainful activity is the performance of significantGenerally, you cannot take the credit if you were duties over a reasonable period of time whilea nonresident alien at any time during the taxUseful Items working for pay or profit, or in work generallyyear.You may want to see: done for pay or profit. Full-time work (or
part-time work done at your employer's conve-Exceptions. You may be able to take thePublication nience) in a competitive work situation for atcredit if you are a nonresident alien who is mar-
least the minimum wage conclusively showsried to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end❏ 524 Credit for the Elderly or the
that you are able to engage in substantial gainfulof the tax year and you and your spouse chooseDisabled
activity.to treat you as a U.S. resident alien. If you make❏ 554 Tax Guide for Seniors Substantial gainful activity is not work you dothat choice, both you and your spouse are taxed
to take care of yourself or your home. It is noton your worldwide incomes.❏ 967 The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
unpaid work on hobbies, institutional therapy orIf you were a nonresident alien at the begin-
training, school attendance, clubs, social pro-ning of the year and a resident alien at the end ofForms (and Instructions)
grams, and similar activities. However, doingthe year, and you were married to a U.S. citizen
❏ Schedule 3 (Form 1040A) Credit for the this kind of work may show that you are able toor resident alien at the end of the year, you may
Elderly or the Disabled for Form engage in substantial gainful activity.be able to choose to be treated as a U.S. resi-
1040A Filers The fact that you have not worked for somedent alien for the entire year. In that case, you
time is not, of itself, conclusive evidence that youmay be allowed to take the credit.❏ Schedule R (Form 1040) Credit for the
cannot engage in substantial gainful activity. For information on these choices, see chap-Elderly or the Disabled
ter 1 of Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Sheltered employment. Certain work of-Aliens. fered at qualified locations to physically or men-
tally impaired persons is considered sheltered
employment. These qualified locations are inCan You Take Married Persons sheltered workshops, hospitals, and similar in-
stitutions, homebound programs, and Depart-the Credit? Generally, if you are married at the end of the tax ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) sponsoredyear, you and your spouse must file a joint return homes.You can take the credit for the elderly or the to take the credit. However, if you and your Compared to commercial employment, paydisabled if you meet both of the following re- spouse did not live in the same household at any is lower for sheltered employment. Therefore,quirements. time during the tax year, you can file either joint one usually does not look for sheltered employ-or separate returns and still take the credit.• You are a qualified individual. ment if he or she can get other employment. The
Head of household. You can file as head of fact that one has accepted sheltered employ-• Your income is not more than certain lim-
household and qualify to take the credit, even if ment is not proof of that person's ability to en-its.
your spouse lived with you during the first 6 gage in substantial gainful activity.You can use Figure 33-A and Figure 33-B as months of the year, if you meet all the tests. Seeguides to see if you qualify. Physician's statement. If you are under ageHead of Household in chapter 2 for the tests you 65, you must have your physician complete amust meet.Use Figure 33-A first to see if you are a quali- statement certifying that you were permanentlyfied individual. If you are, go to Figure 33-B to and totally disabled on the date you retired. Youmake sure your income is not too high to take can use the statement in the instructions forUnder Age 65the credit. Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (Form
You can take the credit only if you file 1040A).If you are under age 65 at the end of 2007, you
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot can qualify for the credit only if you are retired on
take the credit if you file Form 1040EZ.
TIP permanent and total disability (discussed next)
Page 218 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Figure 33-A. Are You a Qualified Individual?
/H17074
Are you married at the end of the tax year?
No
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
Did you receive taxable disability
benefits this year?
You are a qualified
individual and may be able
to take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled
unless your income
exceeds the limits in
Figure 33-B.
/H17074
Yes/H17076
You are not a qualified
individual and cannot
take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled.
/H17074
Yes
/H17073
No
/H17076
Yes
If you were a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year and were married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end  of the tax year, see U.S. Citizen or
Resident Alien under Qualified Individual. If you and your spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resident alien, answer “yes” to this question.
Mandatory retirement age is the age set by your employer at which you would have been required to retire, had you not become di sabled.
Figure 33-B. Income Limits
IF your filing status is ...
Your adjusted gross income (AGI)*
is equal to or more than ...
single, head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child
$17,500
married filing a joint return
and both spouses qualify in
Figure 33-A
$25,000
married filing a joint return
and only one spouse qualifies
in Figure 33-A
$20,000
married filing a separate return $12,500
THEN even if you qualify (see Figure 33-A), you CANNOT take the
credit if ...
OR the total of your nontaxable
social security and other nontaxable
pension(s) is equal to or more than ...
$5,000
$7,500
$5,000
$3,750
*AGI is the amount on Form 1040A, line 22, or Form 1040, line 38.
START HERE
/H17073
1
2
Did you live with your
spouse at any time
during the year?
/H17076
Are you a U.S. citizen or resident alien? 1
No
/H17074Yes
Are you filing a joint
return with your spouse?
Yes /H17075
Were you 65 or older at the end of
the tax year?
/H17074
No
Are you retired on permanent and
total disability?
No
/H17074
No
Did you reach mandatory retirement
age before this year? 2
/H17074
No
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 219

Table 33-1. Initial Amounts Figuring the Credit
THEN enter on line 10
You can figure the credit yourself (see the expla-of Schedule R (Form
nation that follows) or the IRS will figure it for1040) or Schedule 3
you. See Credit Figured for You, later.IF your filing status is ... (Form 1040A)...
Figuring the credit yourself. If you figure thesingle, head of household, or qualifying
credit yourself, fill out the front of either Sched-widow(er) with dependent child and, by the end
ule R (if you are filing Form 1040) or Schedule 3of 2007, you were
(if you are filing Form 1040A). Next, fill out Part• 65 or older .............................. . $5,000 III of either Schedule R or Schedule 3.• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $5,000
There are four steps in Part III to deter-married filing a joint return and by the end of mine the amount of your credit:
2007
• both of you were 65 or older .................. $7,500
1. Determine your initial amount (lines• both of you were under 65 and one of you retired on $5,000 10±12).permanent and total disability1 ..................
• both of you were under 65 and both of you retired on 2. Determine the total of any nontaxable so-$7,500 cial security and certain other nontaxablepermanent and total disability2 ..................
pensions and disability benefits you re-• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under $7,500 ceived (lines 13a, 13b, and 13c).65 and retired on permanent and total disability3 .....
• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under 3. Determine your excess adjusted gross in-$5,00065 and not retired on permanent and total disability ... come (lines 14±17).
4. Determine your credit (lines 18±24 ofmarried filing a separate return and you did not
Schedule R or lines 18±22 of Schedule 3).live with your spouse at any time during the year
and, by the end of 2007, you were These steps are discussed in more detail next.
• 65 or older .............................. . $3,750
• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $3,750
1Amount cannot be more than the taxable disability income.
2Amount cannot be more than your combined taxable disability income. Step 1. Determine Initial3Amount is $5,000 plus the taxable disability income of the spouse under age 65, but not more than $7,500.
Amount
You do not have to file this statement with the time you are absent from work be- To figure the credit, you must first determineyour Form 1040 or Form 1040A, but you must cause of permanent and total disability. your initial amount. See Table 33-1.keep it for your records.
Payments that are not disability income. Initial amounts for persons under age 65. IfVeterans. If the Department of Veterans Af- Any payment you receive from a plan that does you are a qualified individual under age 65, yourfairs (VA) certifies that you are permanently and not provide for disability retirement is not disabil- initial amount cannot be more than your taxabletotally disabled, you can substitute VA Form ity income. Any lump-sum payment for accrued disability income.21-0172, Certification of Permanent and Total annual leave that you receive when you retire onDisability, for the physician's statement you are disability is a salary payment and is not disabilityrequired to keep. VA Form 21-0172 must be Step 2. Total Certainincome.signed by a person authorized by the VA to do For purposes of the credit for the elderly or Nontaxable Pensions andso. You can get this form from your local VA the disabled, disability income does not includeregional office. Benefitsamounts you receive after you reach mandatory
Physician's statement obtained in earlier retirement age. Mandatory retirement age is the Step 2 is to figure the total amount of nontaxableyear. If you got a physician's statement in an age set by your employer at which you would social security and certain other nontaxable pay-earlier year and, due to your continued disabled have had to retire, had you not become dis- ments you received during the year.condition, you were unable to engage in any abled.
Enter these nontaxable payments on linessubstantial gainful activity during 2007, you may
13a or 13b, and total them on line 13c. If you arenot need to get another physician's statement Income Limits married filing a joint return, you must enter thefor 2007. For a detailed explanation of the condi-
combined amount of nontaxable payments bothtions you must meet, see the instructions for To determine if you can claim the credit, you you and your spouse receive.Part II of Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 must consider two income limits. The first limit is(Form 1040A). If you meet the required condi- Worksheets are provided in the in-the amount of your adjusted gross incometions, check the box on line 2 of Part II of Sched- structions for Forms 1040 and 1040A(AGI). The second limit is the amount of nontax-ule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (Form 1040A). to help you determine if any of yourable social security and other nontaxable pen-
TIPIf you checked box 4, 5, or 6 in Part I of either social security benefits (or equivalent railroadsions you received. The limits are shown inSchedule R or Schedule 3, enter in the space retirement benefits) are taxable.Figure 33-B, earlier.above the box on line 2 in Part II the first name(s) If both your AGI and nontaxable pensionsof the spouse(s) for whom the box is checked. are less than the income limits, you may be able Nontaxable payments. Include the following
to claim the credit. See Figuring the Credit, next. nontaxable payments in the amounts you enterDisability income. If you are under age 65, on lines 13a and 13b.If either your AGI or your nontaxableyou must also have taxable disability income to
pensions are equal to or more than the • Nontaxable social security payments. Thisqualify for the credit. Disability income must
income limits, you cannot take the is the nontaxable part of the amount ofmeet both of the following requirements.
CAUTION
!
credit. benefits shown in box 5 of Form• It must be paid under your employer's ac- SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State-cident or health plan or pension plan. ment, which includes disability benefits,
• It must be included in your income as before deducting any amounts withheld to
wages (or payments instead of wages) for pay premiums on supplementary Medicare
Page 220 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

insurance, and before any reduction be- not live in the same household at any Credit Figured for Youcause of benefits received under workers' time during the tax year.
compensation. (Do not include a If you choose to have the Internal Revenuelump-sum death benefit payment you may 2. Divide the result of (1) by 2. Service (IRS) figure the credit for you, read thereceive as a surviving spouse, or a surviv- following discussion for the form you will fileing child's insurance benefit payments you (Form 1040 or 1040A). If you want the IRS toStep 4. Determine Yourmay receive as a guardian.) figure your tax, see chapter 30.
Credit• Nontaxable railroad retirement pension
payments treated as social security. This Form 1040. If you want the IRS to figure your
To determine if you can take the credit, you mustis the nontaxable part of the amount of credit, see Form 1040 Line Entries under Taxadd the amounts you figured in Step 2 and Stepbenefits shown in box 5 of Form Figured by IRS in chapter 30.3.RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Re-
tirement Board. Form 1040A. If you want the IRS to figure yourIF the total of Steps credit, see Form 1040A Line Entries under Tax• Nontaxable pension or annuity payments 2 and 3 is ... THEN ...
Figured by IRS in chapter 30.or disability benefits that are paid under a
equal to or more you cannot take thelaw administered by the Department of
than the amount in credit.Veterans Affairs (VA). (Do not include
Step 1 Exampleamounts received as a pension, annuity,
or similar allowance for personal injuries less than the you can take the The following example illustrates the credit foror sickness resulting from active service in amount in Step 1 credit. the elderly or the disabled. The initial amount isthe armed forces of any country or in the
taken from Table 33-1, shown earlier.National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin-
istration, or the Public Health Service, or Figuring the credit. If you can take the credit, James Davis is 58 years old, single, and filesas a disability annuity under section 808 of subtract the total of Step 2 and Step 3 from the Form 1040A. In 1998 he retired on permanentthe Foreign Service Act of 1980.) amount in Step 1 and multiply the result by 15%. and total disability, and he is still permanently• Pension or annuity payments or disability In certain cases, the amount of your credit and totally disabled. He got the required physi-benefits that are excluded from income may be limited. See Limit on credit, later. cian's statement in 1998, and kept it with hisunder any provision of federal law other records. His physician signed on line B of thethan the Internal Revenue Code. (Do not Example. You are 66 years old and your statement. This year James checks the box ininclude amounts that are a return of your spouse is 64. Your spouse is not disabled. You Part II of Schedule 3. He does not need to getcost of a pension or annuity. These file a joint return on Form 1040. Your adjusted another statement for 2007.amounts do not reduce your initial gross income is $14,630. Together you received He received the following income for theamount.) $3,200 from social security, which was nontax- year:able. You figure the credit as follows:
Nontaxable social security ........ $1,500You should be sure to take into ac- 1)Initial amount ............... $5,000 Interest (taxable) .............. 100count all of the nontaxable amounts 2)Subtract from line 1 the total Taxable disability pension ........ 11,400you receive. These amounts are veri-
CAUTION
! of: James' adjusted gross income is $11,500fied by the IRS through information supplied by a. Nontaxable social security ($11,400 + $100). He figures the credit onother government agencies. and other nontaxable Schedule 3 as follows:pensions ............. $3,200 1) Initial amount .............. $5,000b. Excess adjusted gross 2) Taxable disability pension ..... 11,400Step 3. Determine Excess income 3) Smaller of (1) or (2) .......... 5,000Adjusted Gross Income ($14,630 − $10,000) ÷ 2 ... 2,315 5,515 4) Subtract from line 3 the3) Balance (Not less than -0-) ...... -0- total of:You also must reduce your initial amount by your 4) Credit .................... -0- a. Nontaxable socialexcess adjusted gross income. Figure your ex- security benefits ....... $1,500You cannot take the credit because yourcess adjusted gross income on lines 14±17. b. Excess adjusted grossnontaxable social security (line 2a) plus yourYou figure your excess adjusted gross in- incomeexcess adjusted gross income (line 2b) is morecome as follows: ($11,500 ± $7,500) ÷ 2 .. 2,000 3,500than your initial amount (line 1). 5) Balance (not less than -0-) ..... 1,5001. Subtract from your adjusted gross income 6) Multiply line 5 by 15% (.15) ..... 225(Form 1040, line 38 or Form 1040A, line Limit on credit. The amount of credit you can 7) Enter the amount from22) the amount shown for your filing status claim is generally limited to the amount of your Form 1040A, line 28 .... 276
in the following list. tax. For more information, see the instructions 8) Enter any amounts from
for Part III, Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule Form 1040A, line 29 .... -0-a. $7,500 if you are single, a head of 9) Subtract line 8 from line 7 2763 (Form 1040A).household, or a qualifying widow(er) 10) CreditAt the time this publication went towith a dependent child, (Enter the smaller of line 6print, Congress was considering legis- or line 9) ............ $225b. $10,000 if you are married filing a joint lation that would affect this limit. To find
CAUTION
!return, or His credit is $225. He enters $225 on line 30out if the legislation was enacted, and for more
of Form 1040A. The Schedule 3 for James Davisdetails, see the Instructions for Schedule Rc. $5,000 if you are married filing a sepa-
(Form 1040). is not shown.rate return and you and your spouse did
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 221

3. Did not provide over half of his or her own a. Married filing jointly - $110,000.
support for 2007, b. Single, head of household, or qualifying
4. Lived with you for more than half of 2007 widow(er) - $75,000.34. (see Exceptions to time lived with you be- c. Married filing separately - $55,000.low), and
5. Was a U.S. citizen, a U.S. national, or a
Child Tax Credit resident of the United States. If the child Modified AGI. For purposes of the child tax
was adopted, see Adopted child below. credit, your modified AGI is your AGI plus the
following amounts that may apply to you.For each qualifying child you must either
check the box on Form 1040 or Form 1040A, • Any amount excluded from income be-Introduction
line 6c, column (4), or complete Form 8901 (if cause of the exclusion of income fromThe child tax credit is a credit that may reduce the child is not your dependent). Puerto Rico. On the dotted line next toyour tax by as much as $1,000 for each of your Form 1040, line 38, enter the amount ex-qualifying children. Example. Your son turned 17 on December cluded and identify as ªEPRI.º Also attachThe additional child tax credit is a credit you 30, 2007. He is a citizen of the United States and a copy of any Form(s) 499R-2/W-2PR tomay be able to take if you are not able to claim you claimed him as a dependent on your return. your return.the full amount of the child tax credit. He is not a qualifying child for the child tax credit
because he was not under age 17 at the end ofThis chapter explains the following. • Any amount on line 45 or line 50 of Form
2007. 2555, Foreign Earned Income.• Who is a qualifying child.
• Any amount on line 18 of Form 2555-EZ,Exceptions to time lived with you. A child is• How much is the credit. Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.considered to have lived with you for all of 2007
• How to claim the credit. if the child was born or died in 2007 and your • Any amount on line 15 of Form 4563, Ex-home was this child's home for the entire time he• Why you should check your tax withhold- clusion of Income for Bona Fide Residentsor she was alive. Temporary absences for spe-ing. of American Samoa.cial circumstances, such as for school, vacation,
medical care, military service, or detention in a If you do not have any of the above, yourThe child tax credit and the additional juvenile facility, count as time lived at home. modified AGI is the same as your AGI.child tax credit should not be confused There are also exceptions for kidnapped chil-
with the child and dependent care
CAUTION
! AGI. Your AGI is the amount on Form 1040,dren and children of divorced or separated par-
credit discussed in chapter 32. ents. For details, see Residency Test, in chapter line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22.
3.
If you have no tax. Credits, such as the child
Qualifying child of more than one person. Atax credit, the adoption credit, or the credit for
special rule applies if your qualifying child is thechild and dependent care expenses, are used to
Claiming the Creditqualifying child of more than one person. Forreduce tax. If your tax on Form 1040, line 46, or
details, see Special Test for Qualifying Child ofForm 1040A, line 28, is zero, do not figure the
To claim the child tax credit, you must file FormMore Than One Person, in chapter 3.child tax credit because there is no tax to re-
1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot claim the childduce. However, you may qualify for the addi-
Adopted child. An adopted child is always tax credit on Form 1040EZ. You must providetional child tax credit on line 68 (Form 1040) or
treated as your own child. An adopted child the name and identification number (usually aline 41 (Form 1040A).
includes a child lawfully placed with you for legal social security number) on your tax return (or
adoption. Form 8901) for each qualifying child.Useful Items If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national and Answer the Questions in your form instruc-You may want to see: your adopted child lived with you as a member of tions for Form 1040, line 52, or Form 1040A, lineyour household all year, that child meets condi- 32, to find out which child tax credit worksheetPublication tion (5) above to be a qualifying child for the child you can use to figure the credit.tax credit.❏ 972 Child Tax Credit If you answer ªYesº to question 1, 2, or 3 in
your Form 1040 instructions or question 1 or 2 inForm (and Instructions) your Form 1040A instructions, you must com-
❏ 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit plete the child tax credit worksheet in Publica-Amount of Credit tion 972. Otherwise, you can use the Child Tax❏ 8901 Information on Qualifying Children
Credit Worksheet in your Form 1040 or FormWho Are Not Dependents The maximum amount you can claim for the 1040A instructions. (See the filled-in example,credit is $1,000 for each qualifying child.❏ W-4 Employee's Withholding Allowance later.)
Certificate
Limits on the Credit
You must reduce your child tax credit if either (1)
Additional Child Taxor (2) applies.
Qualifying Child
1. The amount on Form 1040, line 46, or Credit
Form 1040A, line 28, is less than theA qualifying child for purposes of the child tax
credit. If this amount is zero, you cannot This credit is for certain individuals who get lesscredit is a child who:
take this credit because there is no tax to than the full amount of the child tax credit. The
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster reduce. But you may be able to take the additional child tax credit may give you a refund
child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis- additional child tax credit. See Additional even if you do not owe any tax.
ter, or a descendant of any of them (for Child Tax Credit, later.
example, your grandchild, niece, or How to claim the additional child tax credit.2. Your modified adjusted gross incomenephew), To claim the additional child tax credit, follow the(AGI) is above the amount shown below
steps below.2. Was under age 17 at the end of 2007, for your filing status.
Page 222 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

1. Make sure you figured the amount, if any,
of your child tax credit. See Claiming the
Credit, earlier.
2. If you answered ªYesº on line 4 or line 5 of
the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in the
Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions, or
line 13 of the Child Tax Credit Worksheet
in Publication 972, use Form 8812 to see if
you can take the additional child tax credit.
3. If you have an additional child tax credit on
line 13 of Form 8812, carry it to Form
1040, line 68 or Form 1040A, line 41.
Checking Your
Withholding
The child tax credit decreases your tax. You can
check your tax withholding by using Publication
919, How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding.
If you are having too much tax withheld, and
you prefer to have the money during the year,
you may be able to decrease your withholding.
You do this by completing a new Form W-4 and
giving it to your employer.
Example
Amy Brown files as head of household and has
two dependent children under age 17. The chil-
dren are qualifying children for purposes of the
child tax credit. Amy's only income is her salary
of $30,350. Amy chooses to itemize her deduc-
tions and files Form 1040. Her AGI, shown on
line 38 of her Form 1040, is $30,350. This is her
taxable earned income.
Amy does not file Form 2555, 2555-EZ, or
4563. She does not exclude income from Puerto
Rico. Her modified AGI is $30,350.
Amy's tax, shown on line 46 of her Form
1040, is $1,334. She claims a $225 credit for
child and dependent care expenses on line 47.
She claims a $1,029 earned income credit on
line 66a. She has no other credits.
After answering the Questions in the Form
1040 instructions for line 52, she completes the
child tax credit worksheet to figure her child tax
credit of $1,109. Amy's completed questions
and child tax credit worksheet are shown later.
Amy reads the TIP in the worksheet and
finds that she may be able to take the additional
child tax credit. See Additional Child Tax Credit
and Amy's completed Form 8812, later.
Filled-in Questions for Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
Who Must Use
Pub. 972
Questions Pub.
972
Keep this graphic. Ask for text changes. From SGML conversion.
/H12011
3. Are you excluding income from Puerto Rico or are you
filing any of the following forms?
● Form 2555 or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned
income).
● Form 4563 (exclusion of income for residents of
American Samoa).
No. Continue
Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
/H17074
STOP
2. Are you claiming any of the following credits?
● Residential energy credits, Form 5695.
No. Use the
worksheet on
page 40 to figure
your credit.
Yes. 
You must use
Pub. 972 to figure your
child tax credit. You will
also need the form(s) listed
above for any credit(s) you
are claiming.
/H12011
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 38, more than the amount
shown below for your filing status?
● Married filing jointly – $110,000
● Single, head of household, or qualifying widow(er) –
$75,000
● Married filing separately – $55,000
No. Go to question 2.Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
STOP /H12011
● Retirement savings contributions credit, Form 8880.
● Mortgage interest credit, Form 8396.
● District of Columbia first-time homebuyer credit, 
Form 8859.
● Adoption credit, Form 8839.
STOP
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 223

2
2,000
1,334
1,109
225
1,109
225
24811v37 -- 1040 Instructions
/H12011
/H12011
Child Tax Credit Worksheet—Line 52
1040
Yes. STOP
● To be a qualifying child for the child tax credit, the child must be under age 17 at the end
of 2007 and meet the other requirements listed on page 15.
● Do not use this worksheet if you answered “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 3 on page 39. Instead, use Pub. 972.
1.
4.
5.
1/H11003Number of qualifying children: $1,000.
Enter the result.
Are the amounts on lines 2 and 3 the same?
TIP 
Y ou cannot take this credit because there is no tax
to reduce. However, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the below .
No. Subtract line 3 from line 2.
Is the amount on line 1 more than the amount on line 4?
TIP 
Yes. Enter the amount from line 4.
Also, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the
below.
No. Enter the amount from line 1.
This is your child tax
credit.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 52.
You may be able to take the additional child tax credit
on Form 1040, line 68, if you answered “Yes” on line 4 or
line 5 above.
● First, complete your Form 1040 through line 67.
● Then, use Form 8812 to figure any additional child tax
credit.
4
/H20854
5
/H17076
2. 2Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46.
3. Add the amounts from Form 1040:
3
Keep for Y our Records
TIP
CAUTION
Line 47
Line 48 +
Line 49 +
Enter the total.Line 51 +
Page 224 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

2,000
1,109
891
30,350
891
Amy Brown 012 00 5678
18,600
2,903
2,790
891
/H12011
/H12011
Yes. Subtract $11,750 from the amount on line 4a. Enter the result
OMB No. 1545-0074
Additional Child Tax Credit8812Form
Complete and attach to Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 47
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Form 8812 (2007)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form. Cat. No. 10644E
3
2
4a
6
Withheld social security and Medicare taxes from Form(s) W-2, boxes 4 and
6. If married filing jointly, include your spouse’s amounts with yours. If you
worked for a railroad, see instructions on back
Add lines 7 and 8
1
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
27 and 59, plus any taxes that you identified using code
"UT" and entered on the dotted line next to line 63.
Enter -0-.
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
66a and 67.
Enter the total of the amount from Form 1040A, line
40a, plus any excess social security and tier 1 RRTA
taxes withheld that you entered to the left of line 42
(see instructions on back).
Enter the amount from line 1 of your Child Tax Credit Worksheet on page 40 of the Form 1040 instructions,
page 36 of the Form 1040A instructions, or page 21 of the Form 1040NR instructions. If you used Pub.
972, enter the amount from line 8 of the worksheet on page 4 of the publication
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 52, Form 1040A, line 32, or Form 1040NR, line 47
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero, stop; you cannot take this credit
8
9
/H20854
6
/H20854
1040A filers:
1040 filers:
1040 filers:
1040A filers:
1
2
13
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 68,
Form 1040A, line 41, or
Form 1040NR, line 62.
/H17076
/H17076
8812
1040
1040A
. . . . . . . . . .
3
Enter your total earned income (see instructions on back)
5 Is the amount on line 4a more than $11,750?
No. Leave line 5 blank and enter -0- on line 6.
4a
5
Multiply the amount on line 5 by 15% (.15) and enter the result
7
Next. Do you have three or more qualifying children?
No. If line 6 is zero, stop; you cannot take this credit. Otherwise, skip Part II and enter the
smaller of line 3 or line 6 on line 13.
Ye s .
7
8
9
10
10
11 Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- 11
12 12Enter the larger of line 6 or line 11
Next, enter the smaller of line 3 or line 12 on line 13.
13 This is your additional child tax credit
Part III
Part I
Part II
All Filers
Certain Filers Who Have Three or More Qualifying Children
Additional Child Tax Credit
If line 6 is equal to or more than line 3, skip Part II and enter the amount from line 3 on
line 13. Otherwise, go to line 7.
(99)
4b
Nontaxable combat pay (see instructions on
back)
b
1040NR
. . . . . . . . . .
1040
1040A. . . . . . . . . .
1040NR. . . . . . . . . .
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040NR, line
54, plus any taxes that you identified using code "UT"
and entered on the dotted line next to line 58.
1040NR filers:
Enter the amount from Form 1040NR, line 61.1040NR filers:
2007
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 225

Table 35-1. Comparison of Education Credits
Hope Credit Lifetime Learning Credit
35. Up to $1,650 credit per eligible student Up to $2,000 credit per return
Available ONLY until the first 2 years of Available for all years of postsecondary
postsecondary education are completed education and for courses to acquire or
improve job skillsEducation
Available ONLY for 2 years per eligible Available for an unlimited number of years
studentCredits
Student must be pursuing an undergraduate Student does not need to be pursuing a degree
degree or other recognized educational or other recognized education credential
credential
What's New Student must be enrolled at least half time for Available for one or more courses
at least one academic period beginning
during the yearIncome limits increased. Beginning in 2007,
the amount of your Hope or lifetime learning No felony drug conviction on student's record Felony drug conviction rule does not applycredit is gradually reduced (phased out) if your
modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) is be-
tween $47,000 and $57,000 ($94,000 and and the lifetime learning credit for another stu- • You pay the education expenses for an$114,000 if you file a joint return). You cannot dent in the same year. eligible student.claim a credit if your MAGI is $57,000 or more
($114,000 or more if you file a joint return). This • The eligible student is either yourself, your
is an increase from the 2006 limits of $45,000 spouse, or a dependent for whom youDifferences between the Hope and lifetimeand $55,000 ($90,000 and $110,000 if filing a claim an exemption on your tax return.learning credits. There are several differ-joint return). For more information, see Effect of ences between these two credits. For example,the Amount of Your Income on the Amount of you can claim the Hope credit based on theYour Credit, later. Note. Qualified education expenses paid bysame student's expenses for no more than 2
a dependent for whom you claim an exemption,years. However, there is no limit on the number
or by a third party for that dependent, are consid-of years for which you can claim a lifetime learn-
ered paid by you.ing credit based on the same student's ex-
ªQualified education expensesº are definedIntroduction penses. The differences between the two credits
later under What Expenses Qualify. A ªdepen-are summarized in Table 35-1, above.This chapter discusses two tax credits (referred dent for whom you claim an exemptionº is de-to here as education credits) available to per- fined later under Who Can Claim a Dependent'sUseful Itemssons who pay expenses for higher education. Expenses. ªEligible studentsº are defined differ-They are: You may want to see: ently for each credit. See  Who Is an Eligible
• The Hope credit, and Student under the specific information for eitherPublication the Hope or lifetime learning credit.• The lifetime learning credit.
❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education You may find Figure 35-A, on the next page,
The chapter will do the following. helpful in determining if you can claim an educa-
Form (and Instructions) tion credit on your tax return.• Give you general information that applies
to both of the credits. ❏ 8863 Education Credits (Hope and
Lifetime Learning Credits)• Give you specific information about each Who Cannot Claim a Creditof the credits.
You cannot claim an education credit for 2007 if• Help you choose which of the credits to
any of the following apply.claim.
• Your filing status is married filing sepa-Information for Both• Show you how to figure the credit you
rately.choose.
the Hope and Lifetime • You are listed as a dependent in the Ex-
emptions section on another person's taxCan you claim both education credits this Learning Credits return (such as your parents'). See Whoyear. For each student, you can elect for any
year only one of the credits. For example, if you Can Claim a Dependent's Expenses, later.Several rules are common to both educationelect to take the Hope credit for a child on your credits. These are discussed below. • Your MAGI is $57,000 or more ($114,0002007 tax return, you cannot, for that same child, or more in the case of a joint return).also claim the lifetime learning credit for 2007. MAGI is explained later under Effect of theCan You Claim a CreditIf you are eligible to claim the Hope credit Amount of Your Income on the Amount ofand you are also eligible to claim the lifetime Your Credit.The following rules will help you determine if youlearning credit for the same student in the same
are eligible to claim an education credit on your • You (or your spouse) were a nonresidentyear, you can choose to claim either credit, but
tax return. alien for any part of 2007 and the nonresi-not both. For 2007, if the total qualified educa-
tion expenses for a student are less than $8,250, dent alien did not elect to be treated as a
it will generally be to your benefit to claim the resident alien for tax purposes. More infor-
Who Can Claim a CreditHope credit. mation on nonresident aliens can be found
in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide forIf you pay qualified education expenses for Generally, you can claim an education credit if Aliens.more than one student in the same year, you all three of the following requirements are met.can choose to take credits on a per-student, • You claim a tuition and fees deduction for• You pay qualified education expenses ofper-year basis. This means that, for example, the same student in 2007.higher education.you can claim the Hope credit for one student
Page 226 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Figure 35-A. Can You Claim an Education Credit for 2007?
Yes/H17074
Did you* pay qualified education expenses in 2007 for an eligible student?
/H17074
No
Did the academic period for which you paid qualified education
expenses begin in 2007 or the first 3 months of 2008?
Is the eligible student you, your spouse (if married filing jointly), or your
dependent for whom you claim an exemption on your tax return?
Are you listed as a dependent on another person’s tax return?
Is your filing status married filing separately?
Were you (or your spouse) a nonresident alien for any part of 2007 who
did not elect to be treated as a resident alien for tax purposes?
Is your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) less than $57,000
($114,000 if married filing jointly)?
Did you use the same expenses to claim a deduction, or to figure
the tax-free portion of a Coverdell ESA or QTP distribution?**
Were the same expenses paid with tax-free scholarship, fellowship,
grant, or employer-provided educational assistance?
Did you, or someone else who paid these expenses on behalf of a
student, receive a refund of all the expenses?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
You cannot
claim an education
credit for 2007
You can claim
an education credit
for 2007***
You cannot use the same expenses to claim both a lifetime learning credit and a Hope credit.**
Qualified education expenses paid by a dependent for whom you claim an exemption, or by a third party for that dependent, are c onsidered paid by you.*
Did you claim a tuition and fees deduction for the same student?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17075
Your education credits are limited to your tax liability minus certain credits. See Form 8863 for more details.***
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 227

Example 1. Jackson is a sophomore in Uni- Adjustments to QualifiedWhat Expenses Qualify versity V's degree program in dentistry. This Education Expenses
year, in addition to tuition, he is required to pay aThe education credits are based on qualified
If you pay qualified education expenses withfee to the university for the rental of the dentaleducation expenses you pay for yourself, your
certain tax-free funds, you cannot claim a creditspouse, or a dependent for whom you claim an equipment he will use in this program. Because
for those amounts. You must reduce the quali-exemption on your tax return. Generally, a credit the equipment rental fee must be paid to Univer- fied education expenses by the amount of anyis allowed for qualified education expenses paid sity V for enrollment and attendance, Jackson's tax-free educational assistance and refund(s)in 2007 for an academic period beginning in equipment rental fee is a qualified expense. you received.2007 or in the first 3 months of 2008.
For example, if you paid $1,500 in December Example 2. Donna and Charles, both Tax-free educational assistance. This in-2007 for qualified tuition for the Spring 2008 first-year students at College W, are required to cludes:semester beginning in January 2008, you may have certain books and other reading materialsbe able to use that $1,500 in figuring your 2007 • Tax-free parts of scholarships and fellow-to use in their mandatory first-year classes. Thecredit. ships (see chapter 12 of this publicationcollege has no policy about how students should and chapter 1 of Publication 970),
obtain these materials, but any student whoAcademic period. An academic period in-
• Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publicationcludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or other purchases them from College W's bookstore will
970),period of study (such as a summer school ses- receive a bill directly from the college. Charles
sion) as reasonably determined by an educa- bought his books from a friend, so what he paid • Employer-provided educational assistance
tional institution. In the case of an educational (see chapter 11 of Publication 970),for them is not a qualified education expense.
institution that uses credit hours or clock hours Donna bought hers at College W's bookstore. • Veterans' educational assistance (seeand does not have academic terms, each pay- Although Donna paid College W directly for her chapter 1 of Publication 970), andment period can be treated as an academic first-year books and materials, her payment isperiod. • Any other nontaxable (tax-free) paymentsnot a qualified expense because the books and (other than gifts or inheritances) receivedmaterials are not required to be purchased fromPaid with borrowed funds. You can claim an as educational assistance.College W for enrollment or attendance at theeducation credit for qualified education ex-
penses paid with the proceeds of a loan. Use the institution.
Refunds. Qualified education expenses doexpenses to figure the education credit for the
not include expenses for which you, or someoneyear in which the expenses are paid, not the Example 3. When Marci enrolled at College
else who paid qualified education expenses onyear in which the loan is repaid. Treat loan X for her freshman year, she had to pay a sepa-
behalf of a student, receive a refund. For morepayments sent directly to the educational institu- rate student activity fee in addition to her tuition. information, see Refunds in chapters 2 and 3 oftion as paid on the date the institution credits the This activity fee is required of all students, and is Publication 970.student's account. used solely to fund on-campus organizations
and activities run by students, such as the stu- Amounts that do not reduce qualified educa-Student withdraws from class(es). You can dent newspaper and the student government. tion expenses. Do not reduce qualified edu-claim an education credit for qualified education
No portion of the fee covers personal expenses. cation expenses by amounts paid with funds theexpenses not refunded when a student with-
student receives as:Although labeled as a student activity fee, thedraws.
fee is required for Marci's enrollment and attend- • Payment for services, such as wages,
ance at College X. Therefore, it is a qualified
• A loan,Qualified Education Expenses expense.
• A gift,For purposes of an education credit, qualified
• An inheritance, oreducation expenses are tuition and certain re- No Double Benefit Allowed
lated expenses required for enrollment or at- • A withdrawal from the student's personaltendance at an eligible educational institution.  You cannot do any of the following. savings.
Eligible educational institution. An eligible • Deduct higher education expenses on Do not reduce the qualified education ex-educational institution is any college, university, your income tax return (as, for example, a penses by any scholarship or fellowship re-vocational school, or other postsecondary edu- business expense) and also claim an edu- ported as income on the student's tax return incational institution eligible to participate in a stu- cation credit based on those same ex- the following situations.dent aid program administered by the penses. • The use of the money is restricted to costsDepartment of Education. It includes virtually all
• Claim an education credit in the same of attendance (such as room and board)accredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-
other than qualified education expenses.year you are claiming a tuition and feesvately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-
stitutions. The educational institution should be deduction for the same student. • The use of the money is not restricted andable to tell you if it is an eligible educational is used to pay education expenses that• Claim a Hope credit and a lifetime learninginstitution. are not qualified (such as room andcredit based on the same qualified educa-Certain educational institutions located board).tion expenses.outside the United States also participate in the
U.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu- • Claim an education credit based on the
Example 1. Jackie paid $3,000 for tuitiondent Aid (FSA) programs. same expenses used to figure the tax-free and $5,000 for room and board at University X.portion of a distribution from a CoverdellRelated expenses. Student-activity fees and The university did not require her to pay any feeseducation savings account (ESA) or quali-expenses for course-related books, supplies, in addition to her tuition in order to enroll in orfied tuition program (QTP).and equipment are included in qualified educa- attend classes. To help pay these costs, she
tion expenses only if the fees and expenses was awarded a $2,000 scholarship and a $4,000• Claim a credit based on qualified educa-
must be paid to the institution as a condition of student loan.tion expenses paid with a tax-free scholar-
enrollment or attendance. The terms of the scholarship state that it mayship, grant, or employer-provided
In the following examples, assume that each be used to pay any of Jackie's college ex-educational assistance. See Adjustmentsstudent is an eligible student at an eligible edu- penses. Because she applied it toward her tui-to Qualified Education Expenses, next.cational institution. tion, the scholarship is tax free. Therefore, for
Page 228 Chapter 35 Education Credits

purposes of figuring an education credit (either For you to claim an education credit for your credit. If anyone else claims an exemption for
dependent's expenses, you must also claim an Todd, Todd cannot claim an education credit.Hope or lifetime learning), she must first use the
exemption for your dependent. You do this by$2,000 scholarship to reduce her tuition (her
Tuition reduction. When an eligible educa-listing your dependent's name and other re-only qualified education expense). The student
tional institution provides a reduction in tuition toquired information on Form 1040 (or Formloan is not tax-free educational assistance, so
an employee of the institution (or spouse or1040A), line 6c.she does not use it to reduce her qualified ex-
dependent child of an employee), the amount ofpenses. Jackie is treated as having paid $1,000
the reduction may or may not be taxable. If it isin qualified education expenses ($3,000 tuition
IF you... THEN only... taxable, the employee is treated as receiving a± $2,000 scholarship).
payment of that amount and, in turn, paying it toclaim an exemption you can claim an the educational institution on behalf of the stu-Example 2. The facts are the same as in on your tax return for education credit dent. For more information on tuition reductions,Example 1, except that Jackie uses the $2,000 a dependent who is based on that see Qualified Tuition Reduction in chapter 1 ofscholarship to pay room and board, and, there- an eligible student dependent's Publication 970.fore, reports her entire scholarship as income on expenses. The
dependent cannother tax return. In this case, the scholarship is
claim a credit.allocated to expenses other than qualified edu- Effect of the Amount ofcation expenses. Jackie is treated as paying the do not claim an the dependent can Your Income on theentire $3,000 tuition with other funds and can exemption on your claim an educationfigure her education credit on the entire $3,000. Amount of Your Credittax return for a credit. You cannot
dependent who is an claim a credit based
The amount of your education credit is phasedeligible student on this dependent's
Expenses That Do Not Qualify (even if entitled to expenses. out (gradually reduced) if your MAGI is between
the exemption) $47,000 and $57,000 ($94,000 and $114,000 if
Qualified education expenses do not include you file a joint return). You cannot claim an
amounts paid for: education credit if your MAGI is $57,000 or moreExpenses paid by dependent. If you claim ($114,000 or more if you file a joint return).• Insurance, an exemption on your tax return for an eligible
student who is your dependent, treat any ex-• Medical expenses (including student Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI).
penses paid (or deemed paid) by your depen-health fees), For most taxpayers, MAGI is adjusted gross
dent as if you had paid them. Include these income (AGI) as figured on their federal income• Room and board, expenses when figuring the amount of your edu- tax return.
cation credit.• Transportation, or
MAGI when using Form 1040A. If you file
Qualified education expenses paid di-• Similar personal, living, or family ex- Form 1040A, your MAGI is the AGI on line 22 of
rectly to an eligible educational institu-penses. that form.
tion for your dependent under a
TIPThis is true even if the amount must be paid to MAGI when using Form 1040. If you filecourt-approved divorce decree are treated as
the institution as a condition of enrollment or Form 1040, your MAGI is the AGI on line 38 ofpaid by your dependent.
attendance. that form, modified by adding back any:
Expenses paid by you. If you claim an ex-
1. Foreign earned income exclusion,Sports, games, hobbies, and noncredit emption for a dependent who is an eligible stu-
courses. Qualified education expenses gen- dent, only you can include any expenses you 2. Foreign housing exclusion,
erally do not include expenses that relate to any paid when figuring the amount of an education
3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residentscourse of instruction or other education that in- credit. If neither you nor anyone else claims an
of American Samoa, andexemption for the dependent, only the depen-volves sports, games or hobbies, or any non-
dent can include any expenses you paid whencredit course. However, if the course of 4. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents
figuring an education credit.instruction or other education is part of the stu- of Puerto Rico.
dent's degree program, these expenses can Expenses paid by others. Someone otherqualify. than you, your spouse, or your dependent (such Phaseout. If your MAGI is within the range of
as a relative or former spouse) may make a incomes where the credit must be reduced, youComprehensive or bundled fees. Some eli- payment directly to an eligible educational insti- will figure your reduced credit using lines 7±13gible educational institutions combine all of their tution to pay for an eligible student's qualified of Form 8863.fees for an academic period into one amount. If education expenses. In this case, the student is
you do not receive or do not have access to an treated as receiving the payment from the other
When Must the Credit Beallocation showing how much you paid for quali- person and, in turn, paying the institution. If you
fied education expenses and how much you claim an exemption on your tax return for the Repaid (Recaptured)
paid for personal expenses, such as those listed student, you are considered to have paid the
above, contact the institution. The institution is If, after you file your 2007 tax return, you orexpenses.
required to make this allocation and provide you someone else receives tax-free educational as-
with the amount you paid (or were billed) for Example. In 2007, Ms. Allen makes a pay- sistance for, or a refund of, an expense you used
qualified education expenses on Form 1098-T, ment directly to an eligible educational institution to figure an education credit on that return, you
Tuition Statement. See Figuring the Credit, later, for her grandson Todd's qualified education ex- may have to repay all or part of the credit. You
for more information about Form 1098-T. penses. For purposes of claiming an education must refigure your education credit(s) for 2007
credit, Todd is treated as receiving the money as as if the assistance or refund was received in
a gift from his grandmother and, in turn, paying 2007. Subtract the amount of the refigured creditWho Can Claim a his qualified education expenses himself. from the amount of the credit you claimed. The
Unless an exemption for Todd is claimed on result is the amount you must repay. You addDependent's Expenses
someone else's 2007 tax return, only Todd can the repayment (recapture) to your tax liability for
If there are qualified education expenses for use the payment to claim an education credit. the year in which you receive the assistance or
your dependent for a year, either you or your If anyone, such as Todd's parents, claims an refund. See the instructions for your tax return
dependent, but not both of you, can claim an exemption for Todd on his or her 2007 tax re- for that year to find out how to report the recap-
education credit for your dependent's expenses turn, whoever claims the exemption may be able ture amount. Your original 2007 tax return does
for that year. to use the expenses to claim an education not change.
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 229

(including the 2007 Fall semester when he en- 1. 100% of the first $1,100 of qualified educa-
rolled at College U on less than a half-time tion expenses you paid for the eligible stu-Information for Only basis). dent, and
the Hope Credit 2. 50% of the next $1,100 of qualified educa-Example 2. After taking classes at College
tion expenses you paid for that student.V on a half-time basis for the 2006 Spring andFor the tax year, you may be able to claim a Fall semesters, Sharon became a full-time stu- The maximum amount of Hope credit youHope credit of up to $1,650 for qualified educa- dent for the 2007 Spring semester. College V can claim in 2007 is $1,650 times the number oftion expenses paid for each eligible student.
classified Sharon as a second-semester sopho- eligible students. You can claim the full $1,650
more for the 2007 Spring semester and as a for each eligible student for whom you paid atWho Is an Eligible Student first-semester junior for the 2007 Fall semester. least $2,200 of qualified education expenses.
Because College V did not classify Sharon as However, the credit may be reduced based onTo claim the Hope credit, the student for whom having completed the first two years of postsec- your MAGI. See Effect of the Amount of Youryou pay qualified education expenses must be
ondary education as of the beginning of 2007,an eligible student. This is a student who meets Income on the Amount of Your Credit, earlier.
Sharon is an eligible student for tax year 2007.all of the following requirements.
Therefore, the qualified education expenses Example. Jon and Karen Frost are married• The student did not have expenses that paid for the 2007 Spring semester and the 2007 and file a joint tax return. For 2007, they claim anwere used to figure a Hope credit in any 2 Fall semester are taken into account in calculat- exemption for their dependent daughter on theirearlier tax years. ing any Hope credit for 2007. tax return. Their MAGI is $70,000. Their daugh-
• The student had not completed the first 2 ter is in her sophomore (second) year of studiesExample 3. During the 2006 Fall semester,years of postsecondary education (gener- at the local university. Jon and Karen paid quali-ally, the freshman and sophomore years Luis was a high school student who took classes fied education expenses of $4,300 in 2007.of college) before 2007. on a half-time basis at College X. Luis was not
Jon and Karen, their daughter, and the localenrolled as part of a degree program at College• For at least one academic period begin-
university meet all of the requirements for theX because College X only admits students to aning in 2007, the student was enrolled at
degree program if they have a high school di- Hope credit. Jon and Karen can claim a $1,650least half-time in a program leading to a
ploma or equivalent. Because Luis was not en- Hope credit in 2007. This is 100% of the firstdegree, certificate, or other recognized ed-
rolled in a degree program at College X duringucational credential. $1,100 of qualified education expenses, plus
2006, Luis was not an eligible student for tax 50% of the next $1,100.• The student was free of any federal or year 2006.state felony conviction for possessing or
distributing a controlled substance as of Form 1098-T. To help you figure your HopeExample 4. The facts are the same as inthe end of 2007. credit, you should receive Form 1098-T. Gener-Example 3. During the 2007 Spring semester,
ally, an eligible educational institution (such as aLuis again attended College X but not as part of
Completion of first 2 years. A student who college or university) must send Form 1098-Ta degree program. Luis graduated from high
was awarded 2 years of academic credit for (or acceptable substitute) to each enrolled stu-school in June 2007. For the 2007 Fall semes-
postsecondary work completed before 2007 has ter, Luis enrolled as a full-time student in College dent by January 31, 2008.
completed the first 2 years of postsecondary X as part of a degree program, and College Xeducation. This student generally would not be awarded Luis credit for his prior coursework at Claiming the Creditan eligible student for purposes of the Hope College X. Because Luis was enrolled in a de-credit. gree program at College X for the 2007 Fall term You claim the Hope credit by completing Parts I
Exception. Any academic credit awarded on at least a half-time basis, Luis is an eligible and III of Form 8863 and submitting it with your
solely on the basis of the student's performance student for all of tax year 2007. Therefore, the Form 1040 or 1040A. Enter the credit on Formon proficiency examinations is disregarded in qualified education expenses paid for classes 1040, line 49, or on Form 1040A, line 31.determining whether the student has completed taken at College X during both the 2007 Spring
2 years of postsecondary education. semester (during which Luis was not enrolled in
a degree program) and the 2007 Fall semester
are taken into account in computing any HopeEnrolled at least half-time. A student was
Information for Onlycredit.enrolled at least half-time if the student was
taking at least half the normal full-time work load
Example 5. Diana graduated from high the Lifetime Learningfor his or her course of study.
school in June 2005. In January 2006, DianaThe standard for what is half of the normal
enrolled in a one-year postsecondary certificate Creditfull-time work load is determined by each eligible
program on a full-time basis to obtain a certifi-educational institution. However, the standard
For the tax year, you may be able to claim acate as a travel agent. Diana completed themay not be lower than any of those established
lifetime learning credit of up to $2,000 for quali-program in December 2006, and was awarded aby the Department of Education under the
fied education expenses paid for all studentscertificate. In January 2007, she enrolled in aHigher Education Act of 1965.
one-year postsecondary certificate program on enrolled in eligible educational institutions.
Example 1. Marty graduated from high a full-time basis to obtain a certificate as a com- There is no limit on the number of years the
school in June 2006. In September, he enrolled puter programmer. Diana is an eligible student lifetime learning credit can be claimed for each
in an undergraduate degree program at College for both tax years 2006 and 2007 because she student.
U, and attended full time for both the 2006 Fall meets the degree requirement, the work load
and 2007 Spring semesters. For the 2007 Fall requirement, and the year of study requirement Who Is an Eligible Studentsemester, Marty was enrolled less than for those years.
half-time. Because Marty was enrolled in an For purposes of the lifetime learning credit, anundergraduate degree program on at least a
eligible student is a student who is enrolled inhalf-time basis for at least one academic period Figuring the Credit
one or more courses at an eligible educationalthat began during 2006 and at least one aca-
institution (as defined under Qualified EducationThe amount of the Hope credit (per eligible stu-demic period that began during 2007, he is an
Expenses, earlier.eligible student for tax years 2006 and 2007 dent) is the sum of:
Page 230 Chapter 35 Education Credits

$75,000. Toni is attending a local college (an 1098-T. Generally, an eligible educational insti-Figuring the Credit tution (such as a college or university) musteligible educational institution) to earn credits
send Form 1098-T (or acceptable substitute) totoward a degree in nursing. She already has aThe amount of the lifetime learning credit is 20%
each enrolled student by January 31, 2008.bachelor's degree in history and wants to be-of the first $10,000 of qualified education ex-
penses you paid for all eligible students. The come a nurse. In August 2007, Toni paid $6,000
maximum amount of lifetime learning credit you of qualified education expenses for her Fall Claiming the Credit
can claim for 2007 is $2,000 (20% × $10,000). 2007 semester. Bruce and Toni can claim a
However, that amount may be reduced based You claim the lifetime learning credit by complet-$1,200 (20% × $6,000) lifetime learning credit
on your MAGI. See Effect of the Amount of Your ing Parts II and III of Form 8863 and submitting iton their 2007 joint tax return.Income on the Amount of Your Credit, earlier. with your Form 1040 or 1040A. Enter the credit
on Form 1040, line 49, or Form 1040A, line 31.
Form 1098-T. To help you figure your lifetimeExample. Bruce and Toni are married and
learning credit, you should receive Formfile a joint tax return. For 2007, their MAGI is
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 231

Table 36-1, Earned Income Credit in a Nut-
shell. Use Table 36-1 as a guide to Parts A, B,Introduction C, and D. The table is a summary of all the rules
in each part.36. The earned income credit (EIC) is a tax credit for
certain people who work and have less than
Do you have a qualifying child? You have a$39,783 of earned income. A tax credit usually
qualifying child only if you have a child whomeans more money in your pocket. It reduces
meets the three tests described in Rule 8 andthe amount of tax you owe. The EIC may alsoEarned Income illustrated in Figure 36-1.give you a refund.
Credit How do you get the earned income credit? If Improper Claim
To claim the EIC, you must: Made in Prior Year
1. Qualify by meeting certain rules, and If your EIC for any year after 1996 was denied orWhat's New 2. File a tax return, even if you: reduced for any reason other than a math or
clerical error, you must attach a completed Forma. Do not owe any tax,Earned income amount is more. The maxi- 8862 to your next tax return to claim the EIC.
mum amount of income you can earn and still You must also qualify to claim the EIC by meet-b. Did not earn enough money to file a
get the credit has increased. You may be able to ing all the rules described in this chapter.return, or
However, if your EIC was denied or reducedtake the credit if: c. Did not have income taxes withheld as a result of a math or clerical error, do not• You have more than one qualifying child from your pay. attach Form 8862 to your next tax return. Forand you earned less than $37,783 example, if your arithmetic is incorrect, the IRS($39,783 if married filing jointly), When you complete your return, you can can correct it. If you do not provide a correctfigure your EIC by using a worksheet in the social security number, the IRS can deny the• You have one qualifying child and you instructions for Form 1040, Form 1040A, or EIC. These kinds of errors are called math orearned less than $33,241 ($35,241 if mar- Form 1040EZ. Or, if you prefer, you can let the clerical errors.ried filing jointly), or IRS figure the credit for you. If your EIC for any year after 1996 was de-• You do not have a qualifying child and you nied and it was determined that your error wasearned less than $12,590 ($14,590 if mar- How will this chapter help you? This chapter due to reckless or intentional disregard of theried filing jointly). will explain the following. EIC rules, then you cannot claim the EIC for the
next 2 years. If your error was due to fraud, thenYour adjusted gross income also must be less • The rules you must meet to qualify for the you cannot claim the EIC for the next 10 years.than the amount in the above list that applies to EIC.
you. For details, see Rules 1 and 15. More information. See chapter 5 in Publica-• How to figure the EIC.
tion 596 for more detailed information about theInvestment income amount is more. The • How to get advance payment of the EIC in disallowance period and Form 8862.maximum amount of investment income you can your paycheck.
have and still get the credit has increased to
$2,900. See Rule 6.
Useful Items
Part A. Rules forYou may want to see:
EveryonePublicationReminders
❏ 596 Earned Income Credit (EIC) This part of the chapter discusses Rules 1
Increased EIC on certain joint returns. A through 7. You must meet all seven rules to
married person filing a joint return may get more Form (and Instructions) qualify for the earned income credit. If you do not
EIC than someone with the same income but a meet all seven rules, you cannot get the credit❏ Schedule EIC Earned Income Creditdifferent filing status. As a result, the EIC table and you do not need to read the rest of the(Qualifying Child Information)has different columns for married persons filing chapter.
jointly than for everyone else. When you look up If you meet all seven rules in this part, then❏ W-5 Earned Income Credit Advance
read either Part B or Part C (whichever applies)your EIC in the EIC Table, be sure to use the Payment Certificate
for more rules you must meet.correct column for your filing status and the ❏ 8862 Information To Claim Earnednumber of children you have. Income Credit After Disallowance
Rule 1. Your AGI Must BeAdvance payment of the earned income
credit in your paycheck. If you expect to Less Than:
qualify for the earned income credit in 2008, you
can receive part of it in each paycheck through- • $37,783 ($39,783 for married filing jointly)Do You Qualify for theout the year. See Advance Earned Income if you have more than one qualifying child,Credit, later, for more information. Credit? • $33,241 ($35,241 for married filing jointly)
Online help. You can use the EITC Assistant if you have one qualifying child, or
To qualify to claim the EIC, you must first meetat www.irs.gov/eitc to find out if you are eligible • $12,590 ($14,590 for married filing jointly)all of the rules explained in Part A, Rules forfor the credit. The EITC Assistant is available in if you do not have a qualifying child.Everyone. Then you must meet the rules in PartEnglish and Spanish.
B, Rules If You Have a Qualifying Child, or Part
EIC questioned by IRS. The IRS may ask you C, Rules If You Do Not Have a Qualifying Child. Adjusted gross income (AGI).  AGI is the
to provide documents to prove you are entitled There is one final rule you must meet in Part D, amount on line 38 (Form 1040), line 22 (Form
to claim the EIC. We will tell you what docu- Figuring and Claiming the EIC. You qualify for 1040A), or line 4 (Form 1040EZ). If your AGI is
ments to send us. These may include: birth the credit if you meet all the rules in each part equal to or more than the applicable limit listed
certificates, school records, medical records, that applies to you. above, you cannot claim the EIC.
etc. We will also send you a letter with the name, • If you have a qualifying child, the rules inaddress, and telephone number of the IRS em- Example. Your AGI is $34,500, you are sin-Parts A, B, and D apply to you.ployee assigned to your case. The process of gle, and you have one qualifying child. You can-
establishing your eligibility will delay your re- • If you do not have a qualifying child, the not claim the EIC because your AGI is not less
fund. rules in Parts A, C, and D apply to you. than $33,241. However, if your filing status was
Page 232 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Table 36-1. Earned Income Credit in a Nutshell
First, you must meet all the rules in this column. Second, you must meet all the rules in one of Third, you must meet the
these columns, whichever applies. rule in this column.
Part A. Part B. Part C. Part D.
Rules for Everyone Rules If You Have a Rules If You Do Not Figuring and Claiming the
Qualifying Child Have a Qualifying EIC
Child
1. Your adjusted gross 2. You must have a valid 8. Your child must meet 11. You must be at 15. Your earned income must
income (AGI) must be social security number. the relationship, age, and least age 25 but under be less than:
less than: 3. Your filing status residency tests. age 65. •$37,783 ($39,783 for married
•$37,783 ($39,783 for cannot be ªMarried filing 9. Your qualifying child 12. You cannot be the filing jointly) if you have more
married filing jointly) if separately.º cannot be used by more dependent of another than one qualifying child,
you have more than one 4. You must be a U.S. than one person to claim person.
qualifying child, citizen or resident alien the EIC. 13. You cannot be a •$33,241 ($35,241 for married
all year. 10. You cannot be a qualifying child of filing jointly) if you have one
•$33,241 ($35,241 for 5. You cannot file Form qualifying child of another another person. qualifying child, or
married filing jointly) if 2555 or Form 2555-EZ person. 14. You must have
you have one qualifying (relating to foreign lived in the United •$12,590 ($14,590 for married
child, or earned income). States more than half filing jointly) if you do not have
6. Your investment of the year. a qualifying child.
•$12,590 ($14,590 for income must be $2,900
married filing jointly) if or less. 
you do not have a 7. You must have earned
qualifying child. income.
married filing jointly, you might be able to claim Other taxpayer identification number. You any time during the last 6 months of the year,
the EIC because your AGI is less than $35,241. cannot get the EIC if, instead of an SSN, you (or you may be able to file as head of household,
your spouse if filing a joint return) have an indi- instead of married filing separately. In that case,Community property. If you are married, vidual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). you may be able to claim the EIC. For detailedbut qualify to file as head of household under ITINs are issued by the Internal Revenue Serv- information about filing as head of household,special rules for married taxpayers living apart ice to noncitizens who cannot get an SSN.(see Rule 3), and live in a state that has commu- see chapter 2.
nity property laws, your AGI includes that portion
of both your and your spouse's wages that you No SSN. If you do not have a valid SSN, put Rule 4. You Must Be aare required to include in gross income. This is ªNoº next to line 66a (Form 1040), line 40a
different from the community property rules that (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form 1040EZ). You U.S. Citizen or Resident
apply under Rule 7. cannot claim the EIC. Alien All Year
Getting an SSN. If you (or your spouse if
Rule 2. You Must Have a If you (or your spouse, if married) were a nonres-filing a joint return) do not have an SSN, you can
apply for one by filing Form SS-5, Application for ident alien for any part of the year, you cannotValid Social Security a Social Security Card, with the Social Security claim the earned income credit unless your filingNumber (SSN) Administration. status is married filing jointly. You can use that
filing status only if one spouse is a U.S. citizen orFiling deadline approaching and still noTo claim the EIC, you (and your spouse if filing a
SSN. If the filing deadline is approaching and resident alien and you choose to treat the non-joint return) must have a valid SSN issued by the
you still do not have an SSN, you have two resident spouse as a U.S. resident. If you makeSocial Security Administration (SSA). Any quali-
choices.fying child listed on Schedule EIC also must this choice, you and your spouse are taxed on
have a valid SSN. (See Rule 8 if you have a your worldwide income. If you (or your spouse, if1. Request an automatic 6-month extensionqualifying child.) married) were a nonresident alien for any part ofof time to file your return. You can get thisIf your social security card (or your spouse's the year and your filing status is not marriedextension by filing Form 4868, Applicationif filing a joint return) says ªNot valid for employ- filing jointly, enter ªNoº on the dotted line next tofor Automatic Extension of Time to Filementº and your SSN was issued so that you (or U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. For line 66a (Form 1040) or in the space to the left ofyour spouse) could get a federally funded bene- more information, see chapter 1. line 40a (Form 1040A). If you need more infor-fit, you cannot get the EIC. An example of a
mation on making this choice, get Publication2. File the return on time without claiming thefederally funded benefit is Medicaid.
519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.EIC. After receiving the SSN, file anIf you have a card with the legend ªNot valid
amended return (Form 1040X, Amendedfor employmentº and your immigration status
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return) claim-has changed so that you are now a U.S. citizen Rule 5. You Cannot Fileing the EIC. Attach a filled-in Schedule EICor permanent resident, ask the SSA for a new
Form 2555 or Formif you have a qualifying child.social security card without the legend.
2555-EZU. S. citizen. If you were a U. S. citizen when
Rule 3. Your Filing Statusyou received your SSN, you have a valid SSN. You cannot claim the earned income credit if you
Cannot Be Married Filing file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or FormValid for work only with INS or DHS authori- 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.Separatelyzation. If your social security card reads ªValid You file these forms to exclude income earned infor work only with INS authorization,º or ªValid If you are married, you usually must file a joint foreign countries from your gross income, or tofor work only with DHS authorization,º you have return to claim the EIC. Your filing status cannot deduct or exclude a foreign housing amount.a valid SSN. be ªMarried filing separately.º U.S. possessions are not foreign countries. See
Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens andSSN missing or incorrect. If an SSN for you
Resident Aliens Abroad, for more detailed infor-or your spouse is missing from your tax return or Spouse did not live with you. If you are mar-
is incorrect, you may not get the EIC. ried and your spouse did not live in your home at mation.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 233

earned income for the earned income credit. taxable as a pension and are not consideredRule 6. Your Investment Electing to include nontaxable combat pay in earned income. Report taxable pension pay-
Income Must Be $2,900 or earned income may increase or decrease your ments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b (or
EIC. Figure the credit with and without your Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b).Less
nontaxable combat pay before making the elec-
tion. If you make the election, you must includeYou cannot claim the earned income credit un- Disability insurance payments. Payments
less your investment income is $2,900 or less. If in earned income all nontaxable combat pay you you received from a disability insurance policy
your investment income is more than $2,900, received. If you are filing a joint return and both that you paid the premiums for are not earned
you cannot claim the credit. For most people, you and your spouse received nontaxable com- income. It does not matter whether you have
investment income is the total of the following bat pay, you can each make your own election. reached minimum retirement age. If this policy is
amounts. The amount of your nontaxable combat pay through your employer, the amount may be
should be shown on your Form W-2, in box 12, shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with code ªJ.º• Taxable interest (line 8a of Form 1040 or
with code Q.1040A).
• Tax-exempt interest (line 8b of Form 1040 Income That Is Not Earned IncomeSelf-employed persons and statutory em-or 1040A).
ployees. If you are self-employed or received Examples of items that are not earned income• Dividend income (line 9a of Form 1040 or income as a statutory employee, you must use include interest and dividends, pensions and1040A). the Form 1040 instructions to see if you qualify annuities, social security and railroad retirement
• Capital gain net income (line 13 of Form to get the EIC. benefits (including disability benefits), alimony1040, if more than zero, or line 10 of Form and child support, welfare benefits, workers'1040A). compensation benefits, unemployment com-Approved Form 4361 or Form 4029 pensation (insurance), nontaxable foster careIf you file Form 1040EZ, your investment income
is the total of the amount of line 2 and the payments, and veterans' benefits, including VAThis section is for persons who have an ap-amount of any tax-exempt interest you wrote to rehabilitation payments. Do not include any ofproved:the right of the words ªForm 1040EZº on line 2. these items in your earned income.
• Form 4361, Application for ExemptionHowever, if you are reporting income or loss From Self-Employment Tax for Use by Earnings while an inmate. Amounts receivedfrom the rental of personal property on Form Ministers, Members of Religious Orders for work performed while an inmate in a penal1040, line 21, or are filing Schedule E (Form and Christian Science Practitioners, or institution are not earned income when figuring1040), Form 8814, or Form 4797, see Rule 6 in
the earned income credit. This includes• Form 4029, Application for Exemptionchapter 1 of Publication 596 for more informa-
amounts for work performed while in a worktion. From Social Security and Medicare Taxes
release program or while in a halfway house.and Waiver of Benefits.
Rule 7. You Must Have Each approved form exempts certain income Workfare payments. Nontaxable workfare
Earned Income from social security taxes. Each form is dis- payments are not earned income for the EIC.
cussed in this section in terms of what is or is not These are cash payments certain people re-This credit is called the ªearned incomeº credit earned income for purposes of the EIC. ceive from a state or local agency that adminis-because, to qualify, you must work and have ters public assistance programs funded underearned income. If you are married and file a joint the federal Temporary Assistance for NeedyForm 4361. Even if you have an approvedreturn, you meet this rule if at least one spouse Families (TANF) program in return for certainForm 4361, amounts you received for perform-works and has earned income. If you are an work activities such as (1) work experience ac-ing ministerial duties as an employee count asemployee, earned income includes all the tax- tivities (including remodeling or repairing publicable income you get from your employer. If you earned income. This includes wages, salaries,
housing) if sufficient private sector employmentare self-employed or a statutory employee, you tips, and other taxable employee compensation.
is not available, or (2) community service pro-will figure your earned income on EIC Work- Amounts you received for performing ministerial
gram activities.sheet B in the instructions for Form 1040. duties, but not as an employee, do not count as
earned income. Examples include fees for per-
Community property. If you are married, butforming marriages and honoraria for delivering
qualify to file as head of household under specialEarned Income speeches.
rules for married taxpayers living apart (see
Earned income includes all of the following Rule 3), and live in a state that has communityForm 4029. Even if you have an approvedtypes of income. property laws, your earned income for the EICForm 4029, all wages, salaries, tips, and other does not include any amount earned by your1. Wages, salaries, tips, and other taxable taxable employee compensation count as spouse that is treated as belonging to you underemployee pay. Employee pay is earned earned income. However, amounts you re- those laws. That amount is not earned incomeincome only if it is taxable. Nontaxable em- ceived as a self-employed individual do not for the EIC, even though you must include it inployee pay, such as certain dependent count as earned income. Also, in figuring earned your gross income on your income tax return.care benefits and adoption benefits, is not income, do not subtract losses on Schedule C, Your earned income includes the entire amountearned income. But there is an exception C-EZ, or F from wages on line 7 of Form 1040. you earned, even if part of it is treated as belong-for nontaxable combat pay, which you can
ing to your spouse under your state's communitychoose to include in earned income, as
property laws.explained below. Disability Benefits
2. Net earnings from self-employment. Nontaxable military pay. Nontaxable pay forIf you retired on disability, benefits you receive
3. Gross income received as a statutory em- members of the Armed Forces is not consideredunder your employer's disability retirement planployee. earned income for the EIC. Examples of nontax-are considered earned income until you reach
able military pay are combat pay, the Basicminimum retirement age. Minimum retirement
Allowance for Housing (BAH), and the Basicage generally is the earliest age at which youWages, salaries, and tips. Wages, salaries, Allowance for Subsistence (BAS). See Publica-could have received a pension or annuity if youand tips you receive for working are reported to tion 3, Armed Forces' Tax Guide, for more infor-were not disabled. You must report your taxableyou on Form W-2, box 1. You should report mation.disability payments on line 7 of either Form 1040these on line 1 (Form 1040EZ) or line 7 (Forms
or Form 1040A until you reach minimum retire-1040A and 1040). Combat pay. You can elect to havement age. your nontaxable combat pay consid-
Beginning on the day after you reach mini- ered earned income for the EIC. SeeNontaxable combat pay election. You can
TIP
Nontaxable combat pay election, earlier.mum retirement age, payments you receive areelect to include your nontaxable combat pay in
Page 234 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

AND
AND
A qualifying child is a child who is your ...
Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a descendant of any of
them (for example, your grandchild)
OR
was...
Under age 19 at the end of 2007
OR
Under age 24 at the end of 2007 and a student
Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year, regardless of age.
who...
Lived with you in the United States
for more than half of 2007.
OR
Relationship
Age
Residency
Figure 36-1. Tests for Qualifying Child
Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a
descendant of any of them (for example, your niece or nephew)
Graphic in Pub.596 (text may not match). Text from F.1040 inst.
Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaysRule 8. Your Child Must treated as your own child. The term ªadoptedPart B. Rules Meet the Relationship, childº includes a child who was lawfully placed
with you for legal adoption.If You Have a Age, and Residency Tests
Foster child. For the EIC, a person is yourYour child is a qualifying child if your child meetsQualifying Child foster child if the child is placed with you by anthree tests. The three tests are: authorized placement agency or by judgement,If you have met all of the rules in Part A, read decree, or other order of any court of competent1. Relationship,Part B to see if you have a qualifying child. jurisdiction. An authorized placement agency in-Part B discusses Rules 8 through 10. You 2. Age, and cludes a state or local government agency. Itmust meet all three of these rules, in addition to also includes a tax-exempt organization li-3. Residency.the rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for the censed by a state. In addition, it includes anearned income credit with a qualifying child. The three tests are illustrated in Figure 36-1. Indian tribal government or an organization au-You must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A to The paragraphs that follow contain more infor- thorized by an Indian tribal government to placeclaim the EIC with a qualifying child. (You cannot mation about each test. Indian children.file Form 1040EZ.) You also must complete
Schedule EIC and attach it to your return. If you Example. Debbie, who is 12 years old, wasmeet all the rules in Part A and this part, read Relationship Test placed in your care 2 years ago by an authorizedPart D to find out what to do next. agency responsible for placing children in fosterTo be your qualifying child, a child must be your: homes. Debbie is your foster child.If you do not meet Rule 8, you do not
• Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or ahave a qualifying child. Read Part C to Married child. If your child was married at thedescendant of any of them (for example,find out if you can get the earned in-
CAUTION
! end of the year, he or she does not meet theyour grandchild), orcome credit without a qualifying child. relationship test unless either of these two situa-
• Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, tions applies to you: 
stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of
any of them (for example, your niece or 1. You can claim the child's exemption, or
nephew). 2. The reason you cannot claim the child's
The following definitions clarify the relationship exemption is that you gave that right to
test. your child's other parent under the Special
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 235

rule for divorced or separated parents, de- child lived with you for more than half the year in If you have two qualifying children and only
scribed later. one or more homeless shelters, your child one has a valid SSN, you can claim the EIC only
meets the residency test. on the basis of that child. For more information
about SSNs, see Rule 2.
Military personnel stationed outside theAge Test United States.  U.S. military personnel sta- Rule 9. Your Qualifyingtioned outside the United States on extendedYour child must be: Child Cannot Be Used Byactive duty are considered to live in the United
1. Under age 19 at the end of 2007, States during that duty period for purposes of More Than One Person Tothe EIC.2. Under age 24 at the end of 2007 and a Claim the EICstudent, or Extended active duty. Extended active
duty means you are called or ordered to duty for Sometimes a child meets the rules to be a quali-3. Permanently and totally disabled at any an indefinite period or for a period of more than fying child of more than one person. However,time during 2007, regardless of age. 90 days. Once you begin serving your extended only one person can treat that child as a qualify-
The following example and definitions clarify the active duty, you are still considered to have been ing child and claim the EIC using that child. The
age test. on extended active duty even if you do not serve paragraphs that follow will help you decide who,
more than 90 days. if anyone, can claim the EIC when more than
Example. Your son turned 19 on December one person has the same qualifying child.
10. Unless he was disabled or a student, he is Birth or death of a child. A child who was
not a qualifying child because, at the end of the born or died in 2007 is treated as having lived You can choose which person will claim the
year, he was not under age 19. with you for all of 2007 if your home was the EIC. If you and someone else have the same
child's home the entire time he or she was alive qualifying child, you and the other person(s) canStudent defined. To qualify as a student, your in 2007. decide which of you, if otherwise eligible, willchild must be, during some part of each of any 5 take all of the following tax benefits based on thecalendar months during the calendar year: Temporary absences. Count time that you or qualifying child.
your child is away from home on a temporary1. A full-time student at a school that has a • The child's exemption.absence due to a special circumstance as timeregular teaching staff, course of study, and
• The child tax credit.lived with you. Examples of a special circum-regular student body at the school, or
stance include illness, school attendance, busi- • Head of household filing status.2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train- ness, vacation, military service, and detention ining course given by a school described in • The credit for child and dependent carea juvenile facility.(1), or a state, county, or local government. expenses.
Kidnapped child. A kidnapped child is treatedThe 5 calendar months need not be consecu- • The exclusion for dependent care benefits.as living with you for more than half of the year iftive.
• The EIC.the child lived with you for more than half theA full-time student is a student who is en-
part of the year before the date of the kidnap-rolled for the number of hours or courses the The other person cannot take any of these sixping. The child must be presumed by law en-school considers to be full-time attendance. tax benefits unless he or she has a differentforcement authorities to have been kidnapped qualifying child.School defined. A school can be an ele- by someone who is not a member of your familymentary school, junior or senior high school, If you and the other person(s) cannot agreeor your child's family. This treatment applies forcollege, university, or technical, trade, or and more than one person claims the EIC or theall years until the child is returned. However, themechanical school. However, on-the-job train- other tax benefits just listed using the samelast year this treatment can apply is the earliering courses, correspondence schools, and child, the tie-breaker rule (explained in Tableof:schools offering courses only through the In- 36-2) applies. However, the tie-breaker rule
ternet do not count as schools for the EIC. 1. The year there is a determination that the does not apply if the other person is your spouse
child is dead, or and you file a joint return.Vocational high school students. Stu-
dents who work in co-op jobs in private industry 2. The year the child would have reached If another person claims the EIC using thisas a part of a school's regular course of class- age 18. child. If your EIC is denied because your qual-room and practical training are considered If your qualifying child has been kidnapped ifying child is treated under this rule as the quali-full-time students. and meets these requirements, enter ªKC,º in- fying child of another person for 2007, you may
stead of a number, on line 6 of Schedule EIC. be able to take the EIC using a different qualify-Permanently and totally disabled. Your
ing child, but you cannot take the EIC using thechild is permanently and totally disabled if both
rules in Part C for people who do not have aof the following apply. Social security number. Your qualifying child
qualifying child.must have a valid social security number (SSN)
1. He or she cannot engage in any substan- unless the child was born and died in 2007. You
tial gainful activity because of a physical or If the other person cannot claim the EIC. Ifcannot claim the EIC on the basis of a qualifying
mental condition. you and someone else have the same qualifyingchild if:
child but the other person cannot claim the EIC2. A doctor determines the condition has 1. Your qualifying child's SSN is missing from because he or she is not eligible or his or herlasted or can be expected to last continu- your tax return or is incorrect, earned income or AGI is too high, you may beously for at least a year or can lead to able to treat the child as a qualifying child. Seedeath. 2. Your qualifying child's social security card Example 5. But also see You can choose whichsays ªNot valid for employmentº and was person will claim the EIC, earlier.issued for use in getting a federally funded
benefit, orResidency Test Example 1 ± child lived with parent and
3. Instead of an SSN, your qualifying child grandparent. You and your 2-year-old sonYour child must have lived with you in the United has: lived with your mother all year. You are 25 yearsStates for more than half of 2007. The following old. Your only income was $9,000 from aa. An individual taxpayer identificationdefinitions clarify the residency test. part-time job. Your mother's only income wasnumber (ITIN), which is issued to a $20,000 from her job. Your son is a qualifyingUnited States. This means the 50 states and noncitizen who cannot get an SSN, or child of both you and your mother because hethe District of Columbia. It does not include meets the relationship, age, and residency testsb. An adoption taxpayer identificationPuerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam. for both you and your mother. However, onlynumber (ATIN), which is issued to
one of you can treat him as a qualifying child toHomeless shelter. Your home can be any adopting parents who cannot get an
claim the EIC (and, if that person qualifies, thelocation where you regularly live. You do not SSN for the child being adopted until
other tax benefits listed in You can choose whichneed a traditional home. For example, if your the adoption is final.
Page 236 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

person will claim the EIC, earlier). You agree to Table 36-2. When More Than One Person Files a Return Claiming the
let your mother claim him. Same Qualifying Child (Tie-Breaker Rule)
This means, if you do not claim your son as a
Caution. If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parentqualifying child for the EIC or any of the other tax
under the special rule for divorced or separated parents described later, seebenefits listed in You can choose which person
Applying Rule 9 to divorced or separated parents.will claim the EIC, your mother can treat your
son as a qualifying child to claim the EIC and
IF more than one person files a return claiming THEN the child will be treated asany other tax benefit listed for which she quali-
the same qualifying child and . . . the qualifying child of the . .fies.
only one of the persons is the child's parent, parent.Example 2 ± child lived with parent and
grandparent. The facts are the same as in two of the persons are parents of the child, and they parent with whom the child lived
Example 1 except that you and your mother both do not file a joint return together, the longest during the year.
claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case,
two of the persons are parents of the child, the childyou as the child's parent will be the only one
lived with each parent the same amount of timeallowed to claim your son as a qualifying child for
during the year, and the parents do not file a joint parent with the higher adjustedthe EIC and the other tax benefits listed in You
return together, gross income (AGI).can choose which person will claim the EIC. The
IRS will disallow your mother's claim to the EIC none of the persons are the child's parent, person with the highest AGI.and any other tax benefit listed, unless she has
another qualifying child.
the EIC, earlier, you can claim him as a qualify- sister's child, lived with your mother all year. YouExample 3 ± three children lived with par- ing child for the EIC and any other tax benefit are 25 years old, and your only income wasent and grandparent. The facts are the same listed for which you qualify. However, you can- $9,300 from a part-time job. Your mother's onlyas in Example 1 except that you also have two not claim head of household filing status be- income was $15,000 from her job. Your niece isother young children who are qualifying children cause you and your husband did not live apart a qualifying child of both you and your motherof both you and your mother. Only one of you the last 6 months of the year. As a result, your because she meets the relationship, age, andcan claim each child as a qualifying child. How- filing status is married filing separately, so you residency tests for both you and your mother.ever, you and your mother can split the three cannot claim the EIC or the credit for child and However, only one of you can treat her as aqualifying children between you. For example, dependent care expenses. See Rule 3. qualifying child. Your mother agrees to let youyou can use one child and your mother can use treat the child as a qualifying child. This means,the other two. Example 7 ± separated parents. The facts if your mother does not claim her as a qualifying
are the same as in Example 6 except that you child for the EIC or any of the other tax benefitsExample 4 ± parent is qualifying child of and your husband both claim your son as a listed in You can choose which person will claimgrandparent. The facts are the same as in qualifying child. In this case, only your husband the EIC, you can claim your niece as a qualifyingExample 1 except that you are only 18 years old. will be allowed to treat your son as a qualifying child for the EIC and any other tax benefit listedThis means you are a qualifying child of your child. This is because, during 2007, the boy lived for which you qualify.mother. Because of Rule 10, discussed next, with him longer than with you. You cannot claimyou cannot claim the EIC. Only your mother may the EIC for persons either with or without a Example 11 ± child did not live with a
be able to treat your son as a qualifying child to qualifying child. However, because you and your parent. The facts are the same as in Example
claim the EIC. If your mother meets all the other husband did not live apart the last 6 months of 10 except that you and your mother both claim
requirements for claiming the EIC and you do the year your husband cannot claim head of your niece as a qualifying child. In this case, only
not claim your son as a qualifying child for any of household filing status. As a result, his filing your mother will be allowed to treat your niece as
the other tax benefits listed in You can choose status is married filing separately, so he cannot a qualifying child. This is because your mother's
which person will claim the EIC, earlier, your claim the EIC or the credit for child and depen- AGI, $15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300.
mother can treat both you and your son as dent care expenses. See Rule 3.
qualifying children for the EIC. Special rule for divorced or separated par-
Example 8 ± unmarried parents. You, ents. A child will be treated as the qualifyingExample 5 ± parent can claim EIC because your 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived child of his or her noncustodial parent (for pur-grandparent cannot. The facts are the same together all year. You and your son's father are poses of claiming an exemption, but not for theas in Example 1 except that your mother earned not married. Your son is a qualifying child of both EIC) if all of the following apply.$50,000 from her job. Because your mother's you and his father because he meets the rela-
earned income is too high for her to claim the 1. The parents:tionship, age, and residency tests for both you
EIC, only you can claim the EIC using your son. and his father. You earned $12,000 and your
a. Are divorced or legally separated underson's father earned $14,000. Neither of you had
a decree of divorce or separate mainte-Example 6 ± separated parents. You, any other income. Your son's father agrees to let
nance,your husband, and your 10-year-old son lived you treat the child as a qualifying child. This
together until August 1, 2007, when your hus- means, if your son's father does not claim your b. Are separated under a written separa-
son as a qualifying child for the EIC or any of theband moved out of the household. In August and tion agreement, or
other tax benefits listed in You can choose whichSeptember, your son lived with you. For the rest c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6person will claim the EIC, earlier, you can claimof the year, your son lived with your husband. months of the year.him as a qualifying child for the EIC and anyYour son is a qualifying child of both you and
other tax benefit listed for which you qualify.your husband because your son lived with each 2. The child received over half of his or herof you for more than half the year and because support for the year from the parents.he met the relationship and age tests for both of Example 9 ± unmarried parents. The
you. At the end of the year, you and your hus- 3. The child is in the custody of one or bothfacts are the same as in Example 8 except that
band still were not divorced, legally separated, parents for more than half of the year.you and your son's father both claim your son as
or separated under a written separation agree- a qualifying child. In this case, only your son's 4. Either of the following statements is true.ment, so the special rule for divorced or sepa- father will be allowed to treat your son as a
rated parents does not apply. a. The custodial parent signs Form 8332qualifying child. This is because his AGI,
You and your husband will file separate re- or a substantially similar statement that$14,000, is more than your AGI, $12,000. You
turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your he or she will not claim the child as acannot claim the EIC for persons either with or
son as a qualifying child. This means, if your dependent for the year, and the non-without a qualifying child.
husband does not claim your son as a qualifying custodial parent attaches the form or
child for the EIC or any of the other tax benefits Example 10 ± child did not live with a statement to his or her return. (If the
listed in You can choose which person will claim parent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your divorce decree or separation agreement
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 237

went into effect after 1984, the noncus- she meets all the other requirements. Because 5 of Form 1040EZ, and you entered
todial parent can attach certain pages you are your mother's qualifying child, you can- $17,500 on that line.
from the decree or agreement instead not claim the EIC. This is so even if your mother
of Form 8332.) cannot or does not claim the EIC. If you are not sure whether someone else can
claim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa- as a dependent, read the rules for claiming arate maintenance or written separation dependent in chapter 3.agreement that applies to 2007 pro-
If someone else can claim you (or yourPart C. Rulesvides that the noncustodial parent can
spouse if filing a joint return) as a dependent onclaim the child as a dependent and the
his or her return, but does not, you still cannotIf You Do Not Havenoncustodial parent provides at least
claim the credit.$600 for the support of the child during
a Qualifying Childthe year.
Example 1. In 2007, you were age 25, sin-
gle, and living at home with your parents. YouRead this part if you:For details, see chapter 3. Also see Applying
worked and were not a student. You earnedRule 9 to divorced or separated parents, next. 1. Do not have a qualifying child, and $7,500. Your parents cannot claim you as aApplying Rule 9 to divorced or separated dependent. When you file your return, you claim2. Have met all the rules in Part A.parents. If a child is treated as the qualifying an exemption for yourself by not checking thechild of the noncustodial parent under the spe- ªYouº box on line 5 of your Form 1040EZ and bycial rule for children of divorced or separated Part C discusses Rules 11 through 14. You must entering $8,750 on that line. You meet this rule.parents just described, only the noncustodial meet all four of these rules, in addition to the
parent can claim an exemption and the child tax rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for the earned Example 2. The facts are the same as incredit for the child. However, the noncustodial income credit without a qualifying child. Example 1, except that you earned $2,000. Yourparent cannot claim the child as a qualifying parents can claim you as a dependent but de-If you have a qualifying child, the ruleschild for the other tax benefits listed in You can cide not to. You do not meet this rule. Youin this part do not apply to you. You canchoose which person will claim the EIC, earlier. cannot claim the credit because your parentsclaim the credit only if you meet all the
CAUTION
!Only the custodial parent or other eligible tax- could have claimed you as a dependent.rules in Parts A, B, and D. See Rule 8 to find outpayer can claim the child as a qualifying child for if you have a qualifying child.those tax benefits. However, if the custodial par-
ent and another eligible taxpayer both file a Rule 13. You Cannot Be a
return claiming the child as a qualifying child for Rule 11. You Must Be at Qualifying Child ofany of these four tax benefits, the IRS will disal-
Least Age 25 but Underlow all but one of the claims using the tie-breaker Another Person
rule in Table 36-2. Age 65 You are a qualifying child of another person
(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if allYou must be at least age 25 but under age 65 atRule 10. You Cannot Be a of the following statements are true.the end of 2007. If you are married filing a joint
Qualifying Child of return, either you or your spouse must be at 1. You are that person's son, daughter,least age 25 but under age 65 at the end ofAnother Person stepchild, grandchild, or foster child. Or,2007. It does not matter which spouse meets the you are that person's brother, sister, halfage test, as long as one of the spouses does.You are a qualifying child of another person brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsis-(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if all If neither you nor your spouse meets the age ter (or the child or grandchild of that per-of the following statements are true. test, you cannot claim the EIC. Put ªNoº next to son's brother, sister, half brother, halfline 66a (Form 1040), line 40a (Form 1040A), or sister, stepbrother, or stepsister).1. You are that person's son, daughter, line 8a (Form 1040EZ).
stepchild, grandchild, or foster child. Or, 2. At the end of the year you were under age
you are that person's brother, sister, half 19, or under age 24 and a student, or anyExample 1. You are age 28 and unmarried.
brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsis- age if you were permanently and totallyYou meet the age test.
ter (or the child or grandchild of that per- disabled at any time during the year.
son's brother, sister, half brother, half Example 2. You are married and filing a 3. You lived with that person in the Unitedsister, stepbrother, or stepsister). joint return. You are age 23 and your spouse is States for more than half of the year.age 27. You meet the age test because your2. At the end of the year you were under age
If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)spouse is at least age 25 but under age 65.19, or under age 24 and a student, or any
are a qualifying child of another person, youage if you were permanently and totally
cannot claim the EIC. This is true even if thedisabled at any time during the year. Rule 12. You Cannot Be person for whom you are a qualifying child does
3. You lived with that person in the United the Dependent of Another not claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claimStates for more than half of the year. the EIC. Put ªNoº next to line 66a (Form 1040),Person line 40a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (FormFor more details about the tests to be a qualify-
1040EZ).ing child, see Rule 8. If you are not filing a joint return, you meet this
If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) rule if:
Example. You lived with your mother allare a qualifying child of another person, you • You checked box 6a on Form 1040 or year. You are age 26 and permanently and to-cannot claim the EIC. This is true even if the 1040A, or tally disabled. Your only income was from aperson for whom you are a qualifying child does
community center where you went three days anot claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim • You did not check the ªYouº box on line 5
week to answer telephones. You earned $3,400the EIC. Put ªNoº beside line 66a (Form 1040) or of Form 1040EZ, and you entered $8,750
for the year and provided more than half of yourline 40a (Form 1040A). on that line.
own support. Because you meet the relation-
ship, age, and residency tests, you are a qualify-Example. You and your daughter lived with If you are filing a joint return, you meet this
ing child of your mother for the EIC. She canyour mother all year. You are 22 years old and rule if:
claim the EIC if she meets all the other require-attended a trade school full time. You had a • You checked both box 6a and box 6b on ments. Because you are a qualifying child ofpart-time job and earned $5,700. You had no Form 1040 or 1040A, or your mother, you cannot claim the EIC. This isother income. Because you meet the relation-
so even if your mother cannot or does not claimship, age, and residency tests, you are a qualify- • You and your spouse did not check either
the EIC.ing child of your mother. She can claim the EIC if the ªYouº box or the ªSpouseº box on line
Page 238 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Figuring earned income. If you are 5a of Schedule SE and line 7 (Form 1040),Rule 14. You Must Have self-employed, a statutory employee, or a mem- subtract that amount from the amount on line 7
Lived in the United States ber of the clergy or a church employee who files (Form 1040) and enter the result in the first
Schedule SE (Form 1040), you will figure your space of the worksheet in Step 5 of the FormMore Than Half of the Year earned income when you fill out Part 4 of EIC 1040 instructions for lines 66a and 66b.
Worksheet B in the Form 1040 instructions.Your home (and your spouse's, if filing a joint
Otherwise, figure your earned income by us-return) must have been in the United States for IRS Will Figureing the worksheet in Step 5 of the Form 1040more than half the year.
the EIC for Youinstructions for lines 66a and 66b or the FormIf it was not, put ªNoº next to line 66a (Form
1040A instructions for lines 40a and 40b, or the1040), line 40a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form The IRS will figure your EIC for you if you followworksheet in Step 2 of the Form 1040EZ instruc-1040EZ). the steps explained in this section.tions for lines 8a and 8b.
Do not ask the IRS to figure your EICWhen using one of those worksheets to fig-United States. This means the 50 states and
unless you are eligible for it. Read theure your earned income, you will start with thethe District of Columbia. It does not include
rules in Parts A, B, C, and D to see ifamount on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) orPuerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam.
CAUTION
!
you qualify.line 1 (Form 1040EZ). You will then reduce that
amount by any amount included on that line andHomeless shelter. Your home can be any If you want the IRS to also figure thedescribed in the following list.location where you regularly live. You do not amount of your income tax, see chap-need a traditional home. If you lived in one or • Scholarship or fellowship grants not re- ter 30.
TIPmore homeless shelters in the United States for ported on a Form W-2. A scholarship or
more than half the year, you meet this rule. fellowship grant that was not reported to
you on a Form W-2 is not considered
Form 1040Military personnel stationed outside the earned income for the earned income
United States. U.S. military personnel sta- credit. If you file Form 1040 and want the IRS to figuretioned outside the United States on extended • Inmates. Amounts received for work per- your credit for you, follow these steps.active duty (defined in Rule 8) are considered to formed while an inmate in a penal institu-live in the United States during that duty period 1. Put ªEICº on the dotted line next to linetion are not earned income for the earnedfor purposes of the EIC. 66a. Then, if you have any of the types ofincome credit. This includes amounts re-
ceived for work performed while in a work income described earlier under Inmates,
release program or while in a halfway Deferred compensation plans, or Clergy,
house. If you received any amount for follow the instructions given there.
work done while an inmate in a penal insti-Part D. Figuring and 2. If you received nontaxable combat pay andtution and that amount is included in the are electing to include it in your earnedtotal on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A)Claiming the EIC income for the EIC, enter the amount onor line 1 (Form 1040EZ), put ªPRIº and the line 66b. For details, see Nontaxable com-amount on the dotted line next to line 7Read this part if you have met all the rules in bat pay election in Rule 7.(Form 1040), in the space to the left of theParts A and B, or all the rules in Parts A and C.
entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or in 3. Complete all other parts of your return thatPart D discusses Rule 15. You must meet
the space to the left of line 1 (Formthis rule, in addition to the rules in Parts A and B, apply to you (including line 61), but do not
1040EZ).or Parts A and C, to qualify for the earned in- fill in lines 72, 73, 74a, and 76. If you do
come credit. not have a qualifying child, stop here.• Deferred compensation plans. A pen-
This part of the chapter also explains how to sion or annuity from a nonqualified de- 4. If you have a qualifying child, completefigure the amount of your credit. You have two ferred compensation plan or a Schedule EIC according to its instructions.choices. nongovernmental section 457 plan is not Be sure to enter the child's social securityconsidered earned income for the earned number on line 2 of that schedule. If you1. Have the IRS figure the EIC for you. If you income credit. If you received such an do not, your credit may be reduced or dis-want to do this, see IRS Will Figure the amount and it was included in the total on allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-EIC for You. line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or line turn.1 (Form 1040EZ), put ªDFCº and the2. Figure the EIC yourself. If you want to do
amount on the dotted line next to line 7this, see How To Figure the EIC Yourself.
(Form 1040), in the space to the left of the
entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or in Form 1040A
the space to the left of line 1 (FormRule 15. Your Earned If you file Form 1040A and want the IRS to figure1040EZ). This amount may be reported inIncome Must Be Less your credit for you, follow these steps.box 11 of your Form W-2. If you received
such an amount but box 11 is blank, con-Than: 1. Put ªEICº to the left of the entry space fortact your employer for the amount re- line 40a. Then, if you have any of the typesceived as a pension or annuity.• $37,783 ($39,783 for married filing jointly) of income described earlier under Inmates
if you have more than one qualifying child, or Deferred compensation plans, follow theClergy. If you are a member of the clergy instructions given there.• $33,241 ($35,241 for married filing jointly) who files Schedule SE and the amount on line 2
if you have one qualifying child, or of that schedule includes an amount that was 2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and
also reported on line 7 (Form 1040), subtract are electing to include it in your earned• $12,590 ($14,590 for married filing jointly) that amount from the amount on line 7 (Form income for the EIC, enter the amount onif you do not have a qualifying child. 1040) and enter the result in the first space of line 40b. For details, see Nontaxable com-
the worksheet in Step 5 of the Form 1040 in- bat pay election in Rule 7.Earned income generally means wages, sala- structions for lines 66a and 66b. Put ªClergyº onries, tips, other taxable employee pay, and net 3. Complete all other parts of your return thatthe dotted line next to line 66a (Form 1040).earnings from self-employment. Employee pay apply to you (including line 36), but do notis earned income only if it is taxable. Nontaxable Church employees.  A church employee fill in lines 42, 43, 44a, and 46. If you doemployee pay, such as certain dependent care means an employee (other than a minister or not have a qualifying child, stop here.benefits and adoption benefits, is not earned member of a religious order) of a church or
4. If you have a qualifying child, completeincome. But there is an exception for nontaxable qualified church-controlled organization that is
combat pay, which you can choose to include in Schedule EIC according to its instructions.exempt from employer social security and Medi-
earned income. Earned income is explained in Be sure to enter the child's social securitycare taxes. If you received wages as a church
detail in Rule 7. employee and included any amount on both line number on line 2 of that schedule. If you
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 239

do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc- the top of Schedule EIC. The Smiths then fill out
allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- tion booklet. Qualifying Child Information (lines 1 ± 6).
turn. 3. Enter the amount of your earned income Line 1. The Smiths enter Amy's first name
credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet on and last name in the column ªChild 1.º
Form 1040A, line 40a. Line 2. They enter Amy's SSN.Form 1040EZ 4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records. Line 3. They enter Amy's year of birthDo not attach it to your income tax return.If you file Form 1040EZ and want the IRS to (2004).If you do not have a qualifying child, stopfigure your credit for you, follow these steps. here. Lines 4a and 4b. The Smiths skip lines 4a
and 4b because Amy was born after 1988.1. Put ªEICº in the space to the left of line 8a. 5. If you have a qualifying child, completeThen if you have any of the types of in- Schedule EIC according to its instructions. Line 5. The Smiths enter ªDaughter.º Thiscome described earlier under Inmates or Be sure to enter the child's social security line shows Amy's relationship to John and Ja-Deferred compensation plans, follow the number on line 2 of that schedule. If you net.instructions given there. do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- Line 6. The Smiths enter ª12.º This is howallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and many months Amy lived with them in 2007.turn.are electing to include it in your earned
income for the EIC, enter the amount on
Form 1040EZ and EIC Worksheet. If you fileline 8b. For details, see Nontaxable com- Completing the EIC WorksheetForm 1040EZ and want to figure the credit your-bat pay election in Rule 7.
self, follow these steps. Next, the Smiths will complete the EIC Work-3. Complete all other parts of your return that
sheet to figure their earned income credit.apply to you, but do not fill in lines 9, 11a, 1. Go to your form instruction booklet and
or 12. turn to the instructions for lines 8a and 8b Line 1. The Smiths enter $11,000 (their
and look for the EIC Worksheet. earned income).
2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according to Line 2. The Smiths go to the Earned IncomeHow To Figure the its instructions. Find the amount of your Credit Table in the Form 1040A instructions.EIC Yourself credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc- The Smiths find their income of $11,000 within
tion booklet. the range of $11,000 to $11,050. They followTo figure the EIC yourself, use the EIC Work- this line across to the column that describes their3. Enter the amount of your earned incomesheet in the instructions for the form you are filing status and number of children and findcredit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet onusing (Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form $2,853. They enter $2,853 on line 2.Form 1040EZ, line 8a.1040EZ).
Line 3. The Smiths enter their AGI of4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.Form 1040 and EIC Worksheet. If you file $11,000.Do not attach it to your income tax return.Form 1040 and want to figure the credit yourself,
follow these steps. Line 4. The Smiths check the ªYesº box
because lines 1 and 3 are the same ($11,000).
1. Go to your form instruction booklet and They skip line 5 and enter the amount from line 2turn to the instructions for lines 66a and ($2,853) on line 6.Examples66b, and look for Worksheet A or Work-
Line 6. The Smiths' EIC is $2,853.sheet B.
The following two comprehensive examples2. Complete the EIC Worksheet that applies (complete with filled-in forms) may be helpful. Example 2. Kelly Greento your situation according to its instruc-
tions. Complete Worksheet B if you were 1. John and Janet Smith, a married couple (Form 1040EZ)
self-employed, a member of the clergy or a with one qualifying child and using Form
church employee who files Schedule SE, Kelly Green is age 30 and a full-time student.1040A.
or a statutory employee filing Schedule C She lived with her parents in the United States2. Kelly Green, age 30, a student, with noor C-EZ. Find the amount of your credit in for all of 2007. She had a part-time job andqualifying child and using Form 1040EZ.the EIC Table in your instruction booklet. earned $6,240. She earned $20 interest on a
savings account. She is not eligible to be3. Enter the amount of your earned income claimed as a dependent on her parents' return.credit from Worksheet A or B on Form Example 1. John and Janet Although she lived with her parents, she is not1040, line 66a. Smith (Form 1040A) their qualifying child because she does not meet
4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records. the age test. She does not have any children.John and Janet Smith are married and will file aDo not attach it to your income tax return. Kelly qualifies for the earned income credit.joint return. They have one child, Amy, who is 3If you do not have a qualifying child, stop Kelly will file Form 1040EZ and complete theyears old. Amy lived with John and Janet for allhere. EIC Worksheet.of 2007. John worked and earned $9,500. Janet5. If you have a qualifying child, complete worked part of the year and earned $1,500.Schedule EIC according to its instructions. Their earned income and AGI are $11,000. John Completing the EIC WorksheetBe sure to enter the child's social security and Janet qualify for the earned income creditnumber on line 2 of that schedule. If you and fill out the EIC Worksheet and Schedule Kelly figures the amount of her earned incomedo not, your credit may be reduced or dis- EIC. The Smiths will attach Schedule EIC to credit on the EIC Worksheet as follows.allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- Form 1040A when they send their completedturn. Line 1. She enters $6,240 (her earned in-return to the IRS.
come).They took the following steps to completeForm 1040A and EIC Worksheet. If you file Schedule EIC and the EIC Worksheet. Line 2. Kelly goes to the Earned IncomeForm 1040A and want to figure the credit your-
Credit Table in the forms instruction booklet.self, follow these steps.
She finds her earned income of $6,240 in the
Completing Schedule EIC range of $6,200 to $6,250. Kelly follows this line1. Go to your form instruction booklet and
across to the column that describes her filingturn to the instructions for lines 40a and The Smiths complete Schedule EIC because status and finds $428. She enters $428 on line40b, and look for the EIC Worksheet. they have a qualifying child. They enter ªJohn 2.2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according to and Janet Smithº and John's SSN (the SSN that
Line 3. Kelly enters $6,260 (her AGI).its instructions. Find the amount of your appears first on their Form 1040A) on the line at
Page 240 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Line 4. Kelly checks the ªNoº box because not be entitled to get EIC. If your wages are not eligible for some or all of them, you still must
lines 1 and 3 are not the same. report them on your tax return.subject to federal income tax, social security tax,
or Medicare tax withholding, you cannot get theLine 5. Kelly checks the ªYesº box because You cannot use Form 1040EZ to report
advance payment of the earned income credit. Ifthe amount on line 3 ($6,260) is less than your advance payments. You must file
you are a farm worker paid on a daily basis, your$6,750. She leaves line 5 blank and enters the Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
CAUTION
!
amount from line 2, $428, on line 6. employer is not required to pay you the advance
When to give your employer a new Form W-5.amount of the credit.Line 6. She enters $428 here and on Form The 2008 Form W-5 you give to your employer is1040EZ, line 8a. Kelly's earned income credit is valid until December 31, 2008. If you expect to$428. How To Get Advance be eligible for EIC in 2009 and you want to
receive advance payments, you must give yourPayments for 2008
employer a new Form W-5 in 2009. Do this each
If you meet the rules stated above under Who year you expect to be eligible for the EIC.
Advance Earned If you no longer want to get advance pay-can get the advance payment of the earned
ments or if your situation changes and you noincome credit, give your employer a Form W-5,Income Credit longer qualify for the earned income credit, youEarned Income Credit Advance Payment Certifi-
must give your employer a new Form W-5.cate, for 2008.Do you expect to be eligible for the EIC this year Check the ªNoº box on line 1 of the new form.After you have read the instructions and(2008) and to have a qualifying child? If so, you If your spouse files a Form W-5 with his or
can choose to get payments of the EIC in your completed Form W-5, give the lower part of the her employer, you must file a new Form W-5
paycheck now instead of waiting to get your EIC form to your employer. Keep the top part for your with your employer. Check the ªYesº box on line
all at once in 2009 when you file your tax return records. 3.
for the year 2008. These payments are called
advance EIC payments. This part of the chapter
Advance PaymentsMore than one employer. If you have moreexplains how you may be able to get them this
than one employer, give a certificate to only oneyear and how to report them on your tax return. Received in 2007
of them. If you are married and both you andWho can get the advance payment of the If you received advance payments of EIC inyour spouse are employed and expect to qualifyearned income credit? To get part of the 2007, you must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A tofor the credit, you may give a Form W-5 to yourearned income credit paid to you throughout the report the payments. Your Form W-2, box 9, willemployer and your spouse may give one to hisyear in your paycheck, you must meet all the show the amount you received. Report theor her employer.following rules. amount on line 61 (Form 1040) or line 36 (FormIf you receive advance payments of EIC in 1040A).1. You must expect that your earned income 2008, you must file a 2008 tax return (even if youand AGI will each be less than $33,995 You cannot use Form 1040EZ to reportwould not otherwise have to file) to report the($36,995 if you expect to file married filing your advance payments.payments and claim any additional EIC. Box 9 ofjointly).
CAUTION
!
your Form W-2 will show the amount you re-2. You must expect to have a qualifying child. ceived. See the instructions for Form 1040 or
3. You must expect to meet all the rules in Form 1040A for the line number on which you
Parts A, B, and D of this chapter or in the report advance payments of EIC.
instructions for Form W-5.
Receipt of advance payments you do notPersons who are not entitled to receive ad-
qualify for. If you receive advance paymentsvance payments.  Under certain circum-
of EIC in 2008, and later find out that you are notstances, even if you meet these rules, you may
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 241

John and Janet Smith 2222 00222
00000 2223
2004
12
Amy Smith
Daughter
Go to line 5. Go to line 5.Continue. Continue.
Continue. Continue.
/H17076
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE EIC Earned Income Credit(Form 1040A or 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 43
Qualifying Child Information
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040A
or 1040 instructions.
Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040) 2007Cat. No. 13339M
Before you begin: See the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 40a and 40b, or Form 1040, lines 66a and
66b, to make sure that (a) you can take the EIC, and (b) you have a qualifying child.
Qualifying Child Information
● It will take us longer to process your return and issue your refund if you do not fill in all lines that apply
for each qualifying child.
4
2
5
6
1 Child’s name
Child’s SSN
Child’s relationship to you
Number of months child lived with
you in the United States during 2007
months
Yes.
months
If the child was born before 1989—
Was the child permanently and totally disabled during
any part of 2007?
b
Yes.
First name Last name First name Last name
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
(99)
EIC
1040A
1040
Complete and attach to Form 1040A or 1040
only if you have a qualifying child.
● Be sure the child’s name on line 1 and social security number (SSN) on line 2 agree with the child’s
social security card. Otherwise, at the time we process your return, we may reduce or disallow your
EIC. If the name or SSN on the child’s social security card is not correct, call the Social Security
Administration at 1-800-772-1213.
Child 1 Child 2
If you have more than two qualifying children, you
only have to list two to get the maximum credit.
The child must have an SSN as defined on page 41
of the Form 1040A instructions or page 47 of the
Form 1040 instructions unless the child was born and
died in 2007. If your child was born and died in 2007
and did not have an SSN, enter “Died” on this line
and attach a copy of the child’s birth certificate.
No. No.
Go to line 5. Go to line 5.Continue. Continue.
Yes. Yes. No. No.
Continue. Continue.The child is not a
qualifying child.
The child is not a
qualifying child.
● If the child lived with you for more than half of
2007 but less than 7 months, enter “7.”
● If the child was born or died in 2007 and your
home was the child’s home for the entire time he
or she was alive during 2007, enter “12.” Do not enter more than 12 months. Do not enter more than 12 months.
You may also be able to take the additional child tax credit if your child (a) was under age 17 at the end of 2007, and
(b) is a U.S. citizen or resident alien. For more details, see the instructions for line 41 of Form 1040A or line 68 of
Form 1040.
. . . . . . . . . .
● If you take the EIC even though you are not eligible, you may not be allowed to take the credit for up
to 10 years. See back of schedule for details.
(for example, son, daughter, grandchild,
niece, nephew, foster child, etc.)
Was the child under age 24 at the end of 2007 and a
student?
a
Child’s year of birth
If born after 1988, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
Year
If born after 1988, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
Year3
CAUTION
TIP
2007
Page 242 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

11,000
2,853
11,000
2,853
EIC Worksheet _ line 41 Cat. 12088U07
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Lines 40a and 40b
1040A
Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your earned income from Step 5 on
page 40.
Look up the amount on line 1 in the EIC Table on pages 43–50 to
find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status and the number of children you have. Enter the credit here.
Enter the amount from Form 1040A, line 22.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Go to line 5.No.
If you have:
Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on
pages 43–50 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status and the number of children you
have. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040A, line 40a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
Enter “No” to the left of the entry space for line 40a.
If line 2 is zero, You cannot take the credit.
● No qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $7,000 ($9,000
if married filing jointly)?
● 1 or more qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $15,400
($17,400 if married filing jointly)?
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
Reminder—
If you have a qualifying child, complete and attach
Schedule EIC.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see
page 41 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the credit
for 2007.
/H12011
/H17076
/H17076
EIC
1040A
CAUTION
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 243

6,240
6,260
428
428
EIC Worksheet Cat.12063Z05
Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
1040EZ
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Lines 8a and 8b
Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Enter the amount from Form 1040EZ, line 4.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Go to line 5.No.
Is the amount on line 3 less than $7,000 ($9,000 if married filing jointly)?
Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on page 14
to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your
filing status. Enter the credit here.
3
Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income
Credit
Enter “No” in the space to the left of line 8a.
If line 2 is zero, You cannot take the credit.
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed,
see page 11 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the
credit for 2007.CAUTION
1Enter your earned income from Step 2 on page 12.
Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC Table on page 14 to
find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040EZ, line 8a.
6
2
This is your earned income credit.
/H17076
5
6
2
Page 244 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

EIC Eligibility Checklist Keep for Your Records
You may claim the EIC if you answer ªYesº to all the following questions.*
Yes No
1. Is your AGI less than: M M
• $12,590 ($14,590 if married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $33,241 ($35,241 if married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child, or
• $37,783 ($39,783 if married filing jointly) if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rule 1.)
2. Do you, your spouse, and your qualifying child each have a valid SSN? (See Rule 2.) M M
3. Is your filing status married filing jointly, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or single? M M
(See Rule 3.)
Caution: If you or your spouse is a nonresident alien, answer ªYesº only if your filing status is married
filing jointly.
(See Rule 4.)
4. Answer ªYesº if you are not filing Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ. Otherwise, answer ªNo.º M M
(See Rule 5.)
5. Is your investment income $2,900 or less? (See Rule 6.) M M
6. Is your total earned income at least $1 but less than: M M
• $12,590 ($14,590 if married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $33,241 ($35,241 if married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child, or
• $37,783 ($39,783 if married filing jointly) if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rules 7 and 15.)
7. Answer ªYesº if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) are not a qualifying child of another person. M M
Otherwise, answer ªNo.º (See Rules 10 and 13.)
STOP: If you have a qualifying child, answer questions 8 and 9 and skip 10 ± 12. If you do not
have a qualifying child, skip questions 8 and 9 and answer 10 ± 12.*
8. Does your child meet the age, residency, and relationship tests for a qualifying child? M M
(See Rule 8.)
9. Is your child a qualifying child only for you? Answer ªYesº if your qualifying child also meets the tests to be M M
a qualifying child of another person, but the other person is not claiming any child-related tax benefits using
that child. Answer ªNoº if you do not know whether the other person is claiming any child-related tax
benefits using that child.
10. Were you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of 2007? M M
(See Rule 11.)
11. Answer ªYesº if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) cannot be claimed as a dependent on anyone M M
else's return. Answer ªNoº if you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) can be claimed as a dependent on
someone else's return. (See Rule 12.)
12. Was your main home (and your spouse's if filing a joint return) in the United States for more than half the M M
year? (See Rule 14.)
* PERSONS WITH A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 9, you can claim the EIC.
Remember to fill out Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use Form 1040EZ. If you
answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 8 and ªNoº to question 9, see Rule 9 to help you determine whether you can claim
the EIC. If you answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 7 and ªNoº to question 8, answer questions 10 through 12 to see if
you can claim the EIC without a qualifying child.
PERSONS WITHOUT A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 7, and 10 through 12, you
can claim the EIC.
If you answered ªNoº to any question that applies to you: You cannot claim the EIC.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 245

• Refundable credit for prior year minimum ❏ 8912 Credit for Clean Renewable Energy
and Gulf Tax Credit Bondstax.
• Credit for excess social security tax or rail-37. road retirement tax withheld.
Several other credits are discussed in other Nonrefundable Creditschapters in this publication.Other Credits
The credits discussed in this part of the chapter• Child and dependent care credit (chapter
can reduce your tax. However, if the total of32).
these credits is more than your tax, the excess is
• Credit for the elderly or the disabled not refunded to you.What's New (chapter 33).
• Child tax credit (chapter 34).Adoption credit. The maximum adoption Adoption Credit
credit increases to $11,390. See Adoption • Education credits (chapter 35). You may be able to take a tax credit of up toCredit for more information.
• Earned income credit (chapter 36). $11,390 for qualified expenses paid to adopt an
Refundable credit for prior year minimum eligible child. The credit may be allowed for the
tax. If you have any unused minimum tax adoption of a child with special needs even if youNonrefundable credits. The first part of thiscredit carryforward from 2004 or earlier years, do not have any qualified expenses.chapter, Nonrefundable Credits, covers nineyou may qualify for a refund of that credit If your modified adjusted gross income (AGI)credits that you subtract from your tax. Theseamount. See Refundable Credit for Prior Year is more than $170,820, your credit is reduced. Ifcredits may reduce your tax to zero. If theseMinimum Tax for more information. your modified AGI is $210,820 or more, youcredits are more than your tax, the excess is not cannot take the credit.Excess withholding of social security tax refunded to you.
and railroad retirement tax. Social security
tax and tier 1 railroad retirement (RRTA) tax are Qualified adoption expenses. QualifiedRefundable credits. The second part of this
both withheld at a rate of 6.2% of wages. The adoption expenses are reasonable and neces-chapter, Refundable Credits, covers four credits
maximum wages subject to these taxes in- sary expenses directly related to, and whosethat are treated as payments and are refundablecreased to $97,500 in 2007. The withholding principal purpose is for, the legal adoption of anto you. These credits are added to the federalrate of tier 2 RRTA is 3.9% of wages in 2007. eligible child. These expenses include:income tax withheld and any estimated tax pay-The maximum wages subject to this tax in- ments you made. If this total is more than your • Adoption fees,creased to $72,600 in 2007. If you had too much total tax, the excess will be refunded to you.social security or RRTA tax withheld during • Court costs,
2007, you may be entitled to a credit of the • Attorney fees,Useful Itemsexcess withholding. For more information about
You may want to see:the credit, see Credit for Excess Social Security • Travel expenses (including amounts spent
Tax or Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld under for meals and lodging) while away from
PublicationRefundable Credits, later. home, and
❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses • Re-adoption expenses to adopt a foreignCredit for federal telephone excise tax paid.
child.The credit for federal telephone excise tax was ❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for
only available on your 2006 return. If you did not Individuals .request this credit on your 2006 return, file Form
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time Nonqualified expenses. Qualified adop-1040X using a simplified procedure explained in
Homeowners tion expenses do not include expenses:its instructions to amend your 2006 return.
❏ 535 Business Expenses • That violate state or federal law,
❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements • For carrying out any surrogate parenting
(IRAs) arrangement,
Introduction • For the adoption of your spouse's child,Form (and Instructions)This chapter discusses the following nonrefund-
• For which you received funds under anyable credits. ❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit (Individual, federal, state, or local program,Estate, or Trust)• Adoption credit.
• Allowed as a credit or deduction under any❏ 2439 Notice to Shareholder of• Alternative motor vehicle credit. other federal income tax rule,Undistributed Long-Term Capital
• Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property • Paid or reimbursed by your employer orGainscredit. any other person or organization, or❏ 5695 Residential Energy Credits• Credit for clean renewable energy bonds • Paid before 1997.❏ 8396 Mortgage Interest Creditor Gulf tax credit bonds.
❏ 8801 Credit For Prior Year Minimum Tax• Foreign tax credit. Eligible child. The term ªeligible childº meansÐ Individuals, Estates, and Trusts any individual:• Mortgage interest credit.
❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage • Under 18 years old, or• Nonrefundable credit for prior year mini- Subsidymum tax. • Physically or mentally incapable of caring❏ 8839 Qualified Adoption Expenses for himself or herself.• Residential energy credits.
❏ 8880 Credit for Qualified Retirement• Retirement savings contributions credit. Child with special needs. An eligible childSavings Contributions
is a child with special needs if all three of the
❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax CreditThis chapter also discusses the following re- following apply.
fundable credits. ❏ 8910 Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit 1. He or she was a citizen or resident of the• Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain. ❏ 8911 Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refueling United States (including U.S. possessions)
Property Credit• Health coverage tax credit. at the time the adoption process began.
Page 246 Chapter 37 Other Credits

2. A state (including the District of Columbia) Additional requirements. In addition to the Form 1040, line 55. Check box c and enter
manufacturer's (or domestic distributor's) certifi- ª8911º on the line next to box c.has determined that the child cannot or
cation, the following requirements must be metshould not be returned to his or her par-
More information. For more information onto qualify for the credit:ents' home.
the credit, see the instructions for Form 8911.• You placed the vehicle in service after3. The state has determined that the child will
2005;not be adopted unless assistance is pro-
Credit for Cleanvided to the adoptive parents. Factors • The original use of the vehicle began with
used by states to make this determination Renewable Energy Bondsyou;
include: or Gulf Tax Credit Bonds• You acquired the vehicle for your use or to
a. The child's ethnic background, lease to others, and not for resale; and
You may be able to take a credit if you are a
b. The child's age, • You use the vehicle primarily in the United holder of a clean renewable energy bond
States. (CREB) or Gulf tax credit bond (GTCB). CREBsc. Whether the child is a member of a mi-
are tax credit bonds issued after 2005 by certainnority or sibling group, and
tax-exempt electricity providers to finance re-Phaseout of credit. Ordinarily the amount ofd. Whether the child has a medical condi- newable energy projects. GTCBs are tax creditthe credit is 100% of the manufacturer's (ortion or a physical, mental, or emotional bonds issued after 2005 by the state of Ala-domestic distributor's) certification of the maxi-handicap. bama, Louisiana, or Mississippi that are desig-mum credit allowable as explained above. How-
nated by the governor of those states as GTCBsever, if you purchased a qualified hybrid or
and that meet certain other requirements. Theadvanced lean burn technology vehicle from aWhen to take the credit. Generally, until the issuers do not pay interest on both types ofmanufacturer who previously sold at least
adoption becomes final, you take the credit in bonds. Instead of receiving interest, the bond-60,000 of these vehicles, the amount of your
holders qualify to claim a tax credit.the year after your qualified expenses were paid credit may be reduced. Your manufacturer
or incurred. If the adoption becomes final, you should give you the information you need to Who can claim the credits. If you hold atake the credit in the year your expenses were figure your phaseout percentage. See the Form CREB and/or a GTCB on 1 or more credit allow-paid or incurred. See the instructions for Form 8910 instructions. ance dates, you can claim either the CREB8839 for more specific information on when to The phaseout period has begun for credit or the GTCB credit by filing Form 8912.take the credit. certain qualified hybrid vehicles pur- The credit allowance dates are:
Foreign child. If the child is not a U.S. citi- chased for use or lease in 2007. See
CAUTION
! • March 15,zen or resident at the time the adoption process IRS news article, Summary of the Credit for
began, you cannot take the credit unless the Qualified Hybrid Vehicles, on the Internet at • June 15,
adoption becomes final. You treat all adoption www.irs.gov/newsroom/article/0,,id=157557,00. • September 15, andhtml.expenses paid or incurred in years before the
adoption becomes final as paid or incurred in the • December 15.
Recapture of credit. If the vehicle no longeryear it becomes final. The credit allowance date also includes the lastqualifies for the credit, you must recapture part
day on which the CREB or GTCB is outstanding.or all of the credit.How to take the credit. To take the credit, you
must complete Form 8839 and attach it to your How to take the credit. To take the credit, you Amount of credit. The amount of the creditForm 1040. Include the credit in your total for must complete Form 8910 and attach it to your with respect to each credit allowance date isForm 1040, line 54, and check box c on that line. Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for generally equal to 25% of the annual credit for
Form 1040, line 55. Check box c and enter the bond. However, the 25% will be prorated for
ª8910º on the line next to box c. the quarters in which the bond is issued, re-Alternative Motor Vehicle
deemed or matures.Credit More information. For more information on
the credit, see the instructions for Form 8910. Interest income. The amount of any tax creditYou may be able to take a credit if you place an allowed (figured before applying tax liability lim-alternative motor vehicle in service in 2007. its) must be included as interest income on yourAlternative Fuel Vehicle
tax return.Refueling Property CreditAlternative motor vehicle. An alternative
motor vehicle is a new vehicle that qualifies as How to take the credit. To take either credit,You may be able to take a credit if you placeone of the following four types of vehicles. you must complete Form 8912 and attach it toqualified alternative fuel vehicle refueling prop- your Form 1040. Include the credit in your total• Qualified hybrid vehicle. erty in service in 2007. for Form 1040, line 55. Check box c, and enter
• Advanced lean burn technology vehicle. ª8912º on the line next to box c.Qualified alternative fuel vehicle refueling
property. Qualified alternative fuel vehicle re-• Qualified alternative fuel vehicle. More information. For more information onfueling property is any property (other than a• Qualified fuel cell vehicle. these credits, see the instructions for Formbuilding or its structural components) used to 8912.store or dispense alternative fuel into the fuel
tank of a motor vehicle propelled by the fuel, butAmount of credit. Generally, for a qualified
only if the storage or dispensing is at the pointalternative fuel motor vehicle, an advanced lean Foreign Tax Credit
where the fuel is delivered into the tank.burn technology vehicle, or for a passenger car
You generally can choose to take income taxesor truck (light or heavy duty) that is a qualified Amount of the credit. For personal use prop- you paid or accrued during the year to a foreignhybrid vehicle, you can rely on the manufac- erty, the credit is generally the smaller of 30% of country or U.S. possession as a credit againstturer's (or, in the case of a foreign manufacturer, the property's cost or $1,000. For business use your U.S. income tax. Or, you can deduct themits domestic distributor's) certification that a spe- property, the credit is generally the smaller of as an itemized deduction (see chapter 22).cific make, model, and model year vehicle quali- 30% of the property's cost or $30,000. Each You cannot take a credit (or deduction) forfies for the credit and the maximum amount of property's cost must first be reduced by any foreign income taxes paid on income that youthe credit for which it qualifies. For an updated section 179 deduction before figuring the credit. exclude from U.S. tax under any of the following.list of certified vehicles and the specific credit
amounts for each model, go to www.irs.gov/ How to take the credit. To take the credit, you 1. Foreign earned income exclusion.newsroom/article/0,,id=157557,00.html on the must complete Form 8911 and attach it to your
Internet. Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for 2. Foreign housing exclusion.
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 247

Certified indebtedness3. Income from Puerto Rico exempt from • An alternative minimum tax liability and
amount on your MCC adjustments or preferences other than ex-U.S. tax.
clusion items,Original amount of your4. Possession exclusion.
mortgage • A minimum tax credit that you are carrying5. Extraterritorial income exclusion. forward to 2007, or
Limit based on credit rate. If the certificate • An unallowed qualified electric vehicle
credit rate is more than 20%, the credit you are credit.Limit on the credit. Unless you can elect not allowed cannot be more than $2,000. If two orto file Form 1116 (see Exception, later), your The amount of the credit cannot reduce yourmore persons (other than a married couple filingforeign tax credit cannot be more than your U.S. current year's tax below your current year's ten-a joint return) hold an interest in the home totax liability (Form 1040, line 44), multiplied by a tative alternative minimum tax.which the MCC relates, this $2,000 limit must be
fraction. The numerator of the fraction is your divided based on the interest held by each per-
Refundable credit. If you have any unusedtaxable income from sources outside the United son. See Publication 530 for more information.
minimum tax credit carryforward from 2004 orStates. The denominator is your total taxable
earlier years, you may qualify for a refund of thatCarryforward. Your credit (after applying theincome from U.S. and foreign sources. See Pub-
credit amount. For more information, see Re-limit based on credit rate) is also subject to alication 514 for more information. fundable Credit for Prior Year Minimum Tax,limit based on your tax that is figured using Form
later.8396. If your allowable credit is reduced be-
How to take the credit. Complete Form 1116 cause of this tax liability limit, you can carry
and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit forward the unused portion of the credit to the How to take the credit. Figure your 2007
next 3 years or until used, whichever comes first.on Form 1040, line 51. nonrefundable credit (if any), and any carryfor-
If you are subject to the $2,000 limit because ward to 2008 on Form 8801, and attach it to yourException. You do not have to complete your certificate credit rate is more than 20%, you Form 1040. Include the credit in your total forForm 1116 to take the credit if all of the following cannot carry forward any amount more than Form 1040, line 55, and check box b. You canapply. $2,000 (or your share of the $2,000 if you must carry forward any unused credit for prior year
divide the credit). minimum tax to later years until it is completely• All of your foreign source gross income
used.was passive income, which generally in- How to take the credit. Figure your 2007cludes interest and dividends. credit and any carryforward to 2008 on Form More information. For more information8396, and attach it to your Form 1040. Be sure• All of your foreign source gross income about the credit, see the instructions for Formto include any credit carryforward from 2004,and the foreign tax paid on it were re- 8801.2005, and 2006.ported to you on a qualified payee state- Include the credit in your total for Form 1040,ment, which includes Form 1099-INT and Residential Energy Creditsline 54, and check box a.Form 1099-DIV.
You may be eligible for 2 credits, the nonbusi-Reduced home mortgage interest deduction.• The total of your creditable foreign taxes
ness energy property credit and the residentialIf you itemize your deductions on Schedule Awas not more than $300 ($600 if married energy efficient property credit, if you made en-(Form 1040), you must reduce your home mort-filing jointly). ergy saving improvements to your home.gage interest deduction by the amount of the
• You elect this procedure for the tax year. mortgage interest credit shown on Form 8396,
line 3. You must do this even if part of that Nonbusiness energy property credit. You
For more details on these requirements, see amount is to be carried forward to 2008. For may be able to take this credit for any of the
the instructions for Form 1116. more information about the home mortgage in- following improvements to your main home lo-
terest deduction, see chapter 23. cated in the United States in 2007 if they are
new and meet certain requirements for energyMortgage Interest Credit Recapture of federal mortgage subsidy. If efficiency.
you received an MCC with your mortgage loan,The mortgage interest credit is intended to help • Any insulation material or system primarilyyou may have to recapture (pay back) all or partlower-income individuals own a home. If you designed to reduce heat gain or loss inof the benefit you received from that program.qualify, you can take the credit each year for part your home.The recapture may be required if you sell or
of the home mortgage interest you pay. dispose of your home at a gain during the first 9 • Exterior windows (including skylights).
years after the date you closed your mortgage
• Exterior doors.loan. See Publication 523, Selling Your Home,Who qualifies. You may be eligible for the
for more information. • A metal roof with pigmented coatings pri-credit if you were issued a qualified mortgage
marily designed to reduce heat gain incredit certificate (MCC)  from your state or local
your home.Nonrefundable Credit forgovernment. Generally, an MCC is issued only
in connection with a new mortgage for the Prior Year Minimum Tax You may also be able to claim this credit forpurchase of your main home. the cost of any of the following items if the itemsThe tax laws give special treatment to some meet certain performance and quality stan-kinds of income and allow special deductions dards.Amount of credit. Figure your credit on Form and credits for some kinds of expenses. If you
8396. If your mortgage loan amount is equal to • Certain electric heat pump water heaters,benefit from these laws, you may have to pay at
(or smaller than) the certified indebtedness electric heat pumps, geothermal heatleast a minimum amount of tax in addition to any
amount (loan) shown on your MCC, enter on pumps, central air conditioners, and natu-other tax on these items. This is called the alter-
Form 8396, line 1, all the interest you paid on ral gas, propane, or oil water heaters.native minimum tax.
The special treatment of some items of in-your mortgage during the year. • A qualified natural gas, propane, or oil fur-come and expenses only allows you to postponeIf your mortgage loan amount is larger than nace or hot water boiler.paying tax until a later year. If in prior years youthe certified indebtedness amount shown on • An advanced main air circulating fan usedpaid alternative minimum tax because of theseyour MCC, you can figure the credit on only part in a natural gas, propane, or oil furnace.tax postponement items, you may be able toof the interest you paid. To find the amount to take a credit for prior year minimum tax against
enter on line 1, multiply the total interest you For more information about the nonbusinessyour current year's regular tax.
paid during the year on your mortgage by the energy property credit, see the Instructions forYou may be able to take a credit against your
following fraction. Form 5695.regular tax if for 2006 you had:
Page 248 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Residential energy efficient property credit. • Took a full-time, on-farm training course • You were not covered by, or eligible for
You may be able to take this credit if you paid for given by a school or a state, county, or coverage under, any employer-sponsored
any of the following during 2007. local government agency. health insurance plan (including any em-
ployer-sponsored health insurance plan of• Qualified solar electric property for use in School. A school includes a technical, your spouse).your home located in the United States. trade, or mechanical school. It does not include
• You were not imprisoned under federal,• Qualified solar water heating property for an on-the-job training course, correspondence
state, or local authority.use in your home located in the United school, or school offering courses only through
States. the Internet. But, you cannot take the credit if you can be
claimed as a dependent on someone else's• Qualified fuel cell property installed on or How to take the credit. Figure the credit on 2007 tax return. If you meet all of these condi-in connection with your main home located Form 8880. Enter the credit on your Form 1040, tions, you may be able to take a credit of up toin the United States. line 53, or your Form 1040A, line 33, and attach 65% of the amount you paid for qualified healthForm 8880 to your return.For more information about the residential en- insurance coverage for you and any qualifying
ergy efficient property credit, see the instruc- family members. The amount you paid for quali-
tions for Form 5695. fied health insurance coverage must be reduced
by any (a) Archer MSA and health savings ac-Condominiums and cooperative apartments. Refundable Credits count distributions used to pay for the coverage,If you are a member of a condominium manage- and (b) National Emergency Grants you re-ment association for a condominium you own or The credits discussed in this part of the chapter ceived for health insurance in 2007.a tenant-stockholder in a cooperative housing are treated as payments of tax. If the total ofcorporation, you are treated as having paid your You can take this credit on your tax return orthese credits, withheld federal income tax, andproportionate share of any costs of such associ- have it paid on your behalf in advance to yourestimated tax payments is more than your totalation or corporation for purposes of these cred- insurance company. If the credit is paid on yourtax, the excess can be refunded to you.its. behalf in advance, that amount will reduce the
amount of the credit you can take on your taxBasis reduction. You must reduce the basis Credit for Tax on return.of your home by the amount of any credits al-
Undistributed Capital Gain For definitions and special rules, includinglowed.
those relating to qualified health insurance
You must include in your income any amountsHow to take the credits. To take either of the plans, qualifying family members, and em-
that regulated investment companies (com-credits, you must complete Form 5695 and at- ployer-sponsored health insurance plans, seemonly called mutual funds) or real estate invest-tach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit on Publication 502 and the instructions for Formment trusts (REITs) allocated to you as capitalForm 1040, line 50. 8885.gain distributions, even if you did not actually
More information. For more information on receive them. If the mutual fund or REIT paid a
these credits, see the instructions for Form tax on the capital gain, you are allowed a credit TAA Recipient5695. for the tax since it is considered paid by you. The
mutual fund or REIT will send you Form 2439, You were an eligible TAA recipient on the first
Notice to Shareholder of Undistributed day of the month if, for any day in that month orRetirement Savings Long-Term Capital Gains, showing your share the prior month, you:Contributions Credit of the undistributed capital gains and the tax
• Received a trade readjustment allowance,paid, if any. Take the credit for the tax paid byYou may be able to take this credit if you, or your orentering the amount on Form 1040, line 70, andspouse if filing jointly, made: checking box a. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to • Would have been entitled to receive suchyour return. See Capital Gain Distributions in• Contributions (other than rollover contribu- an allowance except that you had not ex-chapter 8 for more information on undistributedtions) to a traditional or Roth IRA, hausted all rights to any unemploymentcapital gains. insurance (except additional compensa-• Elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b)
tion that is funded by a state and is notplan (including designated Roth contribu-
reimbursed from any federal funds) totions) or to a governmental 457, SEP, or Health Coverage Tax
which you were entitled (or would be enti-SIMPLE plan, Credit tled if you applied).• Voluntary employee contributions to a
You may be able to take this credit for any monthqualified retirement plan (including the fed- Example. You received a trade adjustmentin which all the following statements were trueeral Thrift Savings Plan), or allowance for January 2007. You were an eligi-on the first day of the month.• Contributions to a 501(c)(18)(D) plan. ble TAA recipient on the first day of January and
• You were an eligible trade adjustment as- February.
sistance (TAA) recipient, alternative TAAHowever, you cannot take the credit if either of
recipient, or Pension Benefit Guarantythe following applies.
Corporation (PBGC) pension recipient (de- Alternative TAA Recipient1. The amount on Form 1040, line 38, or fined later).
Form 1040A, line 22, is more than $26,000 You were an eligible alternative TAA recipient• You were covered by a qualified health($39,000 if head of household; $52,000 if on the first day of the month if, for that month orinsurance plan for which you paid the pre-married filing jointly). the prior month, you received benefits under anmiums directly to your health plan. alternative trade adjustment assistance pro-2. The person(s) who made the qualified con-
• You were not entitled to Medicare Part A gram for older workers established by the De-tribution or elective deferral (a) was born
or enrolled in Medicare Part B. partment of Labor.after January 1, 1990, (b) is claimed as a
dependent on someone else's 2007 tax re- • You were not enrolled in Medicaid or the Example. You received benefits under anturn, or (c) was a student (defined next). State Children's Health Insurance Pro- alternative trade adjustment assistance pro-
gram (SCHIP). gram for older workers for October 2007. TheStudent. You were a student if during any part program was established by the Department of• You were not enrolled in the Federal Em-of 5 calendar months of 2007 you: Labor. You were an eligible alternative TAA re-ployees Health Benefits (FEHB) program
cipient on the first day of October and Novem-• Were enrolled as a full-time student at a or eligible to receive benefits under the
school, or U.S. military health system (TRICARE). ber.
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 249

You can claim the excess social security or tier 1 Example. You are married and file a jointPBGC Pension Recipient
return with your spouse who had no gross in-RRTA tax as a credit against your income tax.
You were an eligible PBGC pension recipient on come in 2007. During 2007, you worked for theThe following table shows the maximum amount
the first day of the month, if both of the following Brown Shoe Company and earned $60,000 inof wages subject to tax and the maximum
apply. wages. Social security tax of $3,720 was with-amount of tax that should have been withheld for held. You also worked for another employer in2007.1. You were age 55 or older on the first day 2007 and earned $51,000 in wages. $3,162 ofof the month. social security tax was withheld from theseMaximum tax
Maximum that should wages. Because you worked for more than one2. You received a benefit for that month that
wages have been employer and your total wages were more thanwas paid by the PBGC under title IV of the Type of tax subject to tax withheld $97,500, you can take a credit of $837.00 for theEmployee Retirement Income Security Act
Social security or excess social security tax withheld.of 1974 (ERISA). RRTA tier 1 $97,500 $6,045.00
If you received a lump-sum payment from the RRTA tier 2 $72,600 $2,831.40 1. Add all social security tax withheldPBGC after August 5, 2002, you meet item (2) (but not more than $6,045.00 forabove for any month that you would have re- All wages are subject to Medicare tax each employer). Enter the totalceived a PBGC benefit if you had not received here .................... $6,882.00withholding.
the lump-sum payment.
CAUTION
! 2. Enter any uncollected social
security tax on tips or group-term
Use Form 843, Claim for Refund and life insurance included in the total
How To Take the Credit Request for Abatement, to claim a re- on Form 1040, line 63 ........ -0-
fund of excess tier 2 RRTA tax. Be sure
TIP 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,045.00 orTo take the credit, complete Form 8885 and to attach a copy of all of your W-2 forms. See the less, stop here. You cannot take theattach it to your Form 1040. Include your credit worksheet in Publication 505, Tax Withholding credit ................... 6,882.00in the total for Form 1040, line 70, and check box and Estimated Tax, to help you figure the excess 4. Social security tax limit ........ 6,045.00c. amount.You must attach invoices and proof of pay- 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.
ment for any amounts you include on Form Enter the result here and on Form
8885, line 2, for which an advance payment of 1040, line 67 (or Form 1040A, lineEmployer's error. If any one employer with- 42) .................... $837.00the credit was not made on your behalf. For held too much social security or tier 1 RRTA tax,details, see Publication 502 or Form 8885. you cannot take the excess as a credit against How to figure the credit if you worked for a
your income tax. The employer should adjust railroad. If you were a railroad employee atRefundable Credit for Prior the tax for you. If the employer does not adjust any time during 2007, figure the credit as fol-
the overcollection, you can file a claim for refund lows:Year Minimum Tax
using Form 843.
If you paid the alternative minimum tax for 2006 1. Add all social security and tier 1
or you had a minimum tax credit carryforward to RRTA tax withheld (but not moreJoint return. If you are filing a joint return, you2007, you may be able to take a credit for prior than $6,045.00 for each employer).cannot add the social security or tier 1 RRTA taxyear minimum tax. For information about the Enter the total here ..........
withheld from your spouse's wages to thenonrefundable credit for prior year minimum tax 2. Enter any uncollected socialamount withheld from your wages. Figure theyou may be able to take, see Nonrefundable security and tier 1 RRTA tax on tips
withholding separately for you and your spouseCredit for Prior Year Minimum Tax, earlier. How- or group-term life insurance
ever, for 2007, you may qualify for a refundable to determine if either of you has excess with- included in the total on Form 1040,
line 63 ..................credit for prior year minimum tax if you have any holding.
unused minimum tax credit carryforward from 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,045.00 or
2004 or earlier years, even if the total amount of less, stop here. You cannot takeHow to figure the credit if you did not workyour current year credit is more than your total the credit .................for a railroad. If you did not work for a railroadtax liability. To figure the amount of any 2007 4. Social security and tier 1 RRTAduring 2007, figure the credit as follows:refundable credit, complete Part IV of Form tax limit .................. 6,045.00
8801. Include any refundable credit on Form
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.1040, line 71. You can carry forward any unused 1. Add all social security tax withheld Enter the result here and on Form(but not more than $6,045.00 forcredit for prior year minimum tax to later years. 1040, line 67 (or Form 1040A, lineeach employer). Enter the total 42) ....................here ....................
Credit for Excess Social 2. Enter any uncollected social How to take the credit. Enter the credit onsecurity tax on tips or group-termSecurity Tax or Railroad Form 1040, line 67, or include it in the total forlife insurance included in the total Form 1040A, line 42.Retirement Tax Withheld on Form 1040, line 63 ........
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,045.00 orMost employers must withhold social security
less, stop here. You cannot taketax from your wages. If you work for a railroad the credit .................employer, that employer must withhold tier 1
4. Social security tax limit ........ 6,045.00railroad retirement (RRTA) tax and tier 2 RRTA
tax. 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.
If you worked for two or more employers in Enter the result here and on Form
2007, you may have had too much social secur- 1040, line 67 (or Form 1040A, line
42) ....................ity or tier 1 RRTA tax withheld from your pay.
Page 250 Chapter 37 Other Credits

If your taxable income shown on Form 1040, line
2007 43, or Form 1040A, line 27, is less than
CAUTION
!
$100,000, you must use the following Tax Table
Tax Table to figure your tax. If your taxable income is
$100,000 or more, use the Tax Computation
Worksheet that immediately follows the Tax
Tables.
Example. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are filing a joint return. Their
taxable income on Form 1040, line 43, is $25,300. First,
they find the $25,300±25,350 taxable income line. Next,
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
3,393
3,400
3,408
3,415
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
3,001
3,009
3,016
3,024
3,393
3,400
3,408
3,415
3,224
3,231
3,239
3,246
they find the column for married filing jointly and read down
the column. The amount shown where the taxable income
line and filing status column meet is $3,016. This is the tax
amount they should enter on Form 1040, line 44, or Form
1040A, line 28.
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
0 5 0 0 0 0 1,000 2,0005 15 1 1 1 1
15 25 2 2 2 2 1,000 1,025 101 101 101 101 2,000 2,025 201 201 201 20125 50 4 4 4 4 1,025 1,050 104 104 104 104 2,025 2,050 204 204 204 20450 75 6 6 6 6 1,050 1,075 106 106 106 106 2,050 2,075 206 206 206 20675 100 9 9 9 9 1,075 1,100 109 109 109 109 2,075 2,100 209 209 209 209
100 125 11 11 11 11 2,100 2,125 211 211 211 2111,100 1,125 111 111 111 111125 150 14 14 14 14 2,125 2,150 214 214 214 2141,125 1,150 114 114 114 114150 175 16 16 16 16 2,150 2,175 216 216 216 2161,150 1,175 116 116 116 116175 200 19 19 19 19 2,175 2,200 219 219 219 2191,175 1,200 119 119 119 119
2,200 2,225 221 221 221 221200 225 21 21 21 21 1,200 1,225 121 121 121 121 2,225 2,250 224 224 224 224225 250 24 24 24 24 1,225 1,250 124 124 124 124 2,250 2,275 226 226 226 226250 275 26 26 26 26 1,250 1,275 126 126 126 126 2,275 2,300 229 229 229 229275 300 29 29 29 29 1,275 1,300 129 129 129 129
2,300 2,325 231 231 231 231300 325 31 31 31 31 1,300 1,325 131 131 131 131 2,325 2,350 234 234 234 234325 350 34 34 34 34 1,325 1,350 134 134 134 134 2,350 2,375 236 236 236 236350 375 36 36 36 36 1,350 1,375 136 136 136 136 2,375 2,400 239 239 239 239375 400 39 39 39 39 1,375 1,400 139 139 139 139
2,400 2,425 241 241 241 2411,400 1,425 141 141 141 141400 425 41 41 41 41 2,425 2,450 244 244 244 2441,425 1,450 144 144 144 144425 450 44 44 44 44 2,450 2,475 246 246 246 2461,450 1,475 146 146 146 146450 475 46 46 46 46 2,475 2,500 249 249 249 2491,475 1,500 149 149 149 149475 500 49 49 49 49 2,500 2,525 251 251 251 2511,500 1,525 151 151 151 151500 525 51 51 51 51 2,525 2,550 254 254 254 2541,525 1,550 154 154 154 154525 550 54 54 54 54 2,550 2,575 256 256 256 2561,550 1,575 156 156 156 156550 575 56 56 56 56 2,575 2,600 259 259 259 2591,575 1,600 159 159 159 159575 600 59 59 59 59 2,600 2,625 261 261 261 2611,600 1,625 161 161 161 161 2,625 2,650 264 264 264 264600 625 61 61 61 61 1,625 1,650 164 164 164 164 2,650 2,675 266 266 266 266625 650 64 64 64 64 1,650 1,675 166 166 166 166 2,675 2,700 269 269 269 269650 675 66 66 66 66 1,675 1,700 169 169 169 169675 700 69 69 69 69 2,700 2,725 271 271 271 2711,700 1,725 171 171 171 171 2,725 2,750 274 274 274 274700 725 71 71 71 71 1,725 1,750 174 174 174 174 2,750 2,775 276 276 276 276725 750 74 74 74 74 1,750 1,775 176 176 176 176 2,775 2,800 279 279 279 279750 775 76 76 76 76 1,775 1,800 179 179 179 179775 800 79 79 79 79 2,800 2,825 281 281 281 2811,800 1,825 181 181 181 181
2,825 2,850 284 284 284 284800 825 81 81 81 81 1,825 1,850 184 184 184 184
2,850 2,875 286 286 286 286825 850 84 84 84 84 1,850 1,875 186 186 186 186
2,875 2,900 289 289 289 289850 875 86 86 86 86 1,875 1,900 189 189 189 189
875 900 89 89 89 89 1,900 1,925 191 191 191 191 2,900 2,925 291 291 291 291
1,925 1,950 194 194 194 194 2,925 2,950 294 294 294 294900 925 91 91 91 91
1,950 1,975 196 196 196 196 2,950 2,975 296 296 296 296925 950 94 94 94 94
1,975 2,000 199 199 199 199 2,975 3,000 299 299 299 299950 975 96 96 96 96
975 1,000 99 99 99 99
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 252)
- 251 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
3,000 6,000 9,000
3,000 3,050 303 303 303 303 6,000 6,050 603 603 603 603 9,000 9,050 963 903 963 903
3,050 3,100 308 308 308 308 6,050 6,100 608 608 608 608 9,050 9,100 970 908 970 908
3,100 3,150 313 313 313 313 6,100 6,150 613 613 613 613 9,100 9,150 978 913 978 913
3,150 3,200 318 318 318 318 6,150 6,200 618 618 618 618 9,150 9,200 985 918 985 918
3,200 3,250 323 323 323 323 6,200 6,250 623 623 623 623 9,200 9,250 993 923 993 923
3,250 3,300 328 328 328 328 6,250 6,300 628 628 628 628 9,250 9,300 1,000 928 1,000 928
3,300 3,350 333 333 333 333 6,300 6,350 633 633 633 633 9,300 9,350 1,008 933 1,008 933
3,350 3,400 338 338 338 338 6,350 6,400 638 638 638 638 9,350 9,400 1,015 938 1,015 938
3,400 3,450 343 343 343 343 6,400 6,450 643 643 643 643 9,400 9,450 1,023 943 1,023 943
3,450 3,500 348 348 348 348 6,450 6,500 648 648 648 648 9,450 9,500 1,030 948 1,030 948
3,500 3,550 353 353 353 353 6,500 6,550 653 653 653 653 9,500 9,550 1,038 953 1,038 953
3,550 3,600 358 358 358 358 6,550 6,600 658 658 658 658 9,550 9,600 1,045 958 1,045 958
3,600 3,650 363 363 363 363 6,600 6,650 663 663 663 663 9,600 9,650 1,053 963 1,053 963
3,650 3,700 368 368 368 368 6,650 6,700 668 668 668 668 9,650 9,700 1,060 968 1,060 968
3,700 3,750 373 373 373 373 6,700 6,750 673 673 673 673 9,700 9,750 1,068 973 1,068 973
3,750 3,800 378 378 378 378 6,750 6,800 678 678 678 678 9,750 9,800 1,075 978 1,075 978
3,800 3,850 383 383 383 383 6,800 6,850 683 683 683 683 9,800 9,850 1,083 983 1,083 983
3,850 3,900 388 388 388 388 6,850 6,900 688 688 688 688 9,850 9,900 1,090 988 1,090 988
3,900 3,950 393 393 393 393 6,900 6,950 693 693 693 693 9,900 9,950 1,098 993 1,098 993
3,950 4,000 398 398 398 398 6,950 7,000 698 698 698 698 9,950 10,000 1,105 998 1,105 998
4,000 7,000 10,000
4,000 4,050 403 403 403 403 7,000 7,050 703 703 703 703 10,000 10,050 1,113 1,003 1,113 1,003
4,050 4,100 408 408 408 408 7,050 7,100 708 708 708 708 10,050 10,100 1,120 1,008 1,120 1,008
4,100 4,150 413 413 413 413 7,100 7,150 713 713 713 713 10,100 10,150 1,128 1,013 1,128 1,013
4,150 4,200 418 418 418 418 7,150 7,200 718 718 718 718 10,150 10,200 1,135 1,018 1,135 1,018
4,200 4,250 423 423 423 423 7,200 7,250 723 723 723 723 10,200 10,250 1,143 1,023 1,143 1,023
4,250 4,300 428 428 428 428 7,250 7,300 728 728 728 728 10,250 10,300 1,150 1,028 1,150 1,028
4,300 4,350 433 433 433 433 7,300 7,350 733 733 733 733 10,300 10,350 1,158 1,033 1,158 1,033
4,350 4,400 438 438 438 438 7,350 7,400 738 738 738 738 10,350 10,400 1,165 1,038 1,165 1,038
4,400 4,450 443 443 443 443 7,400 7,450 743 743 743 743 10,400 10,450 1,173 1,043 1,173 1,043
4,450 4,500 448 448 448 448 7,450 7,500 748 748 748 748 10,450 10,500 1,180 1,048 1,180 1,048
4,500 4,550 453 453 453 453 7,500 7,550 753 753 753 753 10,500 10,550 1,188 1,053 1,188 1,053
4,550 4,600 458 458 458 458 7,550 7,600 758 758 758 758 10,550 10,600 1,195 1,058 1,195 1,058
4,600 4,650 463 463 463 463 7,600 7,650 763 763 763 763 10,600 10,650 1,203 1,063 1,203 1,063
4,650 4,700 468 468 468 468 7,650 7,700 768 768 768 768 10,650 10,700 1,210 1,068 1,210 1,068
4,700 4,750 473 473 473 473 7,700 7,750 773 773 773 773 10,700 10,750 1,218 1,073 1,218 1,073
4,750 4,800 478 478 478 478 7,750 7,800 778 778 778 778 10,750 10,800 1,225 1,078 1,225 1,078
4,800 4,850 483 483 483 483 7,800 7,850 783 783 783 783 10,800 10,850 1,233 1,083 1,233 1,083
4,850 4,900 488 488 488 488 7,850 7,900 790 788 790 788 10,850 10,900 1,240 1,088 1,240 1,088
4,900 4,950 493 493 493 493 7,900 7,950 798 793 798 793 10,900 10,950 1,248 1,093 1,248 1,093
4,950 5,000 498 498 498 498 7,950 8,000 805 798 805 798 10,950 11,000 1,255 1,098 1,255 1,098
5,000 8,000 11,000
5,000 5,050 503 503 503 503 8,000 8,050 813 803 813 803 11,000 11,050 1,263 1,103 1,263 1,103
5,050 5,100 508 508 508 508 8,050 8,100 820 808 820 808 11,050 11,100 1,270 1,108 1,270 1,108
5,100 5,150 513 513 513 513 8,100 8,150 828 813 828 813 11,100 11,150 1,278 1,113 1,278 1,113
5,150 5,200 518 518 518 518 8,150 8,200 835 818 835 818 11,150 11,200 1,285 1,118 1,285 1,118
5,200 5,250 523 523 523 523 8,200 8,250 843 823 843 823 11,200 11,250 1,293 1,123 1,293 1,124
5,250 5,300 528 528 528 528 8,250 8,300 850 828 850 828 11,250 11,300 1,300 1,128 1,300 1,131
5,300 5,350 533 533 533 533 8,300 8,350 858 833 858 833 11,300 11,350 1,308 1,133 1,308 1,139
5,350 5,400 538 538 538 538 8,350 8,400 865 838 865 838 11,350 11,400 1,315 1,138 1,315 1,146
5,400 5,450 543 543 543 543 8,400 8,450 873 843 873 843 11,400 11,450 1,323 1,143 1,323 1,154
5,450 5,500 548 548 548 548 8,450 8,500 880 848 880 848 11,450 11,500 1,330 1,148 1,330 1,161
5,500 5,550 553 553 553 553 8,500 8,550 888 853 888 853 11,500 11,550 1,338 1,153 1,338 1,169
5,550 5,600 558 558 558 558 8,550 8,600 895 858 895 858 11,550 11,600 1,345 1,158 1,345 1,176
5,600 5,650 563 563 563 563 8,600 8,650 903 863 903 863 11,600 11,650 1,353 1,163 1,353 1,184
5,650 5,700 568 568 568 568 8,650 8,700 910 868 910 868 11,650 11,700 1,360 1,168 1,360 1,191
5,700 5,750 573 573 573 573 8,700 8,750 918 873 918 873 11,700 11,750 1,368 1,173 1,368 1,199
5,750 5,800 578 578 578 578 8,750 8,800 925 878 925 878 11,750 11,800 1,375 1,178 1,375 1,206
5,800 5,850 583 583 583 583 8,800 8,850 933 883 933 883 11,800 11,850 1,383 1,183 1,383 1,214
5,850 5,900 588 588 588 588 8,850 8,900 940 888 940 888 11,850 11,900 1,390 1,188 1,390 1,221
5,900 5,950 593 593 593 593 8,900 8,950 948 893 948 893 11,900 11,950 1,398 1,193 1,398 1,229
5,950 6,000 598 598 598 598 8,950 9,000 955 898 955 898 11,950 12,000 1,405 1,198 1,405 1,236
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 253)
- 252 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
12,000 15,000 18,000
12,000 12,050 1,413 1,203 1,413 1,244 15,000 15,050 1,863 1,503 1,863 1,694 18,000 18,050 2,313 1,921 2,313 2,144
12,050 12,100 1,420 1,208 1,420 1,251 15,050 15,100 1,870 1,508 1,870 1,701 18,050 18,100 2,320 1,929 2,320 2,151
12,100 12,150 1,428 1,213 1,428 1,259 15,100 15,150 1,878 1,513 1,878 1,709 18,100 18,150 2,328 1,936 2,328 2,159
12,150 12,200 1,435 1,218 1,435 1,266 15,150 15,200 1,885 1,518 1,885 1,716 18,150 18,200 2,335 1,944 2,335 2,166
12,200 12,250 1,443 1,223 1,443 1,274 15,200 15,250 1,893 1,523 1,893 1,724 18,200 18,250 2,343 1,951 2,343 2,174
12,250 12,300 1,450 1,228 1,450 1,281 15,250 15,300 1,900 1,528 1,900 1,731 18,250 18,300 2,350 1,959 2,350 2,181
12,300 12,350 1,458 1,233 1,458 1,289 15,300 15,350 1,908 1,533 1,908 1,739 18,300 18,350 2,358 1,966 2,358 2,189
12,350 12,400 1,465 1,238 1,465 1,296 15,350 15,400 1,915 1,538 1,915 1,746 18,350 18,400 2,365 1,974 2,365 2,196
12,400 12,450 1,473 1,243 1,473 1,304 15,400 15,450 1,923 1,543 1,923 1,754 18,400 18,450 2,373 1,981 2,373 2,204
12,450 12,500 1,480 1,248 1,480 1,311 15,450 15,500 1,930 1,548 1,930 1,761 18,450 18,500 2,380 1,989 2,380 2,211
12,500 12,550 1,488 1,253 1,488 1,319 15,500 15,550 1,938 1,553 1,938 1,769 18,500 18,550 2,388 1,996 2,388 2,219
12,550 12,600 1,495 1,258 1,495 1,326 15,550 15,600 1,945 1,558 1,945 1,776 18,550 18,600 2,395 2,004 2,395 2,226
12,600 12,650 1,503 1,263 1,503 1,334 15,600 15,650 1,953 1,563 1,953 1,784 18,600 18,650 2,403 2,011 2,403 2,234
12,650 12,700 1,510 1,268 1,510 1,341 15,650 15,700 1,960 1,569 1,960 1,791 18,650 18,700 2,410 2,019 2,410 2,241
12,700 12,750 1,518 1,273 1,518 1,349 15,700 15,750 1,968 1,576 1,968 1,799 18,700 18,750 2,418 2,026 2,418 2,249
12,750 12,800 1,525 1,278 1,525 1,356 15,750 15,800 1,975 1,584 1,975 1,806 18,750 18,800 2,425 2,034 2,425 2,256
12,800 12,850 1,533 1,283 1,533 1,364 15,800 15,850 1,983 1,591 1,983 1,814 18,800 18,850 2,433 2,041 2,433 2,264
12,850 12,900 1,540 1,288 1,540 1,371 15,850 15,900 1,990 1,599 1,990 1,821 18,850 18,900 2,440 2,049 2,440 2,271
12,900 12,950 1,548 1,293 1,548 1,379 15,900 15,950 1,998 1,606 1,998 1,829 18,900 18,950 2,448 2,056 2,448 2,279
12,950 13,000 1,555 1,298 1,555 1,386 15,950 16,000 2,005 1,614 2,005 1,836 18,950 19,000 2,455 2,064 2,455 2,286
13,000 16,000 19,000
13,000 13,050 1,563 1,303 1,563 1,394 16,000 16,050 2,013 1,621 2,013 1,844 19,000 19,050 2,463 2,071 2,463 2,294
13,050 13,100 1,570 1,308 1,570 1,401 16,050 16,100 2,020 1,629 2,020 1,851 19,050 19,100 2,470 2,079 2,470 2,301
13,100 13,150 1,578 1,313 1,578 1,409 16,100 16,150 2,028 1,636 2,028 1,859 19,100 19,150 2,478 2,086 2,478 2,309
13,150 13,200 1,585 1,318 1,585 1,416 16,150 16,200 2,035 1,644 2,035 1,866 19,150 19,200 2,485 2,094 2,485 2,316
13,200 13,250 1,593 1,323 1,593 1,424 16,200 16,250 2,043 1,651 2,043 1,874 19,200 19,250 2,493 2,101 2,493 2,324
13,250 13,300 1,600 1,328 1,600 1,431 16,250 16,300 2,050 1,659 2,050 1,881 19,250 19,300 2,500 2,109 2,500 2,331
13,300 13,350 1,608 1,333 1,608 1,439 16,300 16,350 2,058 1,666 2,058 1,889 19,300 19,350 2,508 2,116 2,508 2,339
13,350 13,400 1,615 1,338 1,615 1,446 16,350 16,400 2,065 1,674 2,065 1,896 19,350 19,400 2,515 2,124 2,515 2,346
13,400 13,450 1,623 1,343 1,623 1,454 16,400 16,450 2,073 1,681 2,073 1,904 19,400 19,450 2,523 2,131 2,523 2,354
13,450 13,500 1,630 1,348 1,630 1,461 16,450 16,500 2,080 1,689 2,080 1,911 19,450 19,500 2,530 2,139 2,530 2,361
13,500 13,550 1,638 1,353 1,638 1,469 16,500 16,550 2,088 1,696 2,088 1,919 19,500 19,550 2,538 2,146 2,538 2,369
13,550 13,600 1,645 1,358 1,645 1,476 16,550 16,600 2,095 1,704 2,095 1,926 19,550 19,600 2,545 2,154 2,545 2,376
13,600 13,650 1,653 1,363 1,653 1,484 16,600 16,650 2,103 1,711 2,103 1,934 19,600 19,650 2,553 2,161 2,553 2,384
13,650 13,700 1,660 1,368 1,660 1,491 16,650 16,700 2,110 1,719 2,110 1,941 19,650 19,700 2,560 2,169 2,560 2,391
13,700 13,750 1,668 1,373 1,668 1,499 16,700 16,750 2,118 1,726 2,118 1,949 19,700 19,750 2,568 2,176 2,568 2,399
13,750 13,800 1,675 1,378 1,675 1,506 16,750 16,800 2,125 1,734 2,125 1,956 19,750 19,800 2,575 2,184 2,575 2,406
13,800 13,850 1,683 1,383 1,683 1,514 16,800 16,850 2,133 1,741 2,133 1,964 19,800 19,850 2,583 2,191 2,583 2,414
13,850 13,900 1,690 1,388 1,690 1,521 16,850 16,900 2,140 1,749 2,140 1,971 19,850 19,900 2,590 2,199 2,590 2,421
13,900 13,950 1,698 1,393 1,698 1,529 16,900 16,950 2,148 1,756 2,148 1,979 19,900 19,950 2,598 2,206 2,598 2,429
13,950 14,000 1,705 1,398 1,705 1,536 16,950 17,000 2,155 1,764 2,155 1,986 19,950 20,000 2,605 2,214 2,605 2,436
14,000 17,000 20,000
14,000 14,050 1,713 1,403 1,713 1,544 17,000 17,050 2,163 1,771 2,163 1,994 20,000 20,050 2,613 2,221 2,613 2,444
14,050 14,100 1,720 1,408 1,720 1,551 17,050 17,100 2,170 1,779 2,170 2,001 20,050 20,100 2,620 2,229 2,620 2,451
14,100 14,150 1,728 1,413 1,728 1,559 17,100 17,150 2,178 1,786 2,178 2,009 20,100 20,150 2,628 2,236 2,628 2,459
14,150 14,200 1,735 1,418 1,735 1,566 17,150 17,200 2,185 1,794 2,185 2,016 20,150 20,200 2,635 2,244 2,635 2,466
14,200 14,250 1,743 1,423 1,743 1,574 17,200 17,250 2,193 1,801 2,193 2,024 20,200 20,250 2,643 2,251 2,643 2,474
14,250 14,300 1,750 1,428 1,750 1,581 17,250 17,300 2,200 1,809 2,200 2,031 20,250 20,300 2,650 2,259 2,650 2,481
14,300 14,350 1,758 1,433 1,758 1,589 17,300 17,350 2,208 1,816 2,208 2,039 20,300 20,350 2,658 2,266 2,658 2,489
14,350 14,400 1,765 1,438 1,765 1,596 17,350 17,400 2,215 1,824 2,215 2,046 20,350 20,400 2,665 2,274 2,665 2,496
14,400 14,450 1,773 1,443 1,773 1,604 17,400 17,450 2,223 1,831 2,223 2,054 20,400 20,450 2,673 2,281 2,673 2,504
14,450 14,500 1,780 1,448 1,780 1,611 17,450 17,500 2,230 1,839 2,230 2,061 20,450 20,500 2,680 2,289 2,680 2,511
14,500 14,550 1,788 1,453 1,788 1,619 17,500 17,550 2,238 1,846 2,238 2,069 20,500 20,550 2,688 2,296 2,688 2,519
14,550 14,600 1,795 1,458 1,795 1,626 17,550 17,600 2,245 1,854 2,245 2,076 20,550 20,600 2,695 2,304 2,695 2,526
14,600 14,650 1,803 1,463 1,803 1,634 17,600 17,650 2,253 1,861 2,253 2,084 20,600 20,650 2,703 2,311 2,703 2,534
14,650 14,700 1,810 1,468 1,810 1,641 17,650 17,700 2,260 1,869 2,260 2,091 20,650 20,700 2,710 2,319 2,710 2,541
14,700 14,750 1,818 1,473 1,818 1,649 17,700 17,750 2,268 1,876 2,268 2,099 20,700 20,750 2,718 2,326 2,718 2,549
14,750 14,800 1,825 1,478 1,825 1,656 17,750 17,800 2,275 1,884 2,275 2,106 20,750 20,800 2,725 2,334 2,725 2,556
14,800 14,850 1,833 1,483 1,833 1,664 17,800 17,850 2,283 1,891 2,283 2,114 20,800 20,850 2,733 2,341 2,733 2,564
14,850 14,900 1,840 1,488 1,840 1,671 17,850 17,900 2,290 1,899 2,290 2,121 20,850 20,900 2,740 2,349 2,740 2,571
14,900 14,950 1,848 1,493 1,848 1,679 17,900 17,950 2,298 1,906 2,298 2,129 20,900 20,950 2,748 2,356 2,748 2,579
14,950 15,000 1,855 1,498 1,855 1,686 17,950 18,000 2,305 1,914 2,305 2,136 20,950 21,000 2,755 2,364 2,755 2,586
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 254)
- 253 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
21,000 24,000 27,000
21,000 21,050 2,763 2,371 2,763 2,594 24,000 24,050 3,213 2,821 3,213 3,044 27,000 27,050 3,663 3,271 3,663 3,494
21,050 21,100 2,770 2,379 2,770 2,601 24,050 24,100 3,220 2,829 3,220 3,051 27,050 27,100 3,670 3,279 3,670 3,501
21,100 21,150 2,778 2,386 2,778 2,609 24,100 24,150 3,228 2,836 3,228 3,059 27,100 27,150 3,678 3,286 3,678 3,509
21,150 21,200 2,785 2,394 2,785 2,616 24,150 24,200 3,235 2,844 3,235 3,066 27,150 27,200 3,685 3,294 3,685 3,516
21,200 21,250 2,793 2,401 2,793 2,624 24,200 24,250 3,243 2,851 3,243 3,074 27,200 27,250 3,693 3,301 3,693 3,524
21,250 21,300 2,800 2,409 2,800 2,631 24,250 24,300 3,250 2,859 3,250 3,081 27,250 27,300 3,700 3,309 3,700 3,531
21,300 21,350 2,808 2,416 2,808 2,639 24,300 24,350 3,258 2,866 3,258 3,089 27,300 27,350 3,708 3,316 3,708 3,539
21,350 21,400 2,815 2,424 2,815 2,646 24,350 24,400 3,265 2,874 3,265 3,096 27,350 27,400 3,715 3,324 3,715 3,546
21,400 21,450 2,823 2,431 2,823 2,654 24,400 24,450 3,273 2,881 3,273 3,104 27,400 27,450 3,723 3,331 3,723 3,554
21,450 21,500 2,830 2,439 2,830 2,661 24,450 24,500 3,280 2,889 3,280 3,111 27,450 27,500 3,730 3,339 3,730 3,561
21,500 21,550 2,838 2,446 2,838 2,669 24,500 24,550 3,288 2,896 3,288 3,119 27,500 27,550 3,738 3,346 3,738 3,569
21,550 21,600 2,845 2,454 2,845 2,676 24,550 24,600 3,295 2,904 3,295 3,126 27,550 27,600 3,745 3,354 3,745 3,576
21,600 21,650 2,853 2,461 2,853 2,684 24,600 24,650 3,303 2,911 3,303 3,134 27,600 27,650 3,753 3,361 3,753 3,584
21,650 21,700 2,860 2,469 2,860 2,691 24,650 24,700 3,310 2,919 3,310 3,141 27,650 27,700 3,760 3,369 3,760 3,591
21,700 21,750 2,868 2,476 2,868 2,699 24,700 24,750 3,318 2,926 3,318 3,149 27,700 27,750 3,768 3,376 3,768 3,599
21,750 21,800 2,875 2,484 2,875 2,706 24,750 24,800 3,325 2,934 3,325 3,156 27,750 27,800 3,775 3,384 3,775 3,606
21,800 21,850 2,883 2,491 2,883 2,714 24,800 24,850 3,333 2,941 3,333 3,164 27,800 27,850 3,783 3,391 3,783 3,614
21,850 21,900 2,890 2,499 2,890 2,721 24,850 24,900 3,340 2,949 3,340 3,171 27,850 27,900 3,790 3,399 3,790 3,621
21,900 21,950 2,898 2,506 2,898 2,729 24,900 24,950 3,348 2,956 3,348 3,179 27,900 27,950 3,798 3,406 3,798 3,629
21,950 22,000 2,905 2,514 2,905 2,736 24,950 25,000 3,355 2,964 3,355 3,186 27,950 28,000 3,805 3,414 3,805 3,636
22,000 25,000 28,000
22,000 22,050 2,913 2,521 2,913 2,744 25,000 25,050 3,363 2,971 3,363 3,194 28,000 28,050 3,813 3,421 3,813 3,644
22,050 22,100 2,920 2,529 2,920 2,751 25,050 25,100 3,370 2,979 3,370 3,201 28,050 28,100 3,820 3,429 3,820 3,651
22,100 22,150 2,928 2,536 2,928 2,759 25,100 25,150 3,378 2,986 3,378 3,209 28,100 28,150 3,828 3,436 3,828 3,659
22,150 22,200 2,935 2,544 2,935 2,766 25,150 25,200 3,385 2,994 3,385 3,216 28,150 28,200 3,835 3,444 3,835 3,666
22,200 22,250 2,943 2,551 2,943 2,774 25,200 25,250 3,393 3,001 3,393 3,224 28,200 28,250 3,843 3,451 3,843 3,674
22,250 22,300 2,950 2,559 2,950 2,781 25,250 25,300 3,400 3,009 3,400 3,231 28,250 28,300 3,850 3,459 3,850 3,681
22,300 22,350 2,958 2,566 2,958 2,789 25,300 25,350 3,408 3,016 3,408 3,239 28,300 28,350 3,858 3,466 3,858 3,689
22,350 22,400 2,965 2,574 2,965 2,796 25,350 25,400 3,415 3,024 3,415 3,246 28,350 28,400 3,865 3,474 3,865 3,696
22,400 22,450 2,973 2,581 2,973 2,804 25,400 25,450 3,423 3,031 3,423 3,254 28,400 28,450 3,873 3,481 3,873 3,704
22,450 22,500 2,980 2,589 2,980 2,811 25,450 25,500 3,430 3,039 3,430 3,261 28,450 28,500 3,880 3,489 3,880 3,711
22,500 22,550 2,988 2,596 2,988 2,819 25,500 25,550 3,438 3,046 3,438 3,269 28,500 28,550 3,888 3,496 3,888 3,719
22,550 22,600 2,995 2,604 2,995 2,826 25,550 25,600 3,445 3,054 3,445 3,276 28,550 28,600 3,895 3,504 3,895 3,726
22,600 22,650 3,003 2,611 3,003 2,834 25,600 25,650 3,453 3,061 3,453 3,284 28,600 28,650 3,903 3,511 3,903 3,734
22,650 22,700 3,010 2,619 3,010 2,841 25,650 25,700 3,460 3,069 3,460 3,291 28,650 28,700 3,910 3,519 3,910 3,741
22,700 22,750 3,018 2,626 3,018 2,849 25,700 25,750 3,468 3,076 3,468 3,299 28,700 28,750 3,918 3,526 3,918 3,749
22,750 22,800 3,025 2,634 3,025 2,856 25,750 25,800 3,475 3,084 3,475 3,306 28,750 28,800 3,925 3,534 3,925 3,756
22,800 22,850 3,033 2,641 3,033 2,864 25,800 25,850 3,483 3,091 3,483 3,314 28,800 28,850 3,933 3,541 3,933 3,764
22,850 22,900 3,040 2,649 3,040 2,871 25,850 25,900 3,490 3,099 3,490 3,321 28,850 28,900 3,940 3,549 3,940 3,771
22,900 22,950 3,048 2,656 3,048 2,879 25,900 25,950 3,498 3,106 3,498 3,329 28,900 28,950 3,948 3,556 3,948 3,779
22,950 23,000 3,055 2,664 3,055 2,886 25,950 26,000 3,505 3,114 3,505 3,336 28,950 29,000 3,955 3,564 3,955 3,786
23,000 26,000 29,000
23,000 23,050 3,063 2,671 3,063 2,894 26,000 26,050 3,513 3,121 3,513 3,344 29,000 29,050 3,963 3,571 3,963 3,794
23,050 23,100 3,070 2,679 3,070 2,901 26,050 26,100 3,520 3,129 3,520 3,351 29,050 29,100 3,970 3,579 3,970 3,801
23,100 23,150 3,078 2,686 3,078 2,909 26,100 26,150 3,528 3,136 3,528 3,359 29,100 29,150 3,978 3,586 3,978 3,809
23,150 23,200 3,085 2,694 3,085 2,916 26,150 26,200 3,535 3,144 3,535 3,366 29,150 29,200 3,985 3,594 3,985 3,816
23,200 23,250 3,093 2,701 3,093 2,924 26,200 26,250 3,543 3,151 3,543 3,374 29,200 29,250 3,993 3,601 3,993 3,824
23,250 23,300 3,100 2,709 3,100 2,931 26,250 26,300 3,550 3,159 3,550 3,381 29,250 29,300 4,000 3,609 4,000 3,831
23,300 23,350 3,108 2,716 3,108 2,939 26,300 26,350 3,558 3,166 3,558 3,389 29,300 29,350 4,008 3,616 4,008 3,839
23,350 23,400 3,115 2,724 3,115 2,946 26,350 26,400 3,565 3,174 3,565 3,396 29,350 29,400 4,015 3,624 4,015 3,846
23,400 23,450 3,123 2,731 3,123 2,954 26,400 26,450 3,573 3,181 3,573 3,404 29,400 29,450 4,023 3,631 4,023 3,854
23,450 23,500 3,130 2,739 3,130 2,961 26,450 26,500 3,580 3,189 3,580 3,411 29,450 29,500 4,030 3,639 4,030 3,861
23,500 23,550 3,138 2,746 3,138 2,969 26,500 26,550 3,588 3,196 3,588 3,419 29,500 29,550 4,038 3,646 4,038 3,869
23,550 23,600 3,145 2,754 3,145 2,976 26,550 26,600 3,595 3,204 3,595 3,426 29,550 29,600 4,045 3,654 4,045 3,876
23,600 23,650 3,153 2,761 3,153 2,984 26,600 26,650 3,603 3,211 3,603 3,434 29,600 29,650 4,053 3,661 4,053 3,884
23,650 23,700 3,160 2,769 3,160 2,991 26,650 26,700 3,610 3,219 3,610 3,441 29,650 29,700 4,060 3,669 4,060 3,891
23,700 23,750 3,168 2,776 3,168 2,999 26,700 26,750 3,618 3,226 3,618 3,449 29,700 29,750 4,068 3,676 4,068 3,899
23,750 23,800 3,175 2,784 3,175 3,006 26,750 26,800 3,625 3,234 3,625 3,456 29,750 29,800 4,075 3,684 4,075 3,906
23,800 23,850 3,183 2,791 3,183 3,014 26,800 26,850 3,633 3,241 3,633 3,464 29,800 29,850 4,083 3,691 4,083 3,914
23,850 23,900 3,190 2,799 3,190 3,021 26,850 26,900 3,640 3,249 3,640 3,471 29,850 29,900 4,090 3,699 4,090 3,921
23,900 23,950 3,198 2,806 3,198 3,029 26,900 26,950 3,648 3,256 3,648 3,479 29,900 29,950 4,098 3,706 4,098 3,929
23,950 24,000 3,205 2,814 3,205 3,036 26,950 27,000 3,655 3,264 3,655 3,486 29,950 30,000 4,105 3,714 4,105 3,936
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 255)
- 254 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
30,000 33,000 36,000
30,000 30,050 4,113 3,721 4,113 3,944 33,000 33,050 4,680 4,171 4,680 4,394 36,000 36,050 5,430 4,621 5,430 4,844
30,050 30,100 4,120 3,729 4,120 3,951 33,050 33,100 4,693 4,179 4,693 4,401 36,050 36,100 5,443 4,629 5,443 4,851
30,100 30,150 4,128 3,736 4,128 3,959 33,100 33,150 4,705 4,186 4,705 4,409 36,100 36,150 5,455 4,636 5,455 4,859
30,150 30,200 4,135 3,744 4,135 3,966 33,150 33,200 4,718 4,194 4,718 4,416 36,150 36,200 5,468 4,644 5,468 4,866
30,200 30,250 4,143 3,751 4,143 3,974 33,200 33,250 4,730 4,201 4,730 4,424 36,200 36,250 5,480 4,651 5,480 4,874
30,250 30,300 4,150 3,759 4,150 3,981 33,250 33,300 4,743 4,209 4,743 4,431 36,250 36,300 5,493 4,659 5,493 4,881
30,300 30,350 4,158 3,766 4,158 3,989 33,300 33,350 4,755 4,216 4,755 4,439 36,300 36,350 5,505 4,666 5,505 4,889
30,350 30,400 4,165 3,774 4,165 3,996 33,350 33,400 4,768 4,224 4,768 4,446 36,350 36,400 5,518 4,674 5,518 4,896
30,400 30,450 4,173 3,781 4,173 4,004 33,400 33,450 4,780 4,231 4,780 4,454 36,400 36,450 5,530 4,681 5,530 4,904
30,450 30,500 4,180 3,789 4,180 4,011 33,450 33,500 4,793 4,239 4,793 4,461 36,450 36,500 5,543 4,689 5,543 4,911
30,500 30,550 4,188 3,796 4,188 4,019 33,500 33,550 4,805 4,246 4,805 4,469 36,500 36,550 5,555 4,696 5,555 4,919
30,550 30,600 4,195 3,804 4,195 4,026 33,550 33,600 4,818 4,254 4,818 4,476 36,550 36,600 5,568 4,704 5,568 4,926
30,600 30,650 4,203 3,811 4,203 4,034 33,600 33,650 4,830 4,261 4,830 4,484 36,600 36,650 5,580 4,711 5,580 4,934
30,650 30,700 4,210 3,819 4,210 4,041 33,650 33,700 4,843 4,269 4,843 4,491 36,650 36,700 5,593 4,719 5,593 4,941
30,700 30,750 4,218 3,826 4,218 4,049 33,700 33,750 4,855 4,276 4,855 4,499 36,700 36,750 5,605 4,726 5,605 4,949
30,750 30,800 4,225 3,834 4,225 4,056 33,750 33,800 4,868 4,284 4,868 4,506 36,750 36,800 5,618 4,734 5,618 4,956
30,800 30,850 4,233 3,841 4,233 4,064 33,800 33,850 4,880 4,291 4,880 4,514 36,800 36,850 5,630 4,741 5,630 4,964
30,850 30,900 4,240 3,849 4,240 4,071 33,850 33,900 4,893 4,299 4,893 4,521 36,850 36,900 5,643 4,749 5,643 4,971
30,900 30,950 4,248 3,856 4,248 4,079 33,900 33,950 4,905 4,306 4,905 4,529 36,900 36,950 5,655 4,756 5,655 4,979
30,950 31,000 4,255 3,864 4,255 4,086 33,950 34,000 4,918 4,314 4,918 4,536 36,950 37,000 5,668 4,764 5,668 4,986
31,000 34,000 37,000
31,000 31,050 4,263 3,871 4,263 4,094 34,000 34,050 4,930 4,321 4,930 4,544 37,000 37,050 5,680 4,771 5,680 4,994
31,050 31,100 4,270 3,879 4,270 4,101 34,050 34,100 4,943 4,329 4,943 4,551 37,050 37,100 5,693 4,779 5,693 5,001
31,100 31,150 4,278 3,886 4,278 4,109 34,100 34,150 4,955 4,336 4,955 4,559 37,100 37,150 5,705 4,786 5,705 5,009
31,150 31,200 4,285 3,894 4,285 4,116 34,150 34,200 4,968 4,344 4,968 4,566 37,150 37,200 5,718 4,794 5,718 5,016
31,200 31,250 4,293 3,901 4,293 4,124 34,200 34,250 4,980 4,351 4,980 4,574 37,200 37,250 5,730 4,801 5,730 5,024
31,250 31,300 4,300 3,909 4,300 4,131 34,250 34,300 4,993 4,359 4,993 4,581 37,250 37,300 5,743 4,809 5,743 5,031
31,300 31,350 4,308 3,916 4,308 4,139 34,300 34,350 5,005 4,366 5,005 4,589 37,300 37,350 5,755 4,816 5,755 5,039
31,350 31,400 4,315 3,924 4,315 4,146 34,350 34,400 5,018 4,374 5,018 4,596 37,350 37,400 5,768 4,824 5,768 5,046
31,400 31,450 4,323 3,931 4,323 4,154 34,400 34,450 5,030 4,381 5,030 4,604 37,400 37,450 5,780 4,831 5,780 5,054
31,450 31,500 4,330 3,939 4,330 4,161 34,450 34,500 5,043 4,389 5,043 4,611 37,450 37,500 5,793 4,839 5,793 5,061
31,500 31,550 4,338 3,946 4,338 4,169 34,500 34,550 5,055 4,396 5,055 4,619 37,500 37,550 5,805 4,846 5,805 5,069
31,550 31,600 4,345 3,954 4,345 4,176 34,550 34,600 5,068 4,404 5,068 4,626 37,550 37,600 5,818 4,854 5,818 5,076
31,600 31,650 4,353 3,961 4,353 4,184 34,600 34,650 5,080 4,411 5,080 4,634 37,600 37,650 5,830 4,861 5,830 5,084
31,650 31,700 4,360 3,969 4,360 4,191 34,650 34,700 5,093 4,419 5,093 4,641 37,650 37,700 5,843 4,869 5,843 5,091
31,700 31,750 4,368 3,976 4,368 4,199 34,700 34,750 5,105 4,426 5,105 4,649 37,700 37,750 5,855 4,876 5,855 5,099
31,750 31,800 4,375 3,984 4,375 4,206 34,750 34,800 5,118 4,434 5,118 4,656 37,750 37,800 5,868 4,884 5,868 5,106
31,800 31,850 4,383 3,991 4,383 4,214 34,800 34,850 5,130 4,441 5,130 4,664 37,800 37,850 5,880 4,891 5,880 5,114
31,850 31,900 4,393 3,999 4,393 4,221 34,850 34,900 5,143 4,449 5,143 4,671 37,850 37,900 5,893 4,899 5,893 5,121
31,900 31,950 4,405 4,006 4,405 4,229 34,900 34,950 5,155 4,456 5,155 4,679 37,900 37,950 5,905 4,906 5,905 5,129
31,950 32,000 4,418 4,014 4,418 4,236 34,950 35,000 5,168 4,464 5,168 4,686 37,950 38,000 5,918 4,914 5,918 5,136
32,000 35,000 38,000
32,000 32,050 4,430 4,021 4,430 4,244 35,000 35,050 5,180 4,471 5,180 4,694 38,000 38,050 5,930 4,921 5,930 5,144
32,050 32,100 4,443 4,029 4,443 4,251 35,050 35,100 5,193 4,479 5,193 4,701 38,050 38,100 5,943 4,929 5,943 5,151
32,100 32,150 4,455 4,036 4,455 4,259 35,100 35,150 5,205 4,486 5,205 4,709 38,100 38,150 5,955 4,936 5,955 5,159
32,150 32,200 4,468 4,044 4,468 4,266 35,150 35,200 5,218 4,494 5,218 4,716 38,150 38,200 5,968 4,944 5,968 5,166
32,200 32,250 4,480 4,051 4,480 4,274 35,200 35,250 5,230 4,501 5,230 4,724 38,200 38,250 5,980 4,951 5,980 5,174
32,250 32,300 4,493 4,059 4,493 4,281 35,250 35,300 5,243 4,509 5,243 4,731 38,250 38,300 5,993 4,959 5,993 5,181
32,300 32,350 4,505 4,066 4,505 4,289 35,300 35,350 5,255 4,516 5,255 4,739 38,300 38,350 6,005 4,966 6,005 5,189
32,350 32,400 4,518 4,074 4,518 4,296 35,350 35,400 5,268 4,524 5,268 4,746 38,350 38,400 6,018 4,974 6,018 5,196
32,400 32,450 4,530 4,081 4,530 4,304 35,400 35,450 5,280 4,531 5,280 4,754 38,400 38,450 6,030 4,981 6,030 5,204
32,450 32,500 4,543 4,089 4,543 4,311 35,450 35,500 5,293 4,539 5,293 4,761 38,450 38,500 6,043 4,989 6,043 5,211
32,500 32,550 4,555 4,096 4,555 4,319 35,500 35,550 5,305 4,546 5,305 4,769 38,500 38,550 6,055 4,996 6,055 5,219
32,550 32,600 4,568 4,104 4,568 4,326 35,550 35,600 5,318 4,554 5,318 4,776 38,550 38,600 6,068 5,004 6,068 5,226
32,600 32,650 4,580 4,111 4,580 4,334 35,600 35,650 5,330 4,561 5,330 4,784 38,600 38,650 6,080 5,011 6,080 5,234
32,650 32,700 4,593 4,119 4,593 4,341 35,650 35,700 5,343 4,569 5,343 4,791 38,650 38,700 6,093 5,019 6,093 5,241
32,700 32,750 4,605 4,126 4,605 4,349 35,700 35,750 5,355 4,576 5,355 4,799 38,700 38,750 6,105 5,026 6,105 5,249
32,750 32,800 4,618 4,134 4,618 4,356 35,750 35,800 5,368 4,584 5,368 4,806 38,750 38,800 6,118 5,034 6,118 5,256
32,800 32,850 4,630 4,141 4,630 4,364 35,800 35,850 5,380 4,591 5,380 4,814 38,800 38,850 6,130 5,041 6,130 5,264
32,850 32,900 4,643 4,149 4,643 4,371 35,850 35,900 5,393 4,599 5,393 4,821 38,850 38,900 6,143 5,049 6,143 5,271
32,900 32,950 4,655 4,156 4,655 4,379 35,900 35,950 5,405 4,606 5,405 4,829 38,900 38,950 6,155 5,056 6,155 5,279
32,950 33,000 4,668 4,164 4,668 4,386 35,950 36,000 5,418 4,614 5,418 4,836 38,950 39,000 6,168 5,064 6,168 5,286
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 256)
- 255 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
39,000 42,000 45,000
39,000 39,050 6,180 5,071 6,180 5,294 42,000 42,050 6,930 5,521 6,930 5,744 45,000 45,050 7,680 5,971 7,680 6,431
39,050 39,100 6,193 5,079 6,193 5,301 42,050 42,100 6,943 5,529 6,943 5,751 45,050 45,100 7,693 5,979 7,693 6,444
39,100 39,150 6,205 5,086 6,205 5,309 42,100 42,150 6,955 5,536 6,955 5,759 45,100 45,150 7,705 5,986 7,705 6,456
39,150 39,200 6,218 5,094 6,218 5,316 42,150 42,200 6,968 5,544 6,968 5,766 45,150 45,200 7,718 5,994 7,718 6,469
39,200 39,250 6,230 5,101 6,230 5,324 42,200 42,250 6,980 5,551 6,980 5,774 45,200 45,250 7,730 6,001 7,730 6,481
39,250 39,300 6,243 5,109 6,243 5,331 42,250 42,300 6,993 5,559 6,993 5,781 45,250 45,300 7,743 6,009 7,743 6,494
39,300 39,350 6,255 5,116 6,255 5,339 42,300 42,350 7,005 5,566 7,005 5,789 45,300 45,350 7,755 6,016 7,755 6,506
39,350 39,400 6,268 5,124 6,268 5,346 42,350 42,400 7,018 5,574 7,018 5,796 45,350 45,400 7,768 6,024 7,768 6,519
39,400 39,450 6,280 5,131 6,280 5,354 42,400 42,450 7,030 5,581 7,030 5,804 45,400 45,450 7,780 6,031 7,780 6,531
39,450 39,500 6,293 5,139 6,293 5,361 42,450 42,500 7,043 5,589 7,043 5,811 45,450 45,500 7,793 6,039 7,793 6,544
39,500 39,550 6,305 5,146 6,305 5,369 42,500 42,550 7,055 5,596 7,055 5,819 45,500 45,550 7,805 6,046 7,805 6,556
39,550 39,600 6,318 5,154 6,318 5,376 42,550 42,600 7,068 5,604 7,068 5,826 45,550 45,600 7,818 6,054 7,818 6,569
39,600 39,650 6,330 5,161 6,330 5,384 42,600 42,650 7,080 5,611 7,080 5,834 45,600 45,650 7,830 6,061 7,830 6,581
39,650 39,700 6,343 5,169 6,343 5,391 42,650 42,700 7,093 5,619 7,093 5,844 45,650 45,700 7,843 6,069 7,843 6,594
39,700 39,750 6,355 5,176 6,355 5,399 42,700 42,750 7,105 5,626 7,105 5,856 45,700 45,750 7,855 6,076 7,855 6,606
39,750 39,800 6,368 5,184 6,368 5,406 42,750 42,800 7,118 5,634 7,118 5,869 45,750 45,800 7,868 6,084 7,868 6,619
39,800 39,850 6,380 5,191 6,380 5,414 42,800 42,850 7,130 5,641 7,130 5,881 45,800 45,850 7,880 6,091 7,880 6,631
39,850 39,900 6,393 5,199 6,393 5,421 42,850 42,900 7,143 5,649 7,143 5,894 45,850 45,900 7,893 6,099 7,893 6,644
39,900 39,950 6,405 5,206 6,405 5,429 42,900 42,950 7,155 5,656 7,155 5,906 45,900 45,950 7,905 6,106 7,905 6,656
39,950 40,000 6,418 5,214 6,418 5,436 42,950 43,000 7,168 5,664 7,168 5,919 45,950 46,000 7,918 6,114 7,918 6,669
40,000 43,000 46,000
40,000 40,050 6,430 5,221 6,430 5,444 43,000 43,050 7,180 5,671 7,180 5,931 46,000 46,050 7,930 6,121 7,930 6,681
40,050 40,100 6,443 5,229 6,443 5,451 43,050 43,100 7,193 5,679 7,193 5,944 46,050 46,100 7,943 6,129 7,943 6,694
40,100 40,150 6,455 5,236 6,455 5,459 43,100 43,150 7,205 5,686 7,205 5,956 46,100 46,150 7,955 6,136 7,955 6,706
40,150 40,200 6,468 5,244 6,468 5,466 43,150 43,200 7,218 5,694 7,218 5,969 46,150 46,200 7,968 6,144 7,968 6,719
40,200 40,250 6,480 5,251 6,480 5,474 43,200 43,250 7,230 5,701 7,230 5,981 46,200 46,250 7,980 6,151 7,980 6,731
40,250 40,300 6,493 5,259 6,493 5,481 43,250 43,300 7,243 5,709 7,243 5,994 46,250 46,300 7,993 6,159 7,993 6,744
40,300 40,350 6,505 5,266 6,505 5,489 43,300 43,350 7,255 5,716 7,255 6,006 46,300 46,350 8,005 6,166 8,005 6,756
40,350 40,400 6,518 5,274 6,518 5,496 43,350 43,400 7,268 5,724 7,268 6,019 46,350 46,400 8,018 6,174 8,018 6,769
40,400 40,450 6,530 5,281 6,530 5,504 43,400 43,450 7,280 5,731 7,280 6,031 46,400 46,450 8,030 6,181 8,030 6,781
40,450 40,500 6,543 5,289 6,543 5,511 43,450 43,500 7,293 5,739 7,293 6,044 46,450 46,500 8,043 6,189 8,043 6,794
40,500 40,550 6,555 5,296 6,555 5,519 43,500 43,550 7,305 5,746 7,305 6,056 46,500 46,550 8,055 6,196 8,055 6,806
40,550 40,600 6,568 5,304 6,568 5,526 43,550 43,600 7,318 5,754 7,318 6,069 46,550 46,600 8,068 6,204 8,068 6,819
40,600 40,650 6,580 5,311 6,580 5,534 43,600 43,650 7,330 5,761 7,330 6,081 46,600 46,650 8,080 6,211 8,080 6,831
40,650 40,700 6,593 5,319 6,593 5,541 43,650 43,700 7,343 5,769 7,343 6,094 46,650 46,700 8,093 6,219 8,093 6,844
40,700 40,750 6,605 5,326 6,605 5,549 43,700 43,750 7,355 5,776 7,355 6,106 46,700 46,750 8,105 6,226 8,105 6,856
40,750 40,800 6,618 5,334 6,618 5,556 43,750 43,800 7,368 5,784 7,368 6,119 46,750 46,800 8,118 6,234 8,118 6,869
40,800 40,850 6,630 5,341 6,630 5,564 43,800 43,850 7,380 5,791 7,380 6,131 46,800 46,850 8,130 6,241 8,130 6,881
40,850 40,900 6,643 5,349 6,643 5,571 43,850 43,900 7,393 5,799 7,393 6,144 46,850 46,900 8,143 6,249 8,143 6,894
40,900 40,950 6,655 5,356 6,655 5,579 43,900 43,950 7,405 5,806 7,405 6,156 46,900 46,950 8,155 6,256 8,155 6,906
40,950 41,000 6,668 5,364 6,668 5,586 43,950 44,000 7,418 5,814 7,418 6,169 46,950 47,000 8,168 6,264 8,168 6,919
41,000 44,000 47,000
41,000 41,050 6,680 5,371 6,680 5,594 44,000 44,050 7,430 5,821 7,430 6,181 47,000 47,050 8,180 6,271 8,180 6,931
41,050 41,100 6,693 5,379 6,693 5,601 44,050 44,100 7,443 5,829 7,443 6,194 47,050 47,100 8,193 6,279 8,193 6,944
41,100 41,150 6,705 5,386 6,705 5,609 44,100 44,150 7,455 5,836 7,455 6,206 47,100 47,150 8,205 6,286 8,205 6,956
41,150 41,200 6,718 5,394 6,718 5,616 44,150 44,200 7,468 5,844 7,468 6,219 47,150 47,200 8,218 6,294 8,218 6,969
41,200 41,250 6,730 5,401 6,730 5,624 44,200 44,250 7,480 5,851 7,480 6,231 47,200 47,250 8,230 6,301 8,230 6,981
41,250 41,300 6,743 5,409 6,743 5,631 44,250 44,300 7,493 5,859 7,493 6,244 47,250 47,300 8,243 6,309 8,243 6,994
41,300 41,350 6,755 5,416 6,755 5,639 44,300 44,350 7,505 5,866 7,505 6,256 47,300 47,350 8,255 6,316 8,255 7,006
41,350 41,400 6,768 5,424 6,768 5,646 44,350 44,400 7,518 5,874 7,518 6,269 47,350 47,400 8,268 6,324 8,268 7,019
41,400 41,450 6,780 5,431 6,780 5,654 44,400 44,450 7,530 5,881 7,530 6,281 47,400 47,450 8,280 6,331 8,280 7,031
41,450 41,500 6,793 5,439 6,793 5,661 44,450 44,500 7,543 5,889 7,543 6,294 47,450 47,500 8,293 6,339 8,293 7,044
41,500 41,550 6,805 5,446 6,805 5,669 44,500 44,550 7,555 5,896 7,555 6,306 47,500 47,550 8,305 6,346 8,305 7,056
41,550 41,600 6,818 5,454 6,818 5,676 44,550 44,600 7,568 5,904 7,568 6,319 47,550 47,600 8,318 6,354 8,318 7,069
41,600 41,650 6,830 5,461 6,830 5,684 44,600 44,650 7,580 5,911 7,580 6,331 47,600 47,650 8,330 6,361 8,330 7,081
41,650 41,700 6,843 5,469 6,843 5,691 44,650 44,700 7,593 5,919 7,593 6,344 47,650 47,700 8,343 6,369 8,343 7,094
41,700 41,750 6,855 5,476 6,855 5,699 44,700 44,750 7,605 5,926 7,605 6,356 47,700 47,750 8,355 6,376 8,355 7,106
41,750 41,800 6,868 5,484 6,868 5,706 44,750 44,800 7,618 5,934 7,618 6,369 47,750 47,800 8,368 6,384 8,368 7,119
41,800 41,850 6,880 5,491 6,880 5,714 44,800 44,850 7,630 5,941 7,630 6,381 47,800 47,850 8,380 6,391 8,380 7,131
41,850 41,900 6,893 5,499 6,893 5,721 44,850 44,900 7,643 5,949 7,643 6,394 47,850 47,900 8,393 6,399 8,393 7,144
41,900 41,950 6,905 5,506 6,905 5,729 44,900 44,950 7,655 5,956 7,655 6,406 47,900 47,950 8,405 6,406 8,405 7,156
41,950 42,000 6,918 5,514 6,918 5,736 44,950 45,000 7,668 5,964 7,668 6,419 47,950 48,000 8,418 6,414 8,418 7,169
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 257)
- 256 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
48,000 51,000 54,000
48,000 48,050 8,430 6,421 8,430 7,181 51,000 51,050 9,180 6,871 9,180 7,931 54,000 54,050 9,930 7,321 9,930 8,681
48,050 48,100 8,443 6,429 8,443 7,194 51,050 51,100 9,193 6,879 9,193 7,944 54,050 54,100 9,943 7,329 9,943 8,694
48,100 48,150 8,455 6,436 8,455 7,206 51,100 51,150 9,205 6,886 9,205 7,956 54,100 54,150 9,955 7,336 9,955 8,706
48,150 48,200 8,468 6,444 8,468 7,219 51,150 51,200 9,218 6,894 9,218 7,969 54,150 54,200 9,968 7,344 9,968 8,719
48,200 48,250 8,480 6,451 8,480 7,231 51,200 51,250 9,230 6,901 9,230 7,981 54,200 54,250 9,980 7,351 9,980 8,731
48,250 48,300 8,493 6,459 8,493 7,244 51,250 51,300 9,243 6,909 9,243 7,994 54,250 54,300 9,993 7,359 9,993 8,744
48,300 48,350 8,505 6,466 8,505 7,256 51,300 51,350 9,255 6,916 9,255 8,006 54,300 54,350 10,005 7,366 10,005 8,756
48,350 48,400 8,518 6,474 8,518 7,269 51,350 51,400 9,268 6,924 9,268 8,019 54,350 54,400 10,018 7,374 10,018 8,769
48,400 48,450 8,530 6,481 8,530 7,281 51,400 51,450 9,280 6,931 9,280 8,031 54,400 54,450 10,030 7,381 10,030 8,781
48,450 48,500 8,543 6,489 8,543 7,294 51,450 51,500 9,293 6,939 9,293 8,044 54,450 54,500 10,043 7,389 10,043 8,794
48,500 48,550 8,555 6,496 8,555 7,306 51,500 51,550 9,305 6,946 9,305 8,056 54,500 54,550 10,055 7,396 10,055 8,806
48,550 48,600 8,568 6,504 8,568 7,319 51,550 51,600 9,318 6,954 9,318 8,069 54,550 54,600 10,068 7,404 10,068 8,819
48,600 48,650 8,580 6,511 8,580 7,331 51,600 51,650 9,330 6,961 9,330 8,081 54,600 54,650 10,080 7,411 10,080 8,831
48,650 48,700 8,593 6,519 8,593 7,344 51,650 51,700 9,343 6,969 9,343 8,094 54,650 54,700 10,093 7,419 10,093 8,844
48,700 48,750 8,605 6,526 8,605 7,356 51,700 51,750 9,355 6,976 9,355 8,106 54,700 54,750 10,105 7,426 10,105 8,856
48,750 48,800 8,618 6,534 8,618 7,369 51,750 51,800 9,368 6,984 9,368 8,119 54,750 54,800 10,118 7,434 10,118 8,869
48,800 48,850 8,630 6,541 8,630 7,381 51,800 51,850 9,380 6,991 9,380 8,131 54,800 54,850 10,130 7,441 10,130 8,881
48,850 48,900 8,643 6,549 8,643 7,394 51,850 51,900 9,393 6,999 9,393 8,144 54,850 54,900 10,143 7,449 10,143 8,894
48,900 48,950 8,655 6,556 8,655 7,406 51,900 51,950 9,405 7,006 9,405 8,156 54,900 54,950 10,155 7,456 10,155 8,906
48,950 49,000 8,668 6,564 8,668 7,419 51,950 52,000 9,418 7,014 9,418 8,169 54,950 55,000 10,168 7,464 10,168 8,919
49,000 52,000 55,000
49,000 49,050 8,680 6,571 8,680 7,431 52,000 52,050 9,430 7,021 9,430 8,181 55,000 55,050 10,180 7,471 10,180 8,931
49,050 49,100 8,693 6,579 8,693 7,444 52,050 52,100 9,443 7,029 9,443 8,194 55,050 55,100 10,193 7,479 10,193 8,944
49,100 49,150 8,705 6,586 8,705 7,456 52,100 52,150 9,455 7,036 9,455 8,206 55,100 55,150 10,205 7,486 10,205 8,956
49,150 49,200 8,718 6,594 8,718 7,469 52,150 52,200 9,468 7,044 9,468 8,219 55,150 55,200 10,218 7,494 10,218 8,969
49,200 49,250 8,730 6,601 8,730 7,481 52,200 52,250 9,480 7,051 9,480 8,231 55,200 55,250 10,230 7,501 10,230 8,981
49,250 49,300 8,743 6,609 8,743 7,494 52,250 52,300 9,493 7,059 9,493 8,244 55,250 55,300 10,243 7,509 10,243 8,994
49,300 49,350 8,755 6,616 8,755 7,506 52,300 52,350 9,505 7,066 9,505 8,256 55,300 55,350 10,255 7,516 10,255 9,006
49,350 49,400 8,768 6,624 8,768 7,519 52,350 52,400 9,518 7,074 9,518 8,269 55,350 55,400 10,268 7,524 10,268 9,019
49,400 49,450 8,780 6,631 8,780 7,531 52,400 52,450 9,530 7,081 9,530 8,281 55,400 55,450 10,280 7,531 10,280 9,031
49,450 49,500 8,793 6,639 8,793 7,544 52,450 52,500 9,543 7,089 9,543 8,294 55,450 55,500 10,293 7,539 10,293 9,044
49,500 49,550 8,805 6,646 8,805 7,556 52,500 52,550 9,555 7,096 9,555 8,306 55,500 55,550 10,305 7,546 10,305 9,056
49,550 49,600 8,818 6,654 8,818 7,569 52,550 52,600 9,568 7,104 9,568 8,319 55,550 55,600 10,318 7,554 10,318 9,069
49,600 49,650 8,830 6,661 8,830 7,581 52,600 52,650 9,580 7,111 9,580 8,331 55,600 55,650 10,330 7,561 10,330 9,081
49,650 49,700 8,843 6,669 8,843 7,594 52,650 52,700 9,593 7,119 9,593 8,344 55,650 55,700 10,343 7,569 10,343 9,094
49,700 49,750 8,855 6,676 8,855 7,606 52,700 52,750 9,605 7,126 9,605 8,356 55,700 55,750 10,355 7,576 10,355 9,106
49,750 49,800 8,868 6,684 8,868 7,619 52,750 52,800 9,618 7,134 9,618 8,369 55,750 55,800 10,368 7,584 10,368 9,119
49,800 49,850 8,880 6,691 8,880 7,631 52,800 52,850 9,630 7,141 9,630 8,381 55,800 55,850 10,380 7,591 10,380 9,131
49,850 49,900 8,893 6,699 8,893 7,644 52,850 52,900 9,643 7,149 9,643 8,394 55,850 55,900 10,393 7,599 10,393 9,144
49,900 49,950 8,905 6,706 8,905 7,656 52,900 52,950 9,655 7,156 9,655 8,406 55,900 55,950 10,405 7,606 10,405 9,156
49,950 50,000 8,918 6,714 8,918 7,669 52,950 53,000 9,668 7,164 9,668 8,419 55,950 56,000 10,418 7,614 10,418 9,169
50,000 53,000 56,000
50,000 50,050 8,930 6,721 8,930 7,681 53,000 53,050 9,680 7,171 9,680 8,431 56,000 56,050 10,430 7,621 10,430 9,181
50,050 50,100 8,943 6,729 8,943 7,694 53,050 53,100 9,693 7,179 9,693 8,444 56,050 56,100 10,443 7,629 10,443 9,194
50,100 50,150 8,955 6,736 8,955 7,706 53,100 53,150 9,705 7,186 9,705 8,456 56,100 56,150 10,455 7,636 10,455 9,206
50,150 50,200 8,968 6,744 8,968 7,719 53,150 53,200 9,718 7,194 9,718 8,469 56,150 56,200 10,468 7,644 10,468 9,219
50,200 50,250 8,980 6,751 8,980 7,731 53,200 53,250 9,730 7,201 9,730 8,481 56,200 56,250 10,480 7,651 10,480 9,231
50,250 50,300 8,993 6,759 8,993 7,744 53,250 53,300 9,743 7,209 9,743 8,494 56,250 56,300 10,493 7,659 10,493 9,244
50,300 50,350 9,005 6,766 9,005 7,756 53,300 53,350 9,755 7,216 9,755 8,506 56,300 56,350 10,505 7,666 10,505 9,256
50,350 50,400 9,018 6,774 9,018 7,769 53,350 53,400 9,768 7,224 9,768 8,519 56,350 56,400 10,518 7,674 10,518 9,269
50,400 50,450 9,030 6,781 9,030 7,781 53,400 53,450 9,780 7,231 9,780 8,531 56,400 56,450 10,530 7,681 10,530 9,281
50,450 50,500 9,043 6,789 9,043 7,794 53,450 53,500 9,793 7,239 9,793 8,544 56,450 56,500 10,543 7,689 10,543 9,294
50,500 50,550 9,055 6,796 9,055 7,806 53,500 53,550 9,805 7,246 9,805 8,556 56,500 56,550 10,555 7,696 10,555 9,306
50,550 50,600 9,068 6,804 9,068 7,819 53,550 53,600 9,818 7,254 9,818 8,569 56,550 56,600 10,568 7,704 10,568 9,319
50,600 50,650 9,080 6,811 9,080 7,831 53,600 53,650 9,830 7,261 9,830 8,581 56,600 56,650 10,580 7,711 10,580 9,331
50,650 50,700 9,093 6,819 9,093 7,844 53,650 53,700 9,843 7,269 9,843 8,594 56,650 56,700 10,593 7,719 10,593 9,344
50,700 50,750 9,105 6,826 9,105 7,856 53,700 53,750 9,855 7,276 9,855 8,606 56,700 56,750 10,605 7,726 10,605 9,356
50,750 50,800 9,118 6,834 9,118 7,869 53,750 53,800 9,868 7,284 9,868 8,619 56,750 56,800 10,618 7,734 10,618 9,369
50,800 50,850 9,130 6,841 9,130 7,881 53,800 53,850 9,880 7,291 9,880 8,631 56,800 56,850 10,630 7,741 10,630 9,381
50,850 50,900 9,143 6,849 9,143 7,894 53,850 53,900 9,893 7,299 9,893 8,644 56,850 56,900 10,643 7,749 10,643 9,394
50,900 50,950 9,155 6,856 9,155 7,906 53,900 53,950 9,905 7,306 9,905 8,656 56,900 56,950 10,655 7,756 10,655 9,406
50,950 51,000 9,168 6,864 9,168 7,919 53,950 54,000 9,918 7,314 9,918 8,669 56,950 57,000 10,668 7,764 10,668 9,419
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 258)
- 257 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
57,000 60,000 63,000
57,000 57,050 10,680 7,771 10,680 9,431 60,000 60,050 11,430 8,221 11,430 10,181 63,000 63,050 12,180 8,671 12,180 10,931
57,050 57,100 10,693 7,779 10,693 9,444 60,050 60,100 11,443 8,229 11,443 10,194 63,050 63,100 12,193 8,679 12,193 10,944
57,100 57,150 10,705 7,786 10,705 9,456 60,100 60,150 11,455 8,236 11,455 10,206 63,100 63,150 12,205 8,686 12,205 10,956
57,150 57,200 10,718 7,794 10,718 9,469 60,150 60,200 11,468 8,244 11,468 10,219 63,150 63,200 12,218 8,694 12,218 10,969
57,200 57,250 10,730 7,801 10,730 9,481 60,200 60,250 11,480 8,251 11,480 10,231 63,200 63,250 12,230 8,701 12,230 10,981
57,250 57,300 10,743 7,809 10,743 9,494 60,250 60,300 11,493 8,259 11,493 10,244 63,250 63,300 12,243 8,709 12,243 10,994
57,300 57,350 10,755 7,816 10,755 9,506 60,300 60,350 11,505 8,266 11,505 10,256 63,300 63,350 12,255 8,716 12,255 11,006
57,350 57,400 10,768 7,824 10,768 9,519 60,350 60,400 11,518 8,274 11,518 10,269 63,350 63,400 12,268 8,724 12,268 11,019
57,400 57,450 10,780 7,831 10,780 9,531 60,400 60,450 11,530 8,281 11,530 10,281 63,400 63,450 12,280 8,731 12,280 11,031
57,450 57,500 10,793 7,839 10,793 9,544 60,450 60,500 11,543 8,289 11,543 10,294 63,450 63,500 12,293 8,739 12,293 11,044
57,500 57,550 10,805 7,846 10,805 9,556 60,500 60,550 11,555 8,296 11,555 10,306 63,500 63,550 12,305 8,746 12,305 11,056
57,550 57,600 10,818 7,854 10,818 9,569 60,550 60,600 11,568 8,304 11,568 10,319 63,550 63,600 12,318 8,754 12,318 11,069
57,600 57,650 10,830 7,861 10,830 9,581 60,600 60,650 11,580 8,311 11,580 10,331 63,600 63,650 12,330 8,761 12,330 11,081
57,650 57,700 10,843 7,869 10,843 9,594 60,650 60,700 11,593 8,319 11,593 10,344 63,650 63,700 12,343 8,769 12,343 11,094
57,700 57,750 10,855 7,876 10,855 9,606 60,700 60,750 11,605 8,326 11,605 10,356 63,700 63,750 12,355 8,779 12,355 11,106
57,750 57,800 10,868 7,884 10,868 9,619 60,750 60,800 11,618 8,334 11,618 10,369 63,750 63,800 12,368 8,791 12,368 11,119
57,800 57,850 10,880 7,891 10,880 9,631 60,800 60,850 11,630 8,341 11,630 10,381 63,800 63,850 12,380 8,804 12,380 11,131
57,850 57,900 10,893 7,899 10,893 9,644 60,850 60,900 11,643 8,349 11,643 10,394 63,850 63,900 12,393 8,816 12,393 11,144
57,900 57,950 10,905 7,906 10,905 9,656 60,900 60,950 11,655 8,356 11,655 10,406 63,900 63,950 12,405 8,829 12,405 11,156
57,950 58,000 10,918 7,914 10,918 9,669 60,950 61,000 11,668 8,364 11,668 10,419 63,950 64,000 12,418 8,841 12,418 11,169
58,000 61,000 64,000
58,000 58,050 10,930 7,921 10,930 9,681 61,000 61,050 11,680 8,371 11,680 10,431 64,000 64,050 12,430 8,854 12,430 11,181
58,050 58,100 10,943 7,929 10,943 9,694 61,050 61,100 11,693 8,379 11,693 10,444 64,050 64,100 12,443 8,866 12,443 11,194
58,100 58,150 10,955 7,936 10,955 9,706 61,100 61,150 11,705 8,386 11,705 10,456 64,100 64,150 12,455 8,879 12,455 11,206
58,150 58,200 10,968 7,944 10,968 9,719 61,150 61,200 11,718 8,394 11,718 10,469 64,150 64,200 12,468 8,891 12,468 11,219
58,200 58,250 10,980 7,951 10,980 9,731 61,200 61,250 11,730 8,401 11,730 10,481 64,200 64,250 12,480 8,904 12,480 11,231
58,250 58,300 10,993 7,959 10,993 9,744 61,250 61,300 11,743 8,409 11,743 10,494 64,250 64,300 12,493 8,916 12,493 11,244
58,300 58,350 11,005 7,966 11,005 9,756 61,300 61,350 11,755 8,416 11,755 10,506 64,300 64,350 12,505 8,929 12,507 11,256
58,350 58,400 11,018 7,974 11,018 9,769 61,350 61,400 11,768 8,424 11,768 10,519 64,350 64,400 12,518 8,941 12,521 11,269
58,400 58,450 11,030 7,981 11,030 9,781 61,400 61,450 11,780 8,431 11,780 10,531 64,400 64,450 12,530 8,954 12,535 11,281
58,450 58,500 11,043 7,989 11,043 9,794 61,450 61,500 11,793 8,439 11,793 10,544 64,450 64,500 12,543 8,966 12,549 11,294
58,500 58,550 11,055 7,996 11,055 9,806 61,500 61,550 11,805 8,446 11,805 10,556 64,500 64,550 12,555 8,979 12,563 11,306
58,550 58,600 11,068 8,004 11,068 9,819 61,550 61,600 11,818 8,454 11,818 10,569 64,550 64,600 12,568 8,991 12,577 11,319
58,600 58,650 11,080 8,011 11,080 9,831 61,600 61,650 11,830 8,461 11,830 10,581 64,600 64,650 12,580 9,004 12,591 11,331
58,650 58,700 11,093 8,019 11,093 9,844 61,650 61,700 11,843 8,469 11,843 10,594 64,650 64,700 12,593 9,016 12,605 11,344
58,700 58,750 11,105 8,026 11,105 9,856 61,700 61,750 11,855 8,476 11,855 10,606 64,700 64,750 12,605 9,029 12,619 11,356
58,750 58,800 11,118 8,034 11,118 9,869 61,750 61,800 11,868 8,484 11,868 10,619 64,750 64,800 12,618 9,041 12,633 11,369
58,800 58,850 11,130 8,041 11,130 9,881 61,800 61,850 11,880 8,491 11,880 10,631 64,800 64,850 12,630 9,054 12,647 11,381
58,850 58,900 11,143 8,049 11,143 9,894 61,850 61,900 11,893 8,499 11,893 10,644 64,850 64,900 12,643 9,066 12,661 11,394
58,900 58,950 11,155 8,056 11,155 9,906 61,900 61,950 11,905 8,506 11,905 10,656 64,900 64,950 12,655 9,079 12,675 11,406
58,950 59,000 11,168 8,064 11,168 9,919 61,950 62,000 11,918 8,514 11,918 10,669 64,950 65,000 12,668 9,091 12,689 11,419
59,000 62,000 65,000
59,000 59,050 11,180 8,071 11,180 9,931 62,000 62,050 11,930 8,521 11,930 10,681 65,000 65,050 12,680 9,104 12,703 11,431
59,050 59,100 11,193 8,079 11,193 9,944 62,050 62,100 11,943 8,529 11,943 10,694 65,050 65,100 12,693 9,116 12,717 11,444
59,100 59,150 11,205 8,086 11,205 9,956 62,100 62,150 11,955 8,536 11,955 10,706 65,100 65,150 12,705 9,129 12,731 11,456
59,150 59,200 11,218 8,094 11,218 9,969 62,150 62,200 11,968 8,544 11,968 10,719 65,150 65,200 12,718 9,141 12,745 11,469
59,200 59,250 11,230 8,101 11,230 9,981 62,200 62,250 11,980 8,551 11,980 10,731 65,200 65,250 12,730 9,154 12,759 11,481
59,250 59,300 11,243 8,109 11,243 9,994 62,250 62,300 11,993 8,559 11,993 10,744 65,250 65,300 12,743 9,166 12,773 11,494
59,300 59,350 11,255 8,116 11,255 10,006 62,300 62,350 12,005 8,566 12,005 10,756 65,300 65,350 12,755 9,179 12,787 11,506
59,350 59,400 11,268 8,124 11,268 10,019 62,350 62,400 12,018 8,574 12,018 10,769 65,350 65,400 12,768 9,191 12,801 11,519
59,400 59,450 11,280 8,131 11,280 10,031 62,400 62,450 12,030 8,581 12,030 10,781 65,400 65,450 12,780 9,204 12,815 11,531
59,450 59,500 11,293 8,139 11,293 10,044 62,450 62,500 12,043 8,589 12,043 10,794 65,450 65,500 12,793 9,216 12,829 11,544
59,500 59,550 11,305 8,146 11,305 10,056 62,500 62,550 12,055 8,596 12,055 10,806 65,500 65,550 12,805 9,229 12,843 11,556
59,550 59,600 11,318 8,154 11,318 10,069 62,550 62,600 12,068 8,604 12,068 10,819 65,550 65,600 12,818 9,241 12,857 11,569
59,600 59,650 11,330 8,161 11,330 10,081 62,600 62,650 12,080 8,611 12,080 10,831 65,600 65,650 12,830 9,254 12,871 11,581
59,650 59,700 11,343 8,169 11,343 10,094 62,650 62,700 12,093 8,619 12,093 10,844 65,650 65,700 12,843 9,266 12,885 11,594
59,700 59,750 11,355 8,176 11,355 10,106 62,700 62,750 12,105 8,626 12,105 10,856 65,700 65,750 12,855 9,279 12,899 11,606
59,750 59,800 11,368 8,184 11,368 10,119 62,750 62,800 12,118 8,634 12,118 10,869 65,750 65,800 12,868 9,291 12,913 11,619
59,800 59,850 11,380 8,191 11,380 10,131 62,800 62,850 12,130 8,641 12,130 10,881 65,800 65,850 12,880 9,304 12,927 11,631
59,850 59,900 11,393 8,199 11,393 10,144 62,850 62,900 12,143 8,649 12,143 10,894 65,850 65,900 12,893 9,316 12,941 11,644
59,900 59,950 11,405 8,206 11,405 10,156 62,900 62,950 12,155 8,656 12,155 10,906 65,900 65,950 12,905 9,329 12,955 11,656
59,950 60,000 11,418 8,214 11,418 10,169 62,950 63,000 12,168 8,664 12,168 10,919 65,950 66,000 12,918 9,341 12,969 11,669
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 259)
- 258 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
66,000 69,000 72,000
66,000 66,050 12,930 9,354 12,983 11,681 69,000 69,050 13,680 10,104 13,823 12,431 72,000 72,050 14,430 10,854 14,663 13,181
66,050 66,100 12,943 9,366 12,997 11,694 69,050 69,100 13,693 10,116 13,837 12,444 72,050 72,100 14,443 10,866 14,677 13,194
66,100 66,150 12,955 9,379 13,011 11,706 69,100 69,150 13,705 10,129 13,851 12,456 72,100 72,150 14,455 10,879 14,691 13,206
66,150 66,200 12,968 9,391 13,025 11,719 69,150 69,200 13,718 10,141 13,865 12,469 72,150 72,200 14,468 10,891 14,705 13,219
66,200 66,250 12,980 9,404 13,039 11,731 69,200 69,250 13,730 10,154 13,879 12,481 72,200 72,250 14,480 10,904 14,719 13,231
66,250 66,300 12,993 9,416 13,053 11,744 69,250 69,300 13,743 10,166 13,893 12,494 72,250 72,300 14,493 10,916 14,733 13,244
66,300 66,350 13,005 9,429 13,067 11,756 69,300 69,350 13,755 10,179 13,907 12,506 72,300 72,350 14,505 10,929 14,747 13,256
66,350 66,400 13,018 9,441 13,081 11,769 69,350 69,400 13,768 10,191 13,921 12,519 72,350 72,400 14,518 10,941 14,761 13,269
66,400 66,450 13,030 9,454 13,095 11,781 69,400 69,450 13,780 10,204 13,935 12,531 72,400 72,450 14,530 10,954 14,775 13,281
66,450 66,500 13,043 9,466 13,109 11,794 69,450 69,500 13,793 10,216 13,949 12,544 72,450 72,500 14,543 10,966 14,789 13,294
66,500 66,550 13,055 9,479 13,123 11,806 69,500 69,550 13,805 10,229 13,963 12,556 72,500 72,550 14,555 10,979 14,803 13,306
66,550 66,600 13,068 9,491 13,137 11,819 69,550 69,600 13,818 10,241 13,977 12,569 72,550 72,600 14,568 10,991 14,817 13,319
66,600 66,650 13,080 9,504 13,151 11,831 69,600 69,650 13,830 10,254 13,991 12,581 72,600 72,650 14,580 11,004 14,831 13,331
66,650 66,700 13,093 9,516 13,165 11,844 69,650 69,700 13,843 10,266 14,005 12,594 72,650 72,700 14,593 11,016 14,845 13,344
66,700 66,750 13,105 9,529 13,179 11,856 69,700 69,750 13,855 10,279 14,019 12,606 72,700 72,750 14,605 11,029 14,859 13,356
66,750 66,800 13,118 9,541 13,193 11,869 69,750 69,800 13,868 10,291 14,033 12,619 72,750 72,800 14,618 11,041 14,873 13,369
66,800 66,850 13,130 9,554 13,207 11,881 69,800 69,850 13,880 10,304 14,047 12,631 72,800 72,850 14,630 11,054 14,887 13,381
66,850 66,900 13,143 9,566 13,221 11,894 69,850 69,900 13,893 10,316 14,061 12,644 72,850 72,900 14,643 11,066 14,901 13,394
66,900 66,950 13,155 9,579 13,235 11,906 69,900 69,950 13,905 10,329 14,075 12,656 72,900 72,950 14,655 11,079 14,915 13,406
66,950 67,000 13,168 9,591 13,249 11,919 69,950 70,000 13,918 10,341 14,089 12,669 72,950 73,000 14,668 11,091 14,929 13,419
67,000 70,000 73,000
67,000 67,050 13,180 9,604 13,263 11,931 70,000 70,050 13,930 10,354 14,103 12,681 73,000 73,050 14,680 11,104 14,943 13,431
67,050 67,100 13,193 9,616 13,277 11,944 70,050 70,100 13,943 10,366 14,117 12,694 73,050 73,100 14,693 11,116 14,957 13,444
67,100 67,150 13,205 9,629 13,291 11,956 70,100 70,150 13,955 10,379 14,131 12,706 73,100 73,150 14,705 11,129 14,971 13,456
67,150 67,200 13,218 9,641 13,305 11,969 70,150 70,200 13,968 10,391 14,145 12,719 73,150 73,200 14,718 11,141 14,985 13,469
67,200 67,250 13,230 9,654 13,319 11,981 70,200 70,250 13,980 10,404 14,159 12,731 73,200 73,250 14,730 11,154 14,999 13,481
67,250 67,300 13,243 9,666 13,333 11,994 70,250 70,300 13,993 10,416 14,173 12,744 73,250 73,300 14,743 11,166 15,013 13,494
67,300 67,350 13,255 9,679 13,347 12,006 70,300 70,350 14,005 10,429 14,187 12,756 73,300 73,350 14,755 11,179 15,027 13,506
67,350 67,400 13,268 9,691 13,361 12,019 70,350 70,400 14,018 10,441 14,201 12,769 73,350 73,400 14,768 11,191 15,041 13,519
67,400 67,450 13,280 9,704 13,375 12,031 70,400 70,450 14,030 10,454 14,215 12,781 73,400 73,450 14,780 11,204 15,055 13,531
67,450 67,500 13,293 9,716 13,389 12,044 70,450 70,500 14,043 10,466 14,229 12,794 73,450 73,500 14,793 11,216 15,069 13,544
67,500 67,550 13,305 9,729 13,403 12,056 70,500 70,550 14,055 10,479 14,243 12,806 73,500 73,550 14,805 11,229 15,083 13,556
67,550 67,600 13,318 9,741 13,417 12,069 70,550 70,600 14,068 10,491 14,257 12,819 73,550 73,600 14,818 11,241 15,097 13,569
67,600 67,650 13,330 9,754 13,431 12,081 70,600 70,650 14,080 10,504 14,271 12,831 73,600 73,650 14,830 11,254 15,111 13,581
67,650 67,700 13,343 9,766 13,445 12,094 70,650 70,700 14,093 10,516 14,285 12,844 73,650 73,700 14,843 11,266 15,125 13,594
67,700 67,750 13,355 9,779 13,459 12,106 70,700 70,750 14,105 10,529 14,299 12,856 73,700 73,750 14,855 11,279 15,139 13,606
67,750 67,800 13,368 9,791 13,473 12,119 70,750 70,800 14,118 10,541 14,313 12,869 73,750 73,800 14,868 11,291 15,153 13,619
67,800 67,850 13,380 9,804 13,487 12,131 70,800 70,850 14,130 10,554 14,327 12,881 73,800 73,850 14,880 11,304 15,167 13,631
67,850 67,900 13,393 9,816 13,501 12,144 70,850 70,900 14,143 10,566 14,341 12,894 73,850 73,900 14,893 11,316 15,181 13,644
67,900 67,950 13,405 9,829 13,515 12,156 70,900 70,950 14,155 10,579 14,355 12,906 73,900 73,950 14,905 11,329 15,195 13,656
67,950 68,000 13,418 9,841 13,529 12,169 70,950 71,000 14,168 10,591 14,369 12,919 73,950 74,000 14,918 11,341 15,209 13,669
68,000 71,000 74,000
68,000 68,050 13,430 9,854 13,543 12,181 71,000 71,050 14,180 10,604 14,383 12,931 74,000 74,050 14,930 11,354 15,223 13,681
68,050 68,100 13,443 9,866 13,557 12,194 71,050 71,100 14,193 10,616 14,397 12,944 74,050 74,100 14,943 11,366 15,237 13,694
68,100 68,150 13,455 9,879 13,571 12,206 71,100 71,150 14,205 10,629 14,411 12,956 74,100 74,150 14,955 11,379 15,251 13,706
68,150 68,200 13,468 9,891 13,585 12,219 71,150 71,200 14,218 10,641 14,425 12,969 74,150 74,200 14,968 11,391 15,265 13,719
68,200 68,250 13,480 9,904 13,599 12,231 71,200 71,250 14,230 10,654 14,439 12,981 74,200 74,250 14,980 11,404 15,279 13,731
68,250 68,300 13,493 9,916 13,613 12,244 71,250 71,300 14,243 10,666 14,453 12,994 74,250 74,300 14,993 11,416 15,293 13,744
68,300 68,350 13,505 9,929 13,627 12,256 71,300 71,350 14,255 10,679 14,467 13,006 74,300 74,350 15,005 11,429 15,307 13,756
68,350 68,400 13,518 9,941 13,641 12,269 71,350 71,400 14,268 10,691 14,481 13,019 74,350 74,400 15,018 11,441 15,321 13,769
68,400 68,450 13,530 9,954 13,655 12,281 71,400 71,450 14,280 10,704 14,495 13,031 74,400 74,450 15,030 11,454 15,335 13,781
68,450 68,500 13,543 9,966 13,669 12,294 71,450 71,500 14,293 10,716 14,509 13,044 74,450 74,500 15,043 11,466 15,349 13,794
68,500 68,550 13,555 9,979 13,683 12,306 71,500 71,550 14,305 10,729 14,523 13,056 74,500 74,550 15,055 11,479 15,363 13,806
68,550 68,600 13,568 9,991 13,697 12,319 71,550 71,600 14,318 10,741 14,537 13,069 74,550 74,600 15,068 11,491 15,377 13,819
68,600 68,650 13,580 10,004 13,711 12,331 71,600 71,650 14,330 10,754 14,551 13,081 74,600 74,650 15,080 11,504 15,391 13,831
68,650 68,700 13,593 10,016 13,725 12,344 71,650 71,700 14,343 10,766 14,565 13,094 74,650 74,700 15,093 11,516 15,405 13,844
68,700 68,750 13,605 10,029 13,739 12,356 71,700 71,750 14,355 10,779 14,579 13,106 74,700 74,750 15,105 11,529 15,419 13,856
68,750 68,800 13,618 10,041 13,753 12,369 71,750 71,800 14,368 10,791 14,593 13,119 74,750 74,800 15,118 11,541 15,433 13,869
68,800 68,850 13,630 10,054 13,767 12,381 71,800 71,850 14,380 10,804 14,607 13,131 74,800 74,850 15,130 11,554 15,447 13,881
68,850 68,900 13,643 10,066 13,781 12,394 71,850 71,900 14,393 10,816 14,621 13,144 74,850 74,900 15,143 11,566 15,461 13,894
68,900 68,950 13,655 10,079 13,795 12,406 71,900 71,950 14,405 10,829 14,635 13,156 74,900 74,950 15,155 11,579 15,475 13,906
68,950 69,000 13,668 10,091 13,809 12,419 71,950 72,000 14,418 10,841 14,649 13,169 74,950 75,000 15,168 11,591 15,489 13,919
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 260)
- 259 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
75,000 78,000 81,000
75,000 75,050 15,180 11,604 15,503 13,931 78,000 78,050 15,958 12,354 16,343 14,681 81,000 81,050 16,798 13,104 17,183 15,431
75,050 75,100 15,193 11,616 15,517 13,944 78,050 78,100 15,972 12,366 16,357 14,694 81,050 81,100 16,812 13,116 17,197 15,444
75,100 75,150 15,205 11,629 15,531 13,956 78,100 78,150 15,986 12,379 16,371 14,706 81,100 81,150 16,826 13,129 17,211 15,456
75,150 75,200 15,218 11,641 15,545 13,969 78,150 78,200 16,000 12,391 16,385 14,719 81,150 81,200 16,840 13,141 17,225 15,469
75,200 75,250 15,230 11,654 15,559 13,981 78,200 78,250 16,014 12,404 16,399 14,731 81,200 81,250 16,854 13,154 17,239 15,481
75,250 75,300 15,243 11,666 15,573 13,994 78,250 78,300 16,028 12,416 16,413 14,744 81,250 81,300 16,868 13,166 17,253 15,494
75,300 75,350 15,255 11,679 15,587 14,006 78,300 78,350 16,042 12,429 16,427 14,756 81,300 81,350 16,882 13,179 17,267 15,506
75,350 75,400 15,268 11,691 15,601 14,019 78,350 78,400 16,056 12,441 16,441 14,769 81,350 81,400 16,896 13,191 17,281 15,519
75,400 75,450 15,280 11,704 15,615 14,031 78,400 78,450 16,070 12,454 16,455 14,781 81,400 81,450 16,910 13,204 17,295 15,531
75,450 75,500 15,293 11,716 15,629 14,044 78,450 78,500 16,084 12,466 16,469 14,794 81,450 81,500 16,924 13,216 17,309 15,544
75,500 75,550 15,305 11,729 15,643 14,056 78,500 78,550 16,098 12,479 16,483 14,806 81,500 81,550 16,938 13,229 17,323 15,556
75,550 75,600 15,318 11,741 15,657 14,069 78,550 78,600 16,112 12,491 16,497 14,819 81,550 81,600 16,952 13,241 17,337 15,569
75,600 75,650 15,330 11,754 15,671 14,081 78,600 78,650 16,126 12,504 16,511 14,831 81,600 81,650 16,966 13,254 17,351 15,581
75,650 75,700 15,343 11,766 15,685 14,094 78,650 78,700 16,140 12,516 16,525 14,844 81,650 81,700 16,980 13,266 17,365 15,594
75,700 75,750 15,355 11,779 15,699 14,106 78,700 78,750 16,154 12,529 16,539 14,856 81,700 81,750 16,994 13,279 17,379 15,606
75,750 75,800 15,368 11,791 15,713 14,119 78,750 78,800 16,168 12,541 16,553 14,869 81,750 81,800 17,008 13,291 17,393 15,619
75,800 75,850 15,380 11,804 15,727 14,131 78,800 78,850 16,182 12,554 16,567 14,881 81,800 81,850 17,022 13,304 17,407 15,631
75,850 75,900 15,393 11,816 15,741 14,144 78,850 78,900 16,196 12,566 16,581 14,894 81,850 81,900 17,036 13,316 17,421 15,644
75,900 75,950 15,405 11,829 15,755 14,156 78,900 78,950 16,210 12,579 16,595 14,906 81,900 81,950 17,050 13,329 17,435 15,656
75,950 76,000 15,418 11,841 15,769 14,169 78,950 79,000 16,224 12,591 16,609 14,919 81,950 82,000 17,064 13,341 17,449 15,669
76,000 79,000 82,000
76,000 76,050 15,430 11,854 15,783 14,181 79,000 79,050 16,238 12,604 16,623 14,931 82,000 82,050 17,078 13,354 17,463 15,681
76,050 76,100 15,443 11,866 15,797 14,194 79,050 79,100 16,252 12,616 16,637 14,944 82,050 82,100 17,092 13,366 17,477 15,694
76,100 76,150 15,455 11,879 15,811 14,206 79,100 79,150 16,266 12,629 16,651 14,956 82,100 82,150 17,106 13,379 17,491 15,706
76,150 76,200 15,468 11,891 15,825 14,219 79,150 79,200 16,280 12,641 16,665 14,969 82,150 82,200 17,120 13,391 17,505 15,719
76,200 76,250 15,480 11,904 15,839 14,231 79,200 79,250 16,294 12,654 16,679 14,981 82,200 82,250 17,134 13,404 17,519 15,731
76,250 76,300 15,493 11,916 15,853 14,244 79,250 79,300 16,308 12,666 16,693 14,994 82,250 82,300 17,148 13,416 17,533 15,744
76,300 76,350 15,505 11,929 15,867 14,256 79,300 79,350 16,322 12,679 16,707 15,006 82,300 82,350 17,162 13,429 17,547 15,756
76,350 76,400 15,518 11,941 15,881 14,269 79,350 79,400 16,336 12,691 16,721 15,019 82,350 82,400 17,176 13,441 17,561 15,769
76,400 76,450 15,530 11,954 15,895 14,281 79,400 79,450 16,350 12,704 16,735 15,031 82,400 82,450 17,190 13,454 17,575 15,781
76,450 76,500 15,543 11,966 15,909 14,294 79,450 79,500 16,364 12,716 16,749 15,044 82,450 82,500 17,204 13,466 17,589 15,794
76,500 76,550 15,555 11,979 15,923 14,306 79,500 79,550 16,378 12,729 16,763 15,056 82,500 82,550 17,218 13,479 17,603 15,806
76,550 76,600 15,568 11,991 15,937 14,319 79,550 79,600 16,392 12,741 16,777 15,069 82,550 82,600 17,232 13,491 17,617 15,819
76,600 76,650 15,580 12,004 15,951 14,331 79,600 79,650 16,406 12,754 16,791 15,081 82,600 82,650 17,246 13,504 17,631 15,831
76,650 76,700 15,593 12,016 15,965 14,344 79,650 79,700 16,420 12,766 16,805 15,094 82,650 82,700 17,260 13,516 17,645 15,844
76,700 76,750 15,605 12,029 15,979 14,356 79,700 79,750 16,434 12,779 16,819 15,106 82,700 82,750 17,274 13,529 17,659 15,856
76,750 76,800 15,618 12,041 15,993 14,369 79,750 79,800 16,448 12,791 16,833 15,119 82,750 82,800 17,288 13,541 17,673 15,869
76,800 76,850 15,630 12,054 16,007 14,381 79,800 79,850 16,462 12,804 16,847 15,131 82,800 82,850 17,302 13,554 17,687 15,881
76,850 76,900 15,643 12,066 16,021 14,394 79,850 79,900 16,476 12,816 16,861 15,144 82,850 82,900 17,316 13,566 17,701 15,894
76,900 76,950 15,655 12,079 16,035 14,406 79,900 79,950 16,490 12,829 16,875 15,156 82,900 82,950 17,330 13,579 17,715 15,906
76,950 77,000 15,668 12,091 16,049 14,419 79,950 80,000 16,504 12,841 16,889 15,169 82,950 83,000 17,344 13,591 17,729 15,919
77,000 80,000 83,000
77,000 77,050 15,680 12,104 16,063 14,431 80,000 80,050 16,518 12,854 16,903 15,181 83,000 83,050 17,358 13,604 17,743 15,931
77,050 77,100 15,693 12,116 16,077 14,444 80,050 80,100 16,532 12,866 16,917 15,194 83,050 83,100 17,372 13,616 17,757 15,944
77,100 77,150 15,706 12,129 16,091 14,456 80,100 80,150 16,546 12,879 16,931 15,206 83,100 83,150 17,386 13,629 17,771 15,956
77,150 77,200 15,720 12,141 16,105 14,469 80,150 80,200 16,560 12,891 16,945 15,219 83,150 83,200 17,400 13,641 17,785 15,969
77,200 77,250 15,734 12,154 16,119 14,481 80,200 80,250 16,574 12,904 16,959 15,231 83,200 83,250 17,414 13,654 17,799 15,981
77,250 77,300 15,748 12,166 16,133 14,494 80,250 80,300 16,588 12,916 16,973 15,244 83,250 83,300 17,428 13,666 17,813 15,994
77,300 77,350 15,762 12,179 16,147 14,506 80,300 80,350 16,602 12,929 16,987 15,256 83,300 83,350 17,442 13,679 17,827 16,006
77,350 77,400 15,776 12,191 16,161 14,519 80,350 80,400 16,616 12,941 17,001 15,269 83,350 83,400 17,456 13,691 17,841 16,019
77,400 77,450 15,790 12,204 16,175 14,531 80,400 80,450 16,630 12,954 17,015 15,281 83,400 83,450 17,470 13,704 17,855 16,031
77,450 77,500 15,804 12,216 16,189 14,544 80,450 80,500 16,644 12,966 17,029 15,294 83,450 83,500 17,484 13,716 17,869 16,044
77,500 77,550 15,818 12,229 16,203 14,556 80,500 80,550 16,658 12,979 17,043 15,306 83,500 83,550 17,498 13,729 17,883 16,056
77,550 77,600 15,832 12,241 16,217 14,569 80,550 80,600 16,672 12,991 17,057 15,319 83,550 83,600 17,512 13,741 17,897 16,069
77,600 77,650 15,846 12,254 16,231 14,581 80,600 80,650 16,686 13,004 17,071 15,331 83,600 83,650 17,526 13,754 17,911 16,081
77,650 77,700 15,860 12,266 16,245 14,594 80,650 80,700 16,700 13,016 17,085 15,344 83,650 83,700 17,540 13,766 17,925 16,094
77,700 77,750 15,874 12,279 16,259 14,606 80,700 80,750 16,714 13,029 17,099 15,356 83,700 83,750 17,554 13,779 17,939 16,106
77,750 77,800 15,888 12,291 16,273 14,619 80,750 80,800 16,728 13,041 17,113 15,369 83,750 83,800 17,568 13,791 17,953 16,119
77,800 77,850 15,902 12,304 16,287 14,631 80,800 80,850 16,742 13,054 17,127 15,381 83,800 83,850 17,582 13,804 17,967 16,131
77,850 77,900 15,916 12,316 16,301 14,644 80,850 80,900 16,756 13,066 17,141 15,394 83,850 83,900 17,596 13,816 17,981 16,144
77,900 77,950 15,930 12,329 16,315 14,656 80,900 80,950 16,770 13,079 17,155 15,406 83,900 83,950 17,610 13,829 17,995 16,156
77,950 78,000 15,944 12,341 16,329 14,669 80,950 81,000 16,784 13,091 17,169 15,419 83,950 84,000 17,624 13,841 18,009 16,169
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 261)
- 260 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
84,000 87,000 90,000
84,000 84,050 17,638 13,854 18,023 16,181 87,000 87,050 18,478 14,604 18,863 16,931 90,000 90,050 19,318 15,354 19,703 17,681
84,050 84,100 17,652 13,866 18,037 16,194 87,050 87,100 18,492 14,616 18,877 16,944 90,050 90,100 19,332 15,366 19,717 17,694
84,100 84,150 17,666 13,879 18,051 16,206 87,100 87,150 18,506 14,629 18,891 16,956 90,100 90,150 19,346 15,379 19,731 17,706
84,150 84,200 17,680 13,891 18,065 16,219 87,150 87,200 18,520 14,641 18,905 16,969 90,150 90,200 19,360 15,391 19,745 17,719
84,200 84,250 17,694 13,904 18,079 16,231 87,200 87,250 18,534 14,654 18,919 16,981 90,200 90,250 19,374 15,404 19,759 17,731
84,250 84,300 17,708 13,916 18,093 16,244 87,250 87,300 18,548 14,666 18,933 16,994 90,250 90,300 19,388 15,416 19,773 17,744
84,300 84,350 17,722 13,929 18,107 16,256 87,300 87,350 18,562 14,679 18,947 17,006 90,300 90,350 19,402 15,429 19,787 17,756
84,350 84,400 17,736 13,941 18,121 16,269 87,350 87,400 18,576 14,691 18,961 17,019 90,350 90,400 19,416 15,441 19,801 17,769
84,400 84,450 17,750 13,954 18,135 16,281 87,400 87,450 18,590 14,704 18,975 17,031 90,400 90,450 19,430 15,454 19,815 17,781
84,450 84,500 17,764 13,966 18,149 16,294 87,450 87,500 18,604 14,716 18,989 17,044 90,450 90,500 19,444 15,466 19,829 17,794
84,500 84,550 17,778 13,979 18,163 16,306 87,500 87,550 18,618 14,729 19,003 17,056 90,500 90,550 19,458 15,479 19,843 17,806
84,550 84,600 17,792 13,991 18,177 16,319 87,550 87,600 18,632 14,741 19,017 17,069 90,550 90,600 19,472 15,491 19,857 17,819
84,600 84,650 17,806 14,004 18,191 16,331 87,600 87,650 18,646 14,754 19,031 17,081 90,600 90,650 19,486 15,504 19,871 17,831
84,650 84,700 17,820 14,016 18,205 16,344 87,650 87,700 18,660 14,766 19,045 17,094 90,650 90,700 19,500 15,516 19,885 17,844
84,700 84,750 17,834 14,029 18,219 16,356 87,700 87,750 18,674 14,779 19,059 17,106 90,700 90,750 19,514 15,529 19,899 17,856
84,750 84,800 17,848 14,041 18,233 16,369 87,750 87,800 18,688 14,791 19,073 17,119 90,750 90,800 19,528 15,541 19,913 17,869
84,800 84,850 17,862 14,054 18,247 16,381 87,800 87,850 18,702 14,804 19,087 17,131 90,800 90,850 19,542 15,554 19,927 17,881
84,850 84,900 17,876 14,066 18,261 16,394 87,850 87,900 18,716 14,816 19,101 17,144 90,850 90,900 19,556 15,566 19,941 17,894
84,900 84,950 17,890 14,079 18,275 16,406 87,900 87,950 18,730 14,829 19,115 17,156 90,900 90,950 19,570 15,579 19,955 17,906
84,950 85,000 17,904 14,091 18,289 16,419 87,950 88,000 18,744 14,841 19,129 17,169 90,950 91,000 19,584 15,591 19,969 17,919
85,000 88,000 91,000
85,000 85,050 17,918 14,104 18,303 16,431 88,000 88,050 18,758 14,854 19,143 17,181 91,000 91,050 19,598 15,604 19,983 17,931
85,050 85,100 17,932 14,116 18,317 16,444 88,050 88,100 18,772 14,866 19,157 17,194 91,050 91,100 19,612 15,616 19,997 17,944
85,100 85,150 17,946 14,129 18,331 16,456 88,100 88,150 18,786 14,879 19,171 17,206 91,100 91,150 19,626 15,629 20,011 17,956
85,150 85,200 17,960 14,141 18,345 16,469 88,150 88,200 18,800 14,891 19,185 17,219 91,150 91,200 19,640 15,641 20,025 17,969
85,200 85,250 17,974 14,154 18,359 16,481 88,200 88,250 18,814 14,904 19,199 17,231 91,200 91,250 19,654 15,654 20,039 17,981
85,250 85,300 17,988 14,166 18,373 16,494 88,250 88,300 18,828 14,916 19,213 17,244 91,250 91,300 19,668 15,666 20,053 17,994
85,300 85,350 18,002 14,179 18,387 16,506 88,300 88,350 18,842 14,929 19,227 17,256 91,300 91,350 19,682 15,679 20,067 18,006
85,350 85,400 18,016 14,191 18,401 16,519 88,350 88,400 18,856 14,941 19,241 17,269 91,350 91,400 19,696 15,691 20,081 18,019
85,400 85,450 18,030 14,204 18,415 16,531 88,400 88,450 18,870 14,954 19,255 17,281 91,400 91,450 19,710 15,704 20,095 18,031
85,450 85,500 18,044 14,216 18,429 16,544 88,450 88,500 18,884 14,966 19,269 17,294 91,450 91,500 19,724 15,716 20,109 18,044
85,500 85,550 18,058 14,229 18,443 16,556 88,500 88,550 18,898 14,979 19,283 17,306 91,500 91,550 19,738 15,729 20,123 18,056
85,550 85,600 18,072 14,241 18,457 16,569 88,550 88,600 18,912 14,991 19,297 17,319 91,550 91,600 19,752 15,741 20,137 18,069
85,600 85,650 18,086 14,254 18,471 16,581 88,600 88,650 18,926 15,004 19,311 17,331 91,600 91,650 19,766 15,754 20,151 18,081
85,650 85,700 18,100 14,266 18,485 16,594 88,650 88,700 18,940 15,016 19,325 17,344 91,650 91,700 19,780 15,766 20,165 18,094
85,700 85,750 18,114 14,279 18,499 16,606 88,700 88,750 18,954 15,029 19,339 17,356 91,700 91,750 19,794 15,779 20,179 18,106
85,750 85,800 18,128 14,291 18,513 16,619 88,750 88,800 18,968 15,041 19,353 17,369 91,750 91,800 19,808 15,791 20,193 18,119
85,800 85,850 18,142 14,304 18,527 16,631 88,800 88,850 18,982 15,054 19,367 17,381 91,800 91,850 19,822 15,804 20,207 18,131
85,850 85,900 18,156 14,316 18,541 16,644 88,850 88,900 18,996 15,066 19,381 17,394 91,850 91,900 19,836 15,816 20,221 18,144
85,900 85,950 18,170 14,329 18,555 16,656 88,900 88,950 19,010 15,079 19,395 17,406 91,900 91,950 19,850 15,829 20,235 18,156
85,950 86,000 18,184 14,341 18,569 16,669 88,950 89,000 19,024 15,091 19,409 17,419 91,950 92,000 19,864 15,841 20,249 18,169
86,000 89,000 92,000
86,000 86,050 18,198 14,354 18,583 16,681 89,000 89,050 19,038 15,104 19,423 17,431 92,000 92,050 19,878 15,854 20,263 18,181
86,050 86,100 18,212 14,366 18,597 16,694 89,050 89,100 19,052 15,116 19,437 17,444 92,050 92,100 19,892 15,866 20,277 18,194
86,100 86,150 18,226 14,379 18,611 16,706 89,100 89,150 19,066 15,129 19,451 17,456 92,100 92,150 19,906 15,879 20,291 18,206
86,150 86,200 18,240 14,391 18,625 16,719 89,150 89,200 19,080 15,141 19,465 17,469 92,150 92,200 19,920 15,891 20,305 18,219
86,200 86,250 18,254 14,404 18,639 16,731 89,200 89,250 19,094 15,154 19,479 17,481 92,200 92,250 19,934 15,904 20,319 18,231
86,250 86,300 18,268 14,416 18,653 16,744 89,250 89,300 19,108 15,166 19,493 17,494 92,250 92,300 19,948 15,916 20,333 18,244
86,300 86,350 18,282 14,429 18,667 16,756 89,300 89,350 19,122 15,179 19,507 17,506 92,300 92,350 19,962 15,929 20,347 18,256
86,350 86,400 18,296 14,441 18,681 16,769 89,350 89,400 19,136 15,191 19,521 17,519 92,350 92,400 19,976 15,941 20,361 18,269
86,400 86,450 18,310 14,454 18,695 16,781 89,400 89,450 19,150 15,204 19,535 17,531 92,400 92,450 19,990 15,954 20,375 18,281
86,450 86,500 18,324 14,466 18,709 16,794 89,450 89,500 19,164 15,216 19,549 17,544 92,450 92,500 20,004 15,966 20,389 18,294
86,500 86,550 18,338 14,479 18,723 16,806 89,500 89,550 19,178 15,229 19,563 17,556 92,500 92,550 20,018 15,979 20,403 18,306
86,550 86,600 18,352 14,491 18,737 16,819 89,550 89,600 19,192 15,241 19,577 17,569 92,550 92,600 20,032 15,991 20,417 18,319
86,600 86,650 18,366 14,504 18,751 16,831 89,600 89,650 19,206 15,254 19,591 17,581 92,600 92,650 20,046 16,004 20,431 18,331
86,650 86,700 18,380 14,516 18,765 16,844 89,650 89,700 19,220 15,266 19,605 17,594 92,650 92,700 20,060 16,016 20,445 18,344
86,700 86,750 18,394 14,529 18,779 16,856 89,700 89,750 19,234 15,279 19,619 17,606 92,700 92,750 20,074 16,029 20,459 18,356
86,750 86,800 18,408 14,541 18,793 16,869 89,750 89,800 19,248 15,291 19,633 17,619 92,750 92,800 20,088 16,041 20,473 18,369
86,800 86,850 18,422 14,554 18,807 16,881 89,800 89,850 19,262 15,304 19,647 17,631 92,800 92,850 20,102 16,054 20,487 18,381
86,850 86,900 18,436 14,566 18,821 16,894 89,850 89,900 19,276 15,316 19,661 17,644 92,850 92,900 20,116 16,066 20,501 18,394
86,900 86,950 18,450 14,579 18,835 16,906 89,900 89,950 19,290 15,329 19,675 17,656 92,900 92,950 20,130 16,079 20,515 18,406
86,950 87,000 18,464 14,591 18,849 16,919 89,950 90,000 19,304 15,341 19,689 17,669 92,950 93,000 20,144 16,091 20,529 18,419
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 262)
- 261 -

2007 Tax Table± Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
93,000 96,000 99,000
93,000 93,050 20,158 16,104 20,543 18,431 96,000 96,050 20,998 16,854 21,383 19,181 99,000 99,050 21,838 17,604 22,278 19,931
93,050 93,100 20,172 16,116 20,557 18,444 96,050 96,100 21,012 16,866 21,397 19,194 99,050 99,100 21,852 17,616 22,295 19,944
93,100 93,150 20,186 16,129 20,571 18,456 96,100 96,150 21,026 16,879 21,411 19,206 99,100 99,150 21,866 17,629 22,311 19,956
93,150 93,200 20,200 16,141 20,585 18,469 96,150 96,200 21,040 16,891 21,425 19,219 99,150 99,200 21,880 17,641 22,328 19,969
93,200 93,250 20,214 16,154 20,599 18,481 96,200 96,250 21,054 16,904 21,439 19,231 99,200 99,250 21,894 17,654 22,344 19,981
93,250 93,300 20,228 16,166 20,613 18,494 96,250 96,300 21,068 16,916 21,453 19,244 99,250 99,300 21,908 17,666 22,361 19,994
93,300 93,350 20,242 16,179 20,627 18,506 96,300 96,350 21,082 16,929 21,467 19,256 99,300 99,350 21,922 17,679 22,377 20,006
93,350 93,400 20,256 16,191 20,641 18,519 96,350 96,400 21,096 16,941 21,481 19,269 99,350 99,400 21,936 17,691 22,394 20,019
93,400 93,450 20,270 16,204 20,655 18,531 96,400 96,450 21,110 16,954 21,495 19,281 99,400 99,450 21,950 17,704 22,410 20,031
93,450 93,500 20,284 16,216 20,669 18,544 96,450 96,500 21,124 16,966 21,509 19,294 99,450 99,500 21,964 17,716 22,427 20,044
93,500 93,550 20,298 16,229 20,683 18,556 96,500 96,550 21,138 16,979 21,523 19,306 99,500 99,550 21,978 17,729 22,443 20,056
93,550 93,600 20,312 16,241 20,697 18,569 96,550 96,600 21,152 16,991 21,537 19,319 99,550 99,600 21,992 17,741 22,460 20,069
93,600 93,650 20,326 16,254 20,711 18,581 96,600 96,650 21,166 17,004 21,551 19,331 99,600 99,650 22,006 17,754 22,476 20,081
93,650 93,700 20,340 16,266 20,725 18,594 96,650 96,700 21,180 17,016 21,565 19,344 99,650 99,700 22,020 17,766 22,493 20,094
93,700 93,750 20,354 16,279 20,739 18,606 96,700 96,750 21,194 17,029 21,579 19,356 99,700 99,750 22,034 17,779 22,509 20,106
93,750 93,800 20,368 16,291 20,753 18,619 96,750 96,800 21,208 17,041 21,593 19,369 99,750 99,800 22,048 17,791 22,526 20,119
93,800 93,850 20,382 16,304 20,767 18,631 96,800 96,850 21,222 17,054 21,607 19,381 99,800 99,850 22,062 17,804 22,542 20,131
93,850 93,900 20,396 16,316 20,781 18,644 96,850 96,900 21,236 17,066 21,621 19,394 99,850 99,900 22,076 17,816 22,559 20,144
93,900 93,950 20,410 16,329 20,795 18,656 96,900 96,950 21,250 17,079 21,635 19,406 99,900 99,950 22,090 17,829 22,575 20,156
93,950 94,000 20,424 16,341 20,809 18,669 96,950 97,000 21,264 17,091 21,649 19,419 99,950 100,000 22,104 17,841 22,592 20,169
94,000 97,000
94,000 94,050 20,438 16,354 20,823 18,681 97,000 97,050 21,278 17,104 21,663 19,431
94,050 94,100 20,452 16,366 20,837 18,694 97,050 97,100 21,292 17,116 21,677 19,444
94,100 94,150 20,466 16,379 20,851 18,706 97,100 97,150 21,306 17,129 21,691 19,456
94,150 94,200 20,480 16,391 20,865 18,719 97,150 97,200 21,320 17,141 21,705 19,469
94,200 94,250 20,494 16,404 20,879 18,731 97,200 97,250 21,334 17,154 21,719 19,481
94,250 94,300 20,508 16,416 20,893 18,744 97,250 97,300 21,348 17,166 21,733 19,494
94,300 94,350 20,522 16,429 20,907 18,756 97,300 97,350 21,362 17,179 21,747 19,506 $100,00094,350 94,400 20,536 16,441 20,921 18,769 97,350 97,400 21,376 17,191 21,761 19,519 or over Ð
use the Tax94,400 94,450 20,550 16,454 20,935 18,781 97,400 97,450 21,390 17,204 21,775 19,531 Computation94,450 94,500 20,564 16,466 20,949 18,794 97,450 97,500 21,404 17,216 21,789 19,544 Worksheet94,500 94,550 20,578 16,479 20,963 18,806 97,500 97,550 21,418 17,229 21,803 19,556 on page 26394,550 94,600 20,592 16,491 20,977 18,819 97,550 97,600 21,432 17,241 21,817 19,569
94,600 94,650 20,606 16,504 20,991 18,831 97,600 97,650 21,446 17,254 21,831 19,581
94,650 94,700 20,620 16,516 21,005 18,844 97,650 97,700 21,460 17,266 21,845 19,594
94,700 94,750 20,634 16,529 21,019 18,856 97,700 97,750 21,474 17,279 21,859 19,606
94,750 94,800 20,648 16,541 21,033 18,869 97,750 97,800 21,488 17,291 21,873 19,619
94,800 94,850 20,662 16,554 21,047 18,881 97,800 97,850 21,502 17,304 21,887 19,631
94,850 94,900 20,676 16,566 21,061 18,894 97,850 97,900 21,516 17,316 21,901 19,644
94,900 94,950 20,690 16,579 21,075 18,906 97,900 97,950 21,530 17,329 21,915 19,656
94,950 95,000 20,704 16,591 21,089 18,919 97,950 98,000 21,544 17,341 21,932 19,669
95,000 98,000
95,000 95,050 20,718 16,604 21,103 18,931 98,000 98,050 21,558 17,354 21,948 19,681
95,050 95,100 20,732 16,616 21,117 18,944 98,050 98,100 21,572 17,366 21,965 19,694
95,100 95,150 20,746 16,629 21,131 18,956 98,100 98,150 21,586 17,379 21,981 19,706
95,150 95,200 20,760 16,641 21,145 18,969 98,150 98,200 21,600 17,391 21,998 19,719
95,200 95,250 20,774 16,654 21,159 18,981 98,200 98,250 21,614 17,404 22,014 19,731
95,250 95,300 20,788 16,666 21,173 18,994 98,250 98,300 21,628 17,416 22,031 19,744
95,300 95,350 20,802 16,679 21,187 19,006 98,300 98,350 21,642 17,429 22,047 19,756
95,350 95,400 20,816 16,691 21,201 19,019 98,350 98,400 21,656 17,441 22,064 19,769
95,400 95,450 20,830 16,704 21,215 19,031 98,400 98,450 21,670 17,454 22,080 19,781
95,450 95,500 20,844 16,716 21,229 19,044 98,450 98,500 21,684 17,466 22,097 19,794
95,500 95,550 20,858 16,729 21,243 19,056 98,500 98,550 21,698 17,479 22,113 19,806
95,550 95,600 20,872 16,741 21,257 19,069 98,550 98,600 21,712 17,491 22,130 19,819
95,600 95,650 20,886 16,754 21,271 19,081 98,600 98,650 21,726 17,504 22,146 19,831
95,650 95,700 20,900 16,766 21,285 19,094 98,650 98,700 21,740 17,516 22,163 19,844
95,700 95,750 20,914 16,779 21,299 19,106 98,700 98,750 21,754 17,529 22,179 19,856
95,750 95,800 20,928 16,791 21,313 19,119 98,750 98,800 21,768 17,541 22,196 19,869
95,800 95,850 20,942 16,804 21,327 19,131 98,800 98,850 21,782 17,554 22,212 19,881
95,850 95,900 20,956 16,816 21,341 19,144 98,850 98,900 21,796 17,566 22,229 19,894
95,900 95,950 20,970 16,829 21,355 19,156 98,900 98,950 21,810 17,579 22,245 19,906
95,950 96,000 20,984 16,841 21,369 19,169 98,950 99,000 21,824 17,591 22,262 19,919
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er)
- 262 -

CAUTION
!
2007 Tax Computation WorksheetÐLine 44
See the instructions for line 44 in the instructions for Form 1040 to see if you must use the worksheet below to figure your tax.
CAUTION
!
Note. If you are required to use this worksheet to figure the tax on an amount from another form or worksheet, such as the Qualified
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, the Schedule D Tax Worksheet, Schedule J, Form 8615, or the Foreign Earned Income Tax
Worksheet, enter the amount from that form or worksheet in column (a) of the row that applies to the amount you are looking up. Enter the
result on the appropriate line of the form or worksheet that you are completing.
Section AÐ Use if your filing status is Single. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$160,850  $  × 28% (.28)  $  $ 5,889.25  $
Over $160,850 but not over
$349,700  $  × 33% (.33)  $  $ 13,931.75  $
Over $349,700  $  × 35% (.35)  $  $ 20,925.75  $
Section BÐ Use if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er). Complete the row below that applies to you. 
Tax. 
(a) (b) (c) (d) Subtract (d) from (c).
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction Enter the result here and
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount (a) by (b) amount on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$128,500  $  × 25% (.25)  $  $ 7,152.50  $
Over $128,500 but not over
$195,850  $  × 28% (.28)  $  $ 11,007.50  $
Over $195,850 but not over
$349,700  $  × 33% (.33)  $  $ 20,800.00  $
Over $349,700  $  × 35% (.35)  $  $ 27,794.00  $
Section CÐ Use if your filing status is Married filing separately. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$174,850  $  × 33% (.33)  $  $ 10,400.00  $
Over $174,850  $  × 35% (.35)  $  $ 13,897.00  $
Section DÐ Use if your filing status is Head of household. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$110,100  $  × 25% (.25)  $  $ 4,825.00  $
Over $110,100 but not over
$178,350  $  × 28% (.28)  $  $  8,128.00  $
Over $178,350 but not over
$349,700  $  × 33% (.33)  $  $ 17,045.50  $
Over $349,700  $  × 35% (.35)  $  $ 24,039.50  $
Publication 17 (2007) Page 263

Tax Table Cat. 24811v52t
2007
Tax Rate
Schedules
The Tax Rate Schedules are shown so you can see the tax rate that applies
to all levels of taxable income. Do not use them to figure your tax. Instead,
see chapter 30.
Schedule Z— If your filing status is Head of household
Schedule X— If your filing status is Single
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Schedule Y-2— If your filing status is Married filing separately
Schedule Y-1— If your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
CAUTION
$0
7,825
31,850
77,100
160,850
349,700
$7,825
31,850
77,100
160,850
349,700
$0
7,825
31,850
77,100
160,850
349,700
$0
15,650
63,700
128,500
195,850
349,700
$0
7,825
31,850
64,250
97,925
174,850
$0
11,200
42,650
110,100
178,350
349,700
$15,650
63,700
128,500
195,850
349,700
$7,825
31,850
64,250
97,925
174,850
$11,200
42,650
110,100
178,350
349,700
$0
15,650
63,700
128,500
195,850
349,700
$0
7,825
31,850
64,250
97,925
174,850
$0
11,200
42,650
110,100
178,350
349,700
10%
$782.50 + 15%
4,386.25 + 25%
15,698.75 + 28%
39,148.75 + 33%
101,469.25 + 35%
10%
$1,565.00 + 15%
8,772.50 + 25%
24,972.50 + 28%
43,830.50 + 33%
94,601.00 + 35%
10%
$782.50 + 15%
4,386.25 + 25%
12,486.25 + 28%
21,915.25 + 33%
47,300.50 + 35%
10%
$1,120.00 + 15%
5,837.50 + 25%
22,700.00 + 28%
41,810.00 + 33%
98,355.50 + 35%
Page 264 Publication 17 (2007)

Your Rights as a Taxpayer
This section explains some of your amount of your tax liability or cer- our examiner proposes any Your collection appeal rights are
most important rights as a tax- tain collection actions, you have changes to your return, he or she explained in detail in Publication
payer, including the examination, the right to ask the Appeals Office will explain the reasons for the 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
appeal, collection, and refund to review your case. You may also changes. If you do not agree with Innocent spouse relief. Gener-processes. ask a court to review your case. these changes, you can meet with ally, both you and your spouse arethe examiner's supervisor.Relief from certain penalties and each responsible for paying the full
interest. The IRS will waive pen- Repeat examinations. If we ex- amount of any tax, interest, and
alties when allowed by law if you amined your return for the same penalties due on your joint return.
can show you acted reasonably items in either of the 2 previous However, if you qualify for innocentDeclaration of Taxpayer and in good faith or relied on the years and proposed no change to spouse relief, you may be relievedRights incorrect advice of an IRS em- your tax liability, please contact us of all or part of the joint liability. To
ployee. We will waive interest that as soon as possible so we can see request relief, you must file Form
Protection of your rights. IRS is the result of certain errors or de- if we should discontinue the exami- 8857, Request for Innocent
employees will explain and protect lays caused by an IRS employee. nation. Spouse Relief, no later than 2
your rights as a taxpayer through- years after the date on which the
out your contact with us. IRS first attempted to collect the tax
from you. For example, the 2-yearExaminations (Audits) AppealsPrivacy and confidentiality. period for filing your claim may startThe IRS will not disclose to anyone We accept most taxpayers' returns If you do not agree with the exam- if the IRS applies your tax refundthe information you give us, except as filed. If we inquire about your iner's proposed changes, you can from 1 year to the taxes that youas authorized by law. You have the return or select it for examination, it appeal them to the Appeals Office and your spouse owe for anotherright to know why we are asking does not suggest that you are dis- of IRS. Most differences can be year. For more information on inno-you for information, how we will use honest. The inquiry or examination settled without expensive and cent spouse relief, see Publicationit, and what will happen if you do may or may not result in more tax. time-consuming court trials. Your 971, Innocent Spouse Relief, andnot provide requested information. We may close your case without appeal rights are explained in detail Form 8857.change or you may receive a re- in both Publication 5, Your AppealProfessional and courteous
fund. Rights and How To Prepare a Pro-service. If you believe that an
The process of selecting a re- test If You Don't Agree, and Publi-IRS employee has not treated you Potential Third Partyturn for examination usually begins cation 556, Examination ofin a professional, fair, and courte- Contactsin one of two ways. First, we use Returns, Appeal Rights, andous manner, you should tell that
computer programs to identify re- Claims for Refund.employee's supervisor. If the su- Generally, the IRS will deal directly
turns that may have incorrect If you do not wish to use thepervisor's response is not satisfac- with you or your duly authorized
amounts. These programs may be Appeals Office or disagree with itstory, you should write to the IRS representative. However, we
based on information returns, such findings, you may be able to takedirector for your area or the center sometimes talk with other persons
as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies your case to the U.S. Tax Court,where you filed your return. if we need information that you
of past examinations, or on certain U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or have been unable to provide, or toRepresentation. You may either issues identified by compliance the U.S. District Court where you verify information we have re-represent yourself or, with proper projects. Second, we use informa- live. If you take your case to court, ceived. If we do contact other per-written authorization, have some- tion from outside sources that indi- the IRS will have the burden of sons, such as a neighbor, bank,one else represent you in your cates that a return may have proving certain facts if you kept ad- employer, or employees, we willplace. Your representative must be incorrect amounts. These sources equate records to show your tax generally need to tell them limiteda person allowed to practice before may include newspapers, public liability, cooperated with the IRS, information, such as your name.the IRS, such as an attorney, certi- records, and individuals. If we de- and meet certain other conditions. The law prohibits us from disclos-fied public accountant, or enrolled termine that the information is ac- If the court agrees with you on most ing any more information than isagent. If you are in an interview and curate and reliable, we may use it issues in your case and finds that necessary to obtain or verify theask to consult such a person, then to select a return for examination. our position was largely unjustified, information we are seeking. Ourwe must stop and reschedule the Publication 556, Examination of you may be able to recover some of need to contact other persons mayinterview in most cases. Returns, Appeal Rights, and your administrative and litigation continue as long as there is activityYou can have someone accom- Claims for Refund, explains the costs. You will not be eligible to in your case. If we do contact otherpany you at an interview. You may rules and procedures that we follow recover these costs unless you persons, you have a right to re-make sound recordings of any in examinations. The following sec- tried to resolve your case adminis- quest a list of those contacted.meetings with our examination, ap- tions give an overview of how we tratively, including going throughpeal, or collection personnel, pro- conduct examinations. the appeals system, and you gavevided you tell us in writing 10 days us the information necessary to re- RefundsBy mail. We handle many exami-before the meeting. solve the case.nations and inquiries by mail. We You may file a claim for refund ifPayment of only the correct will send you a letter with either a you think you paid too much tax.amount of tax. You are respon- request for more information or a You must generally file the claimCollectionssible for paying only the correct reason why we believe a change to within 3 years from the date youamount of tax due under the lawÐ your return may be needed. You Publication 594, The IRS Collec- filed your original return or 2 yearsno more, no less. If you cannot pay can respond by mail or you can tion Process, explains your rights from the date you paid the tax,all of your tax when it is due, you request a personal interview with and responsibilities regarding pay- whichever is later. The law gener-may be able to make monthly in- an examiner. If you mail us the re- ment of federal taxes. It describes: ally provides for interest on yourstallment payments. quested information or provide an refund if it is not paid within 45 days• What to do when you oweexplanation, we may or may notHelp with unresolved tax of the date you filed your return ortaxes. It describes what to doagree with you, and we will explainproblems. The Taxpayer Advo- claim for refund. Publication 556if you get a tax bill and whatthe reasons for any changes.cate Service can help you if you has more information on refunds.to do if you think your bill isPlease do not hesitate to write to ushave tried unsuccessfully to re- If you were due a refund but youwrong. It also covers makingabout anything you do not under-solve a problem with the IRS. Your did not file a return, you generallyinstallment payments, delay-stand.local Taxpayer Advocate can offer must file within 3 years from theing collection action, and sub-you special help if you have a sig- date the return was due (includingBy interview. If we notify you mitting an offer innificant hardship as a result of a tax extensions) to get that refund.that we will conduct your examina- compromise.problem. For more information, see tion through a personal interview,Contacting your Taxpayer Advo- • IRS collection actions. It cov-or you request such an interview,cate under How To Get Tax Help. ers liens, releasing a lien, le-you have the right to ask that the vies, releasing a levy,examination take place at a rea-Appeals and judicial review. If seizures and sales, and re-sonable time and place that is con-you disagree with us about the lease of property.venient for both you and the IRS. If
■
Publication 17 (2007) Page 265

How To Get Tax Help
• E-file your return. Find out 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax requesting an appointment toYou can get help with unresolved about commercial tax prepa- questions or to order forms resolve a tax account issue. Atax issues, order free publications ration and e-file services and publications. representative will call youand forms, ask tax questions, and available free to eligible tax- back within 2 business daysget information from the IRS in sev- • TeleTax topics. Callpayers. to schedule an in-person ap-eral ways. By selecting the method 1-800-829-4477 to listen to pointment at your conve-that is best for you, you will have • Check the status of your 2007 pre-recorded messages cov- nience. To find the number,quick and easy access to tax help. refund. Click on Where's My ering various tax topics. go to www.irs.gov/localcon-Refund. Wait at least 6 weeksContacting your Taxpayer Advo- • Refund information. To check tacts or look in the phonefrom the date you filed yourcate. The Taxpayer Advocate the status of your 2007 re- book under United Statesreturn (3 weeks if you filedService (TAS) is an independent fund, call 1-800-829-4477 Government, Internal Reve-electronically). Have yourorganization within the IRS whose and press 1 for automated re- nue Service.2007 tax return available be-employees assist taxpayers who fund information or callcause you will need to knoware experiencing economic harm, 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to Mail. You can send youryour social security number,who are seeking help in resolving wait at least 6 weeks from the order for forms, instruc-your filing status, and the ex-tax problems that have not been date you filed your return (3 tions, and publications toact whole dollar amount of
resolved through normal channels, weeks if you filed electroni- the address below. You should re-your refund.or who believe that an IRS system cally). Have your 2007 tax re- ceive a response within 10 daysor procedure is not working as it • Download forms, instructions, turn available because you after your request is received.should. and publications. will need to know your social
You can contact the TAS by security number, your filing National Distribution Center• Order IRS products online.calling the TAS toll-free case intake status, and the exact whole P.O. Box 8903• Research your tax questionsline at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/ dollar amount of your refund. Bloomington, IL 61702-8903online.TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you
Evaluating the quality of our CD/DVD for tax prod-are eligible for assistance. You can • Search publications online by telephone services. To ensure ucts. You can order Pub-also call or write to your local tax- topic or keyword. IRS representatives give accurate, lication 1796, IRS Taxpayer advocate, whose phone
• View Internal Revenue Bulle- courteous, and professional an- Products CD/DVD, and obtain:number and address are listed in
tins (IRBs) published in the swers, we use several methods toyour local telephone directory and • Current-year forms, instruc-last few years. evaluate the quality of our tele-in Publication 1546, Taxpayer Ad- tions, and publications.phone services. One method is forvocate Service ± Your Voice at the • Figure your withholding al- • Prior-year forms, instructions,a second IRS representative to lis-IRS. You can file Form 911, Re- lowances using the withhold- and publications.ten in on or record random tele-quest for Taxpayer Advocate Serv- ing calculator online at phone calls. Another is to ask someice Assistance (And Application for www.irs.gov/individuals. • Bonus: Historical Tax Prod-callers to complete a short surveyTaxpayer Assistance Order), or ucts DVD - Ships with the fi-• Determine if Form 6251 must at the end of the call.ask an IRS employee to complete it nal release.be filed using our Alternativeon your behalf. For more informa- Walk-in. Many productsMinimum Tax (AMT) Assis- • Tax Map: an electronic re-tion, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. and services are availabletant. search tool and finding aid.Taxpayer Advocacy Panel on a walk-in basis.
• Sign up to receive local and • Tax law frequently asked(TAP). The TAP listens to taxpay-
national tax news by email. questions.ers, identifies taxpayer issues, and • Products. You can walk in tomakes suggestions for improving • Get information on starting • Tax Topics from the IRS tele-many post offices, libraries,IRS services and customer satis- and operating a small busi- phone response system.and IRS offices to pick upfaction. If you have suggestions for ness. certain forms, instructions, • Fill-in, print, and save fea-improvements, contact the TAP, and publications. Some IRS tures for most tax forms.toll free at 1-888-912-1227 or go to offices, libraries, groceryPhone. Many serviceswww.improveirs.org. • Internal Revenue Bulletins.stores, copy centers, city andare available by phone.Low Income Taxpayer Clinics county government offices, • Toll-free and email technical
(LITCs). LITCs are independent credit unions, and office sup- support.organizations that provide low in- ply stores have a collection of • The CD which is releasedcome taxpayers with representa- products available to print• Ordering forms, instructions, twice during the year.tion in federal tax controversies from a CD or photocopy fromand publications. Call ± The first release will shipwith the IRS for free or for a nomi- reproducible proofs. Also,1-800-829-3676 to order cur- the beginning of Januarynal charge. The clinics also provide some IRS offices and librariesrent-year forms, instructions, 2008.tax education and outreach for tax- have the Internal Revenueand publications, and ± The final release will shippayers with limited English profi- Code, regulations, Internalprior-year forms and instruc- the beginning of March 2008.ciency or who speak English as a Revenue Bulletins, and Cu-tions. You should receivesecond language. Publication mulative Bulletins availableyour order within 10 days. Purchase the CD/DVD from Na-4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic for research purposes. tional Technical Information Serv-• Asking tax questions. Call theList, provides information on clinics • Services. You can walk in to ice (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdordersIRS with your tax questions atin your area. It is available at www. your local Taxpayer Assis- for $35 (no handling fee) or call1-800-829-1040.irs.gov or at your local IRS office. tance Center every business 1-877-CDFORMS• Solving problems. You canFree tax services. To find out day for personal, face-to-face (1-877-233-6767) toll free to buyget face-to-face help solvingwhat services are available, get tax help. An employee can the CD/DVD for $35 (plus a $5 han-tax problems every businessPublication 910, IRS Guide to Free explain IRS letters, request dling fee). Price is subject today in IRS Taxpayer Assis-Tax Services. It contains a list of adjustments to your tax ac- change.tance Centers. An employeefree tax publications and describes count, or help you set up acan explain IRS letters, re-other free tax information services, CD for small busi-payment plan. If you need toquest adjustments to your ac-including tax education and assis- nesses. Publicationresolve a tax problem, havecount, or help you set up atance programs and a list of 3207, The Small Busi-questions about how the tax
payment plan. Call your localTeleTax topics. ness Resource Guide CD for 2007,law applies to your individualTaxpayer Assistance CenterAccessible versions of IRS pub- is a must for every small businesstax return, or you're morefor an appointment. To findlished products are available on re- owner or any taxpayer about tocomfortable talking withthe number, go to www.irs.quest in a variety of alternative start a business. This year's CDsomeone in person, visit yourgov/localcontacts or look informats for people with disabilities. includes:local Taxpayer Assistancethe phone book under United Center where you can spreadInternet. You can access • Helpful information, such asStates Government, Internal out your records and talk withthe IRS website at www. how to prepare a businessRevenue Service. an IRS representativeirs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 plan, find financing for your
face-to-face. No appointment• TTY/TDD equipment. If youdays a week to: business, and much more.is necessary, but if you pre-have access to TTY/TDD • All the business tax forms, in-fer, you can call your localequipment, call structions, and publicationsCenter and leave a message
Page 266 Publication 17 (2007)

needed to successfully man- • Web links to various govern- • A site map of the CD to help An updated version of this CD is
age a business. ment agencies, business as- you navigate the pages of the available each year in early April.
sociations, and IRS CD with ease. You can get a free copy by calling• Tax law changes for 2007. organizations. 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.• An interactive ªTeens in Bizº• Tax Map: an electronic re- irs.gov/smallbiz.• ªRate the Productº surveyÐ module that gives practicalsearch tool and finding aid. your opportunity to suggest tips for teens about starting
changes for future editions. their own business, creating a
business plan, and filing
taxes.
■
Publication 17 (2007) Page 267

To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Accrual method Exemption for child ........ 158 Alcohol rehabilitation centers:
taxpayers ................. 12 Expenses not deductible: Deductibility of medical10% tax for early withdrawal Foster care prior to, noTaxes paid during tax year, expense ................ 140from IRA or retirement plan charitablededuction of ............ 143 Alcoholic beverages:(See Early withdrawal from deduction ............. 157Accumulation distribution of IRA prohibited transactionsdeferred interest account, No charitable deductiontrusts: in ...................... 123subheading: Tax on) for ................... 158Tax on .................... 200 Aliens ...................... 21110-year tax option ........... 75 Foreign child .............. 247Accuracy-related Dual-status (See Dual-status591/2 rule .................... 123 Medical and dental expenses ofpenalties .................. 19 taxpayers)60 day rule ................. 120 adopted child ........... 138Acknowledgment ........... 161 Filing required ............... 7701/2 rule .................... 117 Taxpayer identification Nonresident (See NonresidentACRS (Accelerated Cost401(k) plans: number .............. 13, 35 aliens)Recovery System):Tax treatment of Taxpayer identification numbers Resident (See Resident aliens)Rental property:contributions ............. 48 (TINs) .................. 211Alternative minimum Alimony ............ 34, 127-129403(b) plans: Advance earned incometax .................... 70 Death of recipientRollovers ............. 75, 121 credit ............... 2, 8, 241 spouse ................. 128Activities not for profit ...... 87 Filing requirements (Table457 plans  (See Section 457 Decrease in amount andAddress: 1-3) ...................... 8deferred compensation plans) recapture rule ........... 129Change of ................. 17 Age:529 plans  (See Qualified tuition Deduction ................. 129Correcting label ............ 16 Children's investments (Seeprograms) Difference from one year toForeign .................... 16 Children, subheading: another of more thanLabel ...................... 16 Investment income of child $15,000 .............. 129No label received ........... 16 under age 18)A Definition of ............... 127P.O. box ................... 16 Form 1040EZ, taxpayer underAbandonment of home ..... 103 Form 1040 to be used:Service Centers ............ 16 65 may use ............... 8Abortion: Deduction for amountAdjusted basis ........... 92-93 Gross income and filingDeductibility as medical paid .................. 129Decreases to basis ......... 92 requirements (Tableexpense ................ 140 Income received, reportingDepreciation ............... 92 1-1) ...................... 5Abroad, citizens traveling or of .................... 129Easements ................ 93 IRAs:working  (See also Citizens Recapture .............. 129Energy conservation subsidies Contribution cutoff at ageoutside U.S.; Foreign Instruments executed afterexclusion ................ 93 701/2 .................. 117employment) ........ 7, 49, 173 1984 ................... 127Examples (Table 13-1) ..... 92 Distribution prior to ageAbsence, temporary ..... 27, 30 Alimony requirements (TableGifts ....................... 94 59 .................... 123 18-1) ................. 128Academic period  (See name of Home sale (See Sale of home) Distribution required at age Instruments executed beforebenefit) Improvements .............. 92 701/2 ............. 122, 124 1985 ................... 127Increases to basis .......... 92Accelerated Cost Recovery Pension distributions required at Joint return of spouses notLocal assessments ......... 92System (ACRS): age 701/2 ................. 77 allowed ................. 128Sales of property ........... 96Rental property: Retirement plan recipients over Jointly owned home ....... 127Section 179 deduction ...... 92 age 75 .................. 73Alternative minimum Separate residencesAdjusted gross income (AGI) Roth IRAs ........... 125, 127tax .................... 70 in .................... 128(See also Deductions) ..... 129 Standard deduction for age 65Accelerated death Taxes and insuranceBusiness expenses, limit on or older ................. 134benefits ................... 83 premiums ............ 127deduction ............... 184 Age test ..................... 27Accident insurance .......... 45 Life insuranceCharitable contribution Agents  (See alsoCafeteria plans ............. 50 premiums ............... 127deduction limit .......... 160 Fiduciaries) ................ 98Long-term care ......... 46, 50 Mortgage payments ....... 127Itemized deduction Income paid to ............. 12Accidental death Interest deduction ....... 147limit ............... 147, 187 Signing return .............. 14benefits ................... 46 Medical and dental expenses Payments designated as notAGI  (See Adjusted gross incomeAccidents, car .............. 163 and limit of alimony ................. 128(AGI))Value determination ....... 164 deduction .......... 137, 141 Payments must be inAgricultural workers  (SeeWillful negligence or intentional Modified (See Modified adjusted cash .................... 128Farmworkers)act as cause ............ 163 gross income (MAGI)) Payments not includedAgriculture  (See Farming)Retirement savings contribution as ...................... 127Accountable plans for Aircraft:credit .................... 22 Payments to thirdemployee Charitable gift of, deduction for party .............. 127, 128reimbursements .......... 181 Adjustments ............... 200 fair market value ........ 159 Penalty for failure to provideAccountants: Administrators, estate  (See Airline club dues: social security number ofExecutors and administrators)Basis to include fees of ..... 91 Not entertainment recipient ................ 129Adopted child .... 26, 27, 30, 35CPA review courses ....... 189 expenses ............... 175 Recapture rule ............ 129Earned income credit ...... 235Preparers of tax returns ..... 14 Airplanes, donations of .... 158 Recipient reporting of ...... 129Adoption:Accounting methods ........ 12 Airport transportation: Reporting of income ....... 87,ATIN ................. 13, 211Accrual method (See Accrual Business-related travel 129Child tax credit (See also Childmethod taxpayers) expense ................ 170 Spouse defined for purposestax credit) ............... 222Cash method (See Cash of ...................... 127Alaska:Credit Employer's assistancemethod taxpayers) Standard meal Spouses cannot be members ofprogram ................ 246Change of: allowance ............... 172 same household ........ 128Credits .............. 158, 246Depreciation, to deduct Substitute payments ....... 128Alaska Permanent FundMarried filingunclaimed amount ..... 70 Taxes and insurance paid ondividends ................. 87separately ............. 22Accounting periods ......... 12 home owned as tenants inChild's dividends .......... 152Taking .................. 247Calendar year ....... 10, 12, 45 common ................ 127Income from ............. 8, 64Employer assistance ....... 46
Change in, standard deduction Termination of and recaptureInvestment income not toEmployer's assistance
not allowed ............. 134 rule .................... 129include ................. 152program .................. 1
Fiscal year .......... 12, 40, 42 Alternative filing methods:Exception for adopted Alaska Unemployment
Fringe benefits ............. 45 child .................... 138 Compensation Fund ..... 143 Electronic (See E-file)
Page 268 Publication 17 (2007)

Alternative minimum tax Rollovers .................. 75 Assessments, local  (See Local Banks:
(AMT) .................... 200 assessments) Automatic investment service,Sale of .................... 100
Accelerated depreciation determination of holdingAssistance  (See Tax help)Gain as ordinary
and ..................... 70 period .................. 100income ................ 72 Assistance, tax  (See Tax help)
Child's tax, figuring of ...... 207 IRAs with ................. 116Simplified method to calculate Assumption of mortgage .... 91Exempt-interest Losses on deposits, whentax-free part of annuity Fees not included individends ................ 64 casualty losses ..... 100, 163payment ................. 73 basis .................... 92Filing requirements (Table Reporting of ............ 168Survivor's annuity ........ 77 Athletic events:1-3) ...................... 8 Money market accounts .... 63Worksheet for Charitable contributions,Incentive stock option ........ 8 Bar associations:computation ........... 73 amount deductible ....... 155Nonrefundable credit for prior Charitable contributionsSurvivor annuities .......... 77 ATIN (Adoption taxpayeryear tax ................ 248 to ...................... 157Trade of insurance policies and identification number) ..... 13Payments ................... 8 Bar employees:annuities ................ 97 At-risk rules:Refundable credit for prior year Tips (See Tip income)Unrecovered Rental property ............. 70tax ..................... 250 Bar review courses ......... 189investment .............. 195 Attachment of wages ........ 12Alternative motor vehicle Withholding ......... 13, 38, 72 Bargain sales:Attachments to return ....... 13credit .................... 247 As charitableAnnulled marriages:Amount of credit ........... 247 Attorneys: contributions ............ 159Filing status ................ 20How to take ............... 247 Bar review courses ........ 189 Basis of purchase .......... 93Anthrax incidents  (See TerroristPhaseout ................. 247 Attorneys' fees ........ 194, 196 Barter income ............... 82attacks)Recapture ................ 247 Basis to include ............ 91 Definition of bartering ....... 82Antiques  (See Collectibles)Amateur sports organizations: Social security and railroad Form 1099-B ........... 42, 82Appliances:Charitable contributions retirement benefits, Basis:Deterioration and damage, notto ...................... 154 deductions for ............ 81 Adjusted basis ............. 92casualty loss ............ 163Ambulance service personnel: Title to property, for preparation, Allocation between businessAppraisal fees .............. 193Life insurance proceeds when filing, etc. ................ 91 and personal use ......... 91Donated property .......... 158death in line of duty ...... 84 Audits: Bad debts ................. 101Not deductible asAmended returns  (See also Travel expense Bargain purchases ......... 93interest ................. 149Form 1040X) ........... 17, 18 records ................. 180 Bonds ..................... 95Real estate transactions, whenItemized deduction, change to Auto insurance: Cost basis ................. 91required by lender ........ 92standard deduction ...... 135 Medical expenses covered by, IRAs for nondeductibleStandard deduction, change to Appraisals: not deductible ........... 140 contributions ..... 119, 122itemized deductions ..... 135 Casualty or theft Definition of ................ 91Automatic extension of time tolosses ............. 164, 165American citizens abroad  (See file ........................ 11 Gifts ....................... 94also Citizens outside Archer MSAs ................ 89 Home sales (See Sale of home)Form 4868 ................. 11U.S.) ....................... 7 Contributions ............... 46 Improvements to realAutomatic investment services:Employment (See Foreign Filing requirements (Table estate ................... 92Holding period, determinationemployment) 1-3) ...................... 8 Inheritance ................. 94of ...................... 100American Indians  (See Indians) Medical expenses paid for Involuntary conversion ...... 93Automobiles  (See Cars)American Samoa: decedent from .......... 138 Like-kind exchanges ........ 97Awards  (See Prizes and awards)Income from ................ 7 Not deductible as medical Other than cost ...... 93-95, 97Away-from-home travel  (Seeexpense ................ 140Amortization: Points not to be included .... 92Travel and transportationBond premiums, treatment Armed forces  (See also Property received forexpenses)of ...................... 153 Reservists; Veterans' benefits; services ................. 93
Veterans'AMT  (See Alternative minimum Real estate ................ 91
organizations) ....... 154, 155,tax (AMT)) Restricted property ......... 93B176 Stock or stock rights ........ 64Annuities  (See also Babysitting .................. 44Combat zone: Tax-exempt obligations:Rollovers) .................. 75 Back pay, award for ......... 44Extension to file return .... 11 Bonds ................... 95Cost computation .......... 73 Emotional distress damagesSigning return forCredit for elderly or disabled Transfers betweenunder Title VII of Civil Rightsspouse ................ 21persons ................. 72 spouses ............. 94, 98Act of 1964 .............. 87Decedent's unrecovered Dependency allotments ..... 31 Beetles:Backup withholding ..... 39, 42,investment in ............ 13 Disability pay ............... 49 Damage or destruction to trees54Early distributions from ..... 76 Disability pensions ......... 50 and plants, when casualtyDividend income ....... 61, 62Deferred annuity loss .................... 163GI Bill benefits ............. 33 Penalties .................. 39contracts .......... 76, 77 Military ................... 193 Beneficiaries  (See also Estate
Bad check penalty .......... 15Estimated tax .............. 72 beneficiaries; TrustMilitary quarters
Exclusion limit .............. 73 Bad debts: beneficiaries) ....... 61, 76, 88allotments ............... 31
Form 1099-R ............... 42 Bank deposit, loss due to bank'sNaval officers on permanent Bequests  (See also EstateGeneral Rule: insolvency orduty aboard ship ........ 169 beneficiaries; Gifts;Annuity starting before bankruptcy .............. 163 Inheritance) ........ 88, 89, 206Permanent dutyNovember 19, 1996 .... 73 Reporting on Schedule Doverseas ............... 169 Bingo ................. 155, 158Nonqualified plans and (Form 1040) .......... 164Real estate taxes when Birth control pills ........... 140qualified plans for Claim for refund ....... 18, 101receiving housing Birth of child ................ 27recipients over 75 Nonbusiness .............. 101allowance .......... 145, 147 Head of household, qualifyingyears .................. 73 Recovery .................. 84Rehabilitative program person to file as .......... 24Purchased annuities ...... 72 Reporting of ............... 101payments ................ 49 Social security number to beSurvivor's annuity ........ 77 Short-term capital loss ..... 101Reserves ................. 184 obtained ................. 35Guaranteed payments ...... 73 Retirees' pay: Baggage: Birth of dependent .......... 30IRAs as ................... 116 Taxable income .......... 49 Business-related travel Blackmail:Joint return ................ 73 Withholding .............. 36 expense ................ 170 Losses due to ............. 163Worksheet ............... 74 Uniforms .................. 193 Balance due ................ 200 Blind persons:Loans from plan ............ 72 Wages ..................... 49 Bankruptcy: Exemption fromLump-sum distributions ..... 74
Art works: Canceled debt not deemed to withholding .............. 37Multiple plan benefits ....... 72
As capital assets ........... 99 be income ............... 83 Guide dogs, deductible asPartly taxable payments .... 73
Capital gains or losses from Financial institution's medical expense ........ 140Purchased annuities ........ 72
sale or trade of .......... 109 bankruptcy causingReporting of ................ 72 Impairment-related work
deductible loss .......... 163Retirement annuities (See also Artists, performing  (See expenses, deduction
Retirement plans) ........ 71 Performing artists) Reporting of ............ 168 for ...................... 141
Publication 17 (2007) Page 269

Reimbursements ....... 37, 44 Lump-sum distributions from Interest on loans, notBlind persons: (Cont.)
pensions and deductible .............. 152Standard deduction for .... 134 Returning excess for
annuities ................ 75 Leased vehicles ........... 178business expenses .... 37,Blood banks:
Medical transportation ..... 140Mutual funds paying ........ 63182No charitable deduction for
Parking (See Parking fees)Net capital gain ....... 98, 108,Travel (See Travel andblood donations to ...... 155,
Personal property taxes on,109transportation expenses)158
deduction of ............ 146Included as investmentWork-related education .... 189Blue books to determine fair
Reporting of ............... 180income ............... 152market value ............. 159 Business organizations:
Table 26-3 showing forms toNet long-term capitalCharitable contributionsBoarding houses ............ 67 be used .............. 183loss .................... 108to ...................... 157Boats: Sale, trade-in, or otherSale of personal items ...... 90Business property:Charitable gift of, deduction for disposition .............. 178Sale or trade of property heldfair market value ........ 159 As gift, adjusted basis Section 179 deductions .... 178more than 1 year ....... 100,for ....................... 94Donations of .............. 158 Work-related education,108Basis for depreciation ....... 95Bona fide business purpose: transportation for ........ 190Schedule D ............... 107Property use changed to,Travel expenses .......... 171 Cash:Section 1250 gains from sale ofadjusted basis for ........ 95Work-related education .... 187 Dividends paid as .......... 61real property ........ 98, 109Sales or exchanges ........ 96Bonds: Rebates ................... 87State or local governmentLike-kind exchanges ..... 97Adjusted basis for .......... 95 Sales of property for ........ 97bonds, tax-exempt ....... 99Amortization of Business tax credits: Cash contributions, records toTax rates ................. 109premium ........... 153, 195 Claim for refund ............ 18 keep ..................... 160Maximum capital gain ratesAs capital assets ........... 99 Business use of home ...... 192 Cash method taxpayers ..... 12(Table 16-1) .......... 109Clean renewable energy Bad debts ................. 101Total net gain ............. 108bonds .................. 247 Points, deduction of ....... 149Total net loss ............. 108Convertible bonds .......... 97 C Real estate transactions, taxUndistributed gains ........ 108Discounted: Cafeteria plans .............. 50 allocation ............... 144Credit for tax on ..... 63, 249Capital gain or loss ....... 99 Calendar year taxpayers: Taxes paid during tax year,Car expenses .............. 162Gulf tax credit bonds ....... 247 Accounting periods ..... 10, 12, deduction of ............ 143Car pools .................. 177Issued at discount .......... 59 45 Worthless securities andCarrybacks:Market discount bonds ..... 100 Filing due date ............. 10 negotiable promissoryBusiness tax creditOriginal issue discount ...... 59 notes .................... 96California Nonoccupational carrybacks ............... 18Redemption of ............. 96 Disability Benefit Cash rebates ................ 87Carryovers:Retirement of .......... 76, 96 Fund ..................... 143 Casualties .................. 107Capital loss .......... 108, 109Sale of ..................... 59 Campaign contributions .... 87, Casualty insurance:Worksheet .............. 109Savings .................... 56 155, 157 Premiums not in propertyCharitable contributions, whenSold at premium, computation Presidential Election Campaign basis .................... 92deduction exceedsof adjusted basis ......... 95 Fund .................... 13 Reimbursements from ...... 87adjusted-gross-incomeState or local government, Campaign expenses ........ 196 Casualty losses ....... 162-168,limits ................... 160tax-exempt .............. 99 193, 195Canada: Investment interest ........ 152Tax-exempt ................ 59 Adjusted basis inContributions to charitable Cars  (See also Standard mileageBonuses ............. 37, 44, 89 property .... 92, 93, 165, 168organizations in .... 155, 157 rates; Travel andBookkeeping  (See Amount of loss ............ 164Resident of ............ 26, 30 transportation) .... 47, 90, 168,Recordkeeping requirements) Appraisals ........... 164, 165Cancellation of Debt ......... 82 177Books to determine fair market Bank deposit, loss due to bank'sExceptions to treatment as Accidents resulting in casualtyvalue ..................... 164 insolvency orincome .................. 82 loss .................... 163Borrowed funds  (See also bankruptcy .............. 163Form 1099-C ............... 42 Value determination ..... 164Loans) ................ 72, 152 Costs:Willful negligence orCandidates for public office:Used for charitable Cleaning up or makingintentional act asContributions to, no charitablecontributions, deduction repairs ............... 164cause ................ 163deduction for ....... 155, 157for ...................... 160 Photographs andActual expenses ..... 177, 178Capital assets: appraisals ............ 165Bottled water ............... 140 Advertising displays on .... 177Coal and iron ore ........... 85 Deductible losses ......... 163Boy Scouts: Allowances fromDefinition of ................ 99 $100 rule ............... 167Charitable contributions employers .............. 181Capital expenses ............ 33 When to take (Tableto ...................... 155 As capital assets ........... 99 25-2) ................. 167Capital gains or losses ..... 98,Breach of contract: Blue book to determine fair Deduction limits ........... 167101, 107, 110Damages as income ........ 87 market value ............ 159 For personal property (TableBad debts as short-term capitalemployment ............... 192 Books to determine fair market 25-1) ................. 166loss .................... 101Bribes .................. 87, 195 value ................... 164 Definition of casualty ...... 163Carryover of ......... 108, 109Brokers: Business and personal use, Disasters (See also DisasterWorksheet .............. 109Form 1099-B ........... 42, 96 allocation between ..... 178, relief) .............. 165, 166Character of gain ........... 98IRAs with ................. 116 180 Employer's emergency disasterCharacter of loss ........... 98Commissions ...... 116, 117 Business-related travel fund .................... 165Child's distributions andReceiving dividends, reporting expenses ............... 170 Fair market value ofdividends, reportingon Form 1099-MISC ...... 62 Car pools ................. 177 property ................ 164of ................. 152, 203Burglary: Charitable gift of, deduction for Form 4684 to be filed ...... 162Collectibles ............... 109Losses due to ............. 163 fair market value ........ 159 Insurance proceeds, treatmentDeductions ............... 108Burial expenses  (See Funerals) Charitable organization service, of ...................... 165Limit on ................. 108 use for .................. 157Business associates  (See also Net operating losses ....... 168Married filing Depreciation .............. 178Entertainment Nondeductible losses ...... 163separately ............. 22expenses) ........... 171, 173 Donations of .............. 158 Proof of loss .............. 164
Distributions ............... 63Business travel to meet .... 175 Electric vehicles (See Electric Property used partly for
Form 1040 or 1040A to beTravel expenses of, paying cars) business and partly for
used ............. 8, 64, 108for ...................... 171 Employer-provided ......... 46 personal purposes ...... 167
Hobbies, sales from Reimbursement ........... 165Fixed and variable rateBusiness expenses  (See also
collections ............... 89 Reporting of gain or(FAVR) ................. 182Entertainment
Holding period, determination loss ............... 167, 168expenses) ........... 171, 173 Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to
of ...................... 100 Single casualty on multiplefill out .................. 184Job search expenses ....... 89
properties ............... 166How to report ............. 107Meal expenses (See Meal and Hauling tools or
lodging expenses) Installment sales and ...... 108 instruments ............. 177 Cell phone ................. 192
Page 270 Publication 17 (2007)

Cemeteries: To individuals, not Care providers (See also Child Citizens outside U.S.:
deductible ......... 155, 157 care) .................... 44 Business travel outsideCharitable contributions
Token items given by Child's tax, figuring of ...... 207 U.S. .................... 173to ...................... 154
recipients ............... 155 Alternative minimum Self-employedCertificate, mortgage
Volunteers, deductibility of tax ................... 207 persons .............. 173credit .................... 248
contributions (Table Credit for (See also Child and Standard mealCertificates of deposit (CDs) 
24-2) ................... 156 dependent care credit; Child allowance ............ 172(See also Individual retirement
tax credit) ............... 7, 8Charitable deduction for living Earned income exclusion .... 2arrangements (IRAs)) ...... 60,
Custody of ................. 27expenses ................ 160 Employment (See Foreign115
Death of child: employment)Charity benefit events:Chambers of commerce:
Head of household, qualifyingDeduction amount for charitable Extension of time to file ..... 11Charitable contributions
person to file as ........ 24contributions ............ 155 Filing requirements .......... 7to ................. 155, 157
Deductions ............... 206Checklists: Withholding from IRAEntertainment expenses for
Dividends of (See this heading: distributions ............. 122Medical and dental expenseattending meetings ...... 175
Investment income of childdeductions (Table Civic associations:Change of address .......... 17 under age 18)21-1) ................... 139 Charitable contributionsChange of name ......... 12, 42 Earnings of ................. 7Checks: to ...................... 157Chaplains: Filing requirements .......... 7As charitable Contributions to, no charitableLife insurance proceeds when As dependents (Tablecontributions ............ 159 deduction for ............ 155death in line of duty ...... 84 1-2) .................... 6Canceled checks as evidence of Civil defense organizations:Charitable Gifts to ............... 54, 206travel expenses ......... 179 Charitable contributionscontributions ........ 153-162 Inclusion of child's income onConstructive receipt of ...... 12 to ...................... 155$500 or more noncash parents's return (FigurePayment of tax ............. 15 Civil service retirementcontribution: 31-A) ................... 203Penalty if not honored ...... 15 benefits ................... 71Form 8283 to be Income, calculation of ..... 203Check-writing fees ......... 196 Civil suits  (See also Damagesused ................. 162 Capital gains from lawsuits) .............. 87Child and dependent careBargain sales as .......... 159 distributions .......... 203credit ...................... 8 Civil tax penalties  (SeeBenefit received as result of Investment income of childDue diligence ............. 213 Penalties)contribution ........ 155, 157 under age 18 ........... 61,Earned income ............ 211 Clergy ........................ 7Capital gain property as 202-207Full-time student .......... 211 Contributions that can be spentdonation ................ 159 Dependent filing requirementsMarried filing separately .... 22 as individual wishes, notLimit on deduction ....... 160 (Table 1-2) ............. 6 deductible charitablePayments to relatives ...... 212Carryover of excess Form 8615, use of (Figure contribution ............. 157Child born alive ............. 27deduction ............... 160 31-B) ................. 204 Housing ................... 48Child care:Deductions: General rules ........... 202 Real estate taxes whenBabysitting ................. 4430% limit of adjusted gross Interest and dividends ..... 7, receiving housingCare providers ............. 44income ............... 160 8, 61 allowance ....... 145, 147Credit (See Child and Investment income50% limit of adjusted gross Life insurance proceeds whendependent care credit) defined ............... 206income ............... 160 chaplain died in line ofExpenses .................. 33 Parental information,Examples of (Table duty ..................... 84Nursing care for healthy baby, providing of ........... 20424-1) ................. 154 Pensions .................. 48not deductible as medical Parents' election to report onLimits on .......... 155, 160 Special income rules ....... 48expense ................ 140 Form 1040 ..... 7, 152, 202Year to claim Clerical help, deductibilityChild custody ............... 27 Trust income ............ 206deduction ............. 159 of ........................ 193Child support ............... 87 Kidnapped ............. 27, 29Definition of ............... 154 Clients  (See also EntertainmentAlimony, difference Net investment income, figuringDwelling unit used as expenses) ........... 171, 173from .......... 127, 128, 129 of ...................... 206home .................... 68 Business travel to meet .... 175Child support under pre-1985 Nontaxable income ........ 206Fair market value of property Travel expenses of, payingagreement ................ 34 Property received as gift,contributions ....... 155, 159 for ...................... 171Child tax credit ......... 7, 8, 25, income from ............ 206Recordkeeping Closing costs:222-223 Signing return, parent forrequirements ......... 161 Real propertyAdditional credit ........... 222 child ..................... 14Gifts to reduce public transactions ............. 91Amount of credit ........... 222 Standard deduction for ... 134,debt ..................... 16 Sale of home .............. 103Claiming, procedure for .... 222 135Itemized deductions, limit Clothing:Form 8812, completed ..... 223 Stillborn ................... 27on ...................... 154 Military ................... 193Limits ................. 22, 222 Support of (See Child support)Large quantities of Moth damage, not casualtyModified adjusted gross Tax credit (See Child tax credit)items ................... 159 loss .................... 163income ............... 222 Tentative tax figured at parent'sNoncash contributions, Uniforms:Married filing separately .... 22 tax rate ................. 206recordkeeping Charitable organizationQualifying child ............ 222 Transporting schoolrequirements ............ 161 requiring, deduction for costWithholding, checking children .................. 90Nonqualified and upkeep of ........ 156amount ................. 223 Chronic illness:organizations ........... 157 Used clothing, charitableChild, qualifying ............. 26 Accelerated payment of lifeNot deductible ............ 157 deduction for fair marketinsurance proceeds (SeeChildcare:Ordinary income property as value ................... 159Accelerated death benefits)Credit .................... 209donation ................ 159 work ...................... 193Long-term care (See Long-termProvider:Property contributions ..... 158 Club dues and membershipcare insurance contracts)Taxpayer identification fees:Decreased in value ...... 159 Church employees:number ............... 213
EntertainmentIncreased in value ....... 159 Filing requirements (TableChildren  (See also expenses ............... 175Publication 78, list of qualified 1-3) ...................... 8Adoption) ............. 46, 158
Coal and iron ore ............ 85organizations ........... 154 Churches, temples, etc.:Additional credit on child tax
Coins  (See Collectibles)Qualified organizations .... 154 credit ................... 222 Charitable contributions
Types of ................ 154 Collectibles:to ...................... 155Adoption (See Adopted child)
As capital assets ........... 99Written statement 50% limit onBabysitters ................. 44
from .................. 156 Gains or losses from sale ordeduction ............. 160Birth of child:
trade of ................. 109Convention delegates,Schedule A (Form 1040) to be Head of household, qualifying
deduction of unreimbursed IRA investment in ......... 123used for deductions ..... 162 person to file as ........ 24
expenses ............... 156Time of making contribution, Social security number to be Collective bargaining
how to determine ........ 159 obtained ............... 35 Citizen or resident test ...... 26 agreements ............... 38
Publication 17 (2007) Page 271

College professor: Conservation: Cost-of-living Excess withholding of social
allowances ................ 45 security and railroadResearch expenses ....... 193 Charitable contribution to
retirement tax (See Excesspromote, recordkeeping Country clubs:Colleges and universities:
withholding credit)requirement ............. 162 Charitable contributionsCharitable contributions
For the disabled ........... 218Constructive receipt of to ...................... 157to ...................... 155
income ................ 12, 60 For the elderly ............ 218Dues:50% limit on
deduction ............. 160 Contributions  (See also Charitable deduction not Foreign tax (See Foreign tax
Campaign contributions; allowed ............... 155Athletic events, amount credit)
Charitabledeductible ............ 155 Entertainment expense Gulf tax credit bonds (See
contributions) ...... 16, 68, 87,Education costs (See also deduction not Credit for clean renewable
153-162, 155, 157Qualified tuition allowed ............... 175 energy bonds or Gulf tax
Nontaxable combatprograms) ............... 90 credit bonds)Coupon bonds .............. 60
pay ................ 116, 117Employer-provided Health coverage tax (SeeCourt awards and damages
educational assistance Political ................... 196 Health coverage tax credit)(See Damages from lawsuits)
(See also Educational Reservist repayments ..... 116 Hope scholarship ........... 22Cousin ...................... 30
assistance) ........... 131 Retirement (See specific type of Lifetime learning (See LifetimeCoverdell ESAs:
Combat zone: plan) learning credit)Additional tax on .......... 200Extension to file return ...... 11 Controlled corporations: Mortgage interest (SeeFiling requirements (TableSigning return for Nontaxable stock purchase Mortgage interest credit)1-3) ...................... 8spouse .................. 21 of ....................... 97 Nonfundable credits ....... 246CPAs  (See Accountants)Comments on publication .... 4 Related party Other than those on FormCredit card payment of taxes:transactions ............. 98Commission drivers: 1040A, Form 1040 to beEstimated tax .............. 41Conventions:Deduction of expenses .... 180 used ..................... 9Credit cards:Delegates:Commissions ............... 37 Prior year minimum tax (AMT),Annual fees, notDeduction of unreimbursedAdvance ................... 44 nonrefundable .......... 248deductible .............. 152expenses ............. 156IRAs with brokers .... 116, 117 Prior year minimum tax (AMT),Benefits, taxability ofTravel expenses ........ 173Property basis to include when refundable .............. 250insurance ................ 88Travel expenses .......... 173buyer pays ............... 91 Refundable credits ........ 249Charitable contributionsWork-related education,Sharing of (kickbacks) ...... 89 Residential energy credits (Seecharged to .............. 159deduction of travel expensesUnearned, deduction for Residential energy credit)Finance charges, notfor overseasrepayment of ............. 44 deductible .............. 153 Retirement savings contributionconventions ............. 190Commodities: (See Retirement savingsPayment of taxes ..... 3, 11, 15Conversion  (See specificDerivative financial contribution credit)Convenience fee of serviceretirement or IRA plan)instruments .............. 99 providers .............. 15 Cremation:
Convertible stocks andCommon law marriage ...... 20 Installment Not deductible as medicalbonds ..................... 97Communist organizations: agreements ............ 16 expense ................ 140
Cooperative housing:Charitable contributions Credit for child and dependent Criminal prosecutions:Dwelling unit used asto ...................... 157 care expenses ........... 201 Travel expenses for federalhome .................... 65Community property ..... 6, 57, Credit for clean renewable staff .................... 170Mortgage interest94 energy bonds or Gulf Cruises:statements .............. 151Alimony, difference bonds .................... 247 Travel expenses whenReal estate taxes, deductionfrom .................... 127 Amount of credit ........... 247 incidental businessof ...................... 144IRAs ...................... 116 How to take .......... 247, 249 activities ................ 172Taxes that are deductibleMarried filing separately .... 22 Who can claim ............ 247 Work-related education,(Table 22-1) .......... 145Medical and dental Credit for prior year minimum deduction ofSale or trade of:expenses ............... 137 tax: expenses ............... 190Form 1099-S toCommuting expenses ..... 176, Nonrefundable ............ 248 Custodial fees .............. 194report ................ 108196 Refundable ............... 250 Custody of child ............. 27Period of ownership andEmployer-provided commuter Credit for the elderly or the Customers  (See alsouse .................. 105vehicle .................. 47 disabled .................. 201 EntertainmentCooperatives:Compensation  (See also Wages Nontaxable payments ..... 220 expenses) ........... 171, 173Patronage dividends ........ 64and salaries) ............... 44 Credit reports: Business travel to meet .... 175Co-owners:Defined for IRA Costs not included in property Travel expenses of, payingDwelling unit used as home bypurposes ............... 116 basis .................... 92 for ...................... 171co-owner, rental income andDefined for Roth IRA Fees for, notexpense allocation ....... 68purposes ............... 125 deductible .............. 152Copyrights .................. 99Employee .................. 44 Credits ................ 199, 201 DInfringement damages ...... 87Miscellaneous Alternative motor vehicle credit Daily allowance  (See Per diem)Royalties .................. 85compensation ............ 44 (See Alternative motor vehicle Damage to property  (See alsoNonemployee .............. 88 Corporations  (See also S credit) Casualty losses) .......... 162corporations) ............... 84Computation of tax .......... 13 Capital gains, undistributed, Disasters (See also DisasterControlled corporations .... 97,Equal amounts ............. 13 credit for tax on ..... 63, 249 relief) .............. 165, 16698Negative amounts .......... 13 Changing claim ............ 17 Damages ................... 192Director fees asRounding off dollars ........ 13 Child and dependent care (See Damages from lawsuits ..... 87self-employmentComputer .................. 192 Child and dependent care Medical expenses as part ofincome .................. 88Condemnation of credit) settlement .............. 141Reorganizations and nontaxableproperty ............. 107, 162 Child tax (See Child tax credit) Dating your return ........... 14trade of stock ............ 97Basis computation .......... 93 Clean renewable energy bonds Daycare centers  (See also ChildCorrections  (See Errors)Disaster areas, (See Credit for clean and dependent care credit;Cosmetic surgery:government-ordered renewable energy bonds or Child care) .......... 8, 44, 212Not deductible as medicaldemolition of unsafe Gulf tax credit bonds) De minimis benefits ......... 46expense ................ 140home ................... 163 Earned income (See Earned Deadlines  (See Due dates)Cosmetics:Period of ownership and income credit)
Death  (See Decedents)use ..................... 105 Not deductible as medical Education (See Education
Death benefits:expense ................ 140Confidential information: credits)
Accelerated ................ 83Cost basis ................... 91Privacy Act and paperwork Empowerment zone and
reduction information ...... 3 IRAs for nondeductible renewal community Life insurance proceeds (See
Travel expenses and ...... 179 contributions ....... 119, 122 employment credit ....... 199 Life insurance)
Page 272 Publication 17 (2007)

Long-term care insurance Death of ................... 30 Impairment-related workDeath benefits: (Cont.)
contracts ............... 140 expenses of ....... 141, 185Deceased dependent's medicalPublic safety officers who died
Medical expenses (See Medical and dental expenses .... 138or were killed in line of duty, Work-related
and dental expenses)tax exclusion ............. 84 education ............. 191Disabled dependent care
Mortgage interest (See expenses, deduction Income .................... 50Death of child ............... 27
Mortgages) for ...................... 140 Insurance costs ............ 50Death of dependent ......... 30
Not itemizing, use of Form Exemption for ........... 25-34 Military and governmentDebt instruments  (See Bonds or 1040A .................... 8 Filing requirements .......... 7 pensions ................ 50Notes) Pass-through entities ...... 194 Earned income, unearned Public assistanceDebts  (See also Bad Penalties, no deduction income, and gross income benefits .................. 86debts) ................. 18, 84 permitted ............... 152 levels (Table 1-2) ....... 6 Reporting of disability pensionCanceled (See Cancellation of Performing artists' Married, filing joint income .................. 50debt) expenses ............... 185 return ................... 25 Retirement, pensions, andNonrecourse ............... 82 Prepaid insurance Medical and dental expenses profit-sharing plans ....... 50Paid by another ............ 12 premiums ............... 140 of ...................... 138 Signing of return byPayoff of debt included in sales Prescription medicines ..... 140 Qualifying child ........ 26, 138 court-appointedtransaction ............... 96 Rental expenses ....... 66, 70 representative ........... 14Qualifying relative ..... 29, 138Public, gifts to reduce ....... 16 Repayments ............... 85 Social security and railroadSocial security number .... 12,Recourse .................. 82 Section 179 deductions: retirement benefits,34Refund offset against ..... 9, 14 Adjustment to basis deductions for ............ 81Adoption taxpayerDeceased taxpayers  (See for .................... 92 Special school or home for,identificationDecedents) Car expenses ........... 178 deductibility of medicalnumber ............ 13, 35Decedents  (See also Executors Self-employed persons: expense ................ 140Alien dependents ........ 35and administrators) .......... 6 Health insurance Terrorist attack as cause ofStandard deduction for .... 135Capital loss of ............. 109 premiums ............ 142 injury, disability paymentsTravel expenses for ....... 171Deceased spouse ........... 6 Social security and railroad excluded fromTuition deduction for ....... 133Personal exemption ...... 25 retirement benefits ....... 81 taxation .................. 72Dependents not allowed toDue dates ................. 10 Standard Workers' compensation ..... 51claim dependents ......... 25deduction ........... 134-135Filing requirements .......... 6 Disability:Depletion allowance ......... 85Stop-smokingFuneral expenses ......... 157 Income ................... 220Deposits ................... 212programs ............... 140Medical and dental Disability benefits:Loss on ................... 194Student loan interest deductionexpenses ............... 138 Earned income credit ...... 234Losses on ........... 100, 163(See Student loans)Savings bonds ............. 57 Disability insurance payments:Reporting of ............ 168Theft loss ................. 195Spouse's death ........ 20, 21 Earned income credit ...... 234Depreciation:Transportation expenses (SeeStandard deduction ........ 134 Disability, permanent and totalAdjustment to basis for ..... 92Travel and transportationTransfer of property at disability ................. 218Alternative minimum tax andexpenses)death .................... 96 Disabled:acceleratedTuition and fees (See Tuition)Declaration of rights of depreciation ............. 70 Child ...................... 27Tuition and feestaxpayers: Cars ...................... 178 Dependent ................. 30deduction ................. 8IRS request for Union dues (See Labor unions) Cell phone ................ 192 Disaster Assistance Act ofinformation ............... 3 Work-related education .... 189 Change of use of 1988:Deduction: property ................. 95Deeds: Withholding ................ 38Costs of discrimination Computer ................. 192Preparation costs for ...... 151 Disaster relief  (See alsosuits ..................... 88 Recording fees, basis to Correcting amount Terrorist attacks) ....... 50, 72,Deductions  (See also Bad debts; include .................. 92 claimed .................. 70 87, 166Capital losses; Entertainment Form 4562:Deferred annuity contracts Cash gifts to victims ....... 165expenses; Personal exemption; (See Annuities) Rental property Disaster Relief and EmergencyPoints; Recovery of amounts depreciation ........... 70Deferred compensation: Assistance Act:previously deducted; Standard Home computer ........... 194Limit ....................... 48 Grants ................... 86deduction) ...... 22, 24, 25, 34, Property used in trade orNonqualified plans .......... 45 Unemployment84, 101, 108, 134, 149, 151, business, as noncapitalDeferred compensation plans assistance ............. 86171, 173 assets ................... 99(See Retirement plans) Employer's emergency disasterAlimony, deductible by Real property: fund .................... 165Delinquent taxes:payer .............. 127, 129 Gain from disposition ofReal estate transactions, tax Government-ordered demolitionBusiness expenses (See property .......... 70, 106allocation ............... 144 or relocation of home that isBusiness expenses) Land, no depreciation unsafe due to ........... 163Delivery services .......... 3, 10Casualty losses (See Capital of ..................... 70 Grants or payments ........ 86Business-related travellosses) Rental property ......... 66, 70expense ................ 170 Replacement of lost orChanging claim after filing, need
Designated Roth destroyed property ...... 166Demutualization of lifeto amend ................ 17
Account ............... 73, 75insurance companies ..... 97 Disclosure statement ........ 19Charitable contributions (See
Defined. ................... 72Dental expenses  (See Medical Discount, bonds and notesalso Charitable
Destroyed records ......... 179and dental expenses) issued at .................. 59contributions) ....... 153-162
Diaper service .............. 140Dental expenses (See Medical Dentures: Discounted debt instruments 
Direct deposit of refunds .... 14and dental expenses) (See also Original issueDeductibility as medical
discount (OID)) ............. 42expense ................ 140Depreciation ............... 92 Directors' fees .............. 88
Capital gain or loss ......... 99Educator expenses ..... 8, 130 Dependent care: Disabilities, persons
Benefits ............. 209, 213Estate .................... 194 Discounts:with ................. 209, 211
Center .................... 212Fee-basis government Accrued leave payment ..... 50 Employee discounts, effect on
Credit for ................. 209officials ................. 184 basis .................... 93Armed forces .............. 49
Dependent taxpayer test .... 25Impairment-related work Blind (See Blind persons) Distributions  (See also
expenses .......... 141, 185 Dividends; Rollovers) ...... 42,Dependent's education Cafeteria plans ............. 50
Interest (See Interest payments) 75expenses, claiming: Credit for (See Elderly or
Education credit ........... 229Investment expenses ...... 152 Early (See Early withdrawaldisabled, credit for)
from deferred interestIRA contributions (See Dependent who is disabled,Dependents  (See also Child tax
account)Individual retirement deduction for carecredit) ............... 7, 8, 138
arrangements (IRAs)) Liquidating distributions ..... 63expenses ............... 140Birth of .................... 30
Itemizing (See Itemized Born and died within Guide dogs, deductible as Lump sum (See Lump-sum
deductions) year ................. 12, 35 medical expense ........ 140 distributions)
Publication 17 (2007) Page 273

Transfers between Penalties .......... 122, 123 Work-related education,Distributions  (Cont.)
spouses ............. 94, 98 deduction ofSection 457 deferredNondividend
expenses ............... 190Use of home after compensation plans ...... 76distributions .............. 63
divorce ................. 105 Tax on ..................... 76 Educational assistance  (SeeQualified charitable ........ 122
also Tuition) ............... 132Doctors' bills  (See Medical and Earned income ............. 239Qualified reservist .......... 76
dental expenses) Employer-provided ......... 46Child and dependent careRequired minimum distributions
Tuition deduction, effectcredit ................... 211Documentary evidence:(See also Individual
on .................... 132Recordkeepingretirement arrangements Defined:
requirements ............ 178(IRAs); Pensions) ....... 77, Scholarships (See ScholarshipsFor purposes of standard
120, 122 and fellowships)deduction ............. 135Domestic help:
Tuition (See Qualified tuitionReturn of capital ............ 63 Dependent filing requirementsWithholding ................ 36
programs)(Table 1-2) ................ 6District of Columbia: Domestic help, no exemption
Employee ................. 234 Educational institution  (Seefor ........................ 25First-time homebuyer
Self-employed ............ 234 Eligible educational institution)credit ................... 104 Domestic relations orders,
Earned income credit ...... 201, Educational organizations:qualified (QDROs):Dividends  (See also Form
232 As related party in1099-DIV) .......... 61-65, 62 Rollover of retirement plan
2007 changes ............... 1 transactions ............. 98distribution ............... 76Alaska Permanent Fund (See
Advance .................. 2, 8 Charitable contributionsAlaska Permanent Fund Donations  (See Charitable
Filing requirements (Table to ................. 154, 155dividends) contributions)
1-3) .................... 8 50% limit onAs stock dividends and stock Down payment
Amount of earned income .... 1 deduction ............. 160rights .................... 63 assistance ................ 88
Considered unmarried ...... 23Backup withholding ......... 61 Educator expenses .... 130, 192Droughts:
Disability benefits .......... 234Beneficiary of estate or trust EE series bonds  (See U.S.Losses of property due
Disability insurancereceiving ................ 61 savings bonds)to ...................... 163
payments ............... 234Buying more stock with ..... 63 E-file .................... 3, 5, 9Drug or alcohol rehabilitation
Filing claim ................. 7Defined .................... 61 centers: Extensions of time to file .... 11
Foster child ............... 235Exempt-interest Deductibility of medical Form 8453-OL for signature
Investment income, limitdividends ................ 64 expense ................ 140 requirement ............... 9
on ........................ 1Expenses related to, deduction On time filing ............... 10Drugs:
Married filing separately .... 22of ....................... 65 As medical expenses: EIC  (See Earned income credit)Military personnel ......... 236Fees to collect ............ 194 Over-the-counter drugs, not EITC Assistant ............. 232Social security card ........ 236deductible ............ 140Foreign income ............ 61 Elderly or disabled, creditSocial security number .... 236Prescription medicines,Form 1040A, use of ......... 8 for ......................... 8Two persons with samedeductibility ........... 140Form 1099-DIV (See Form Married filing separately .... 22qualifying child ........... 28Dry cleaning:1099-DIV) Elderly persons  (See alsoEarthquakes  (See also DisasterBusiness-related travelHolding period, determination Pensions) .................. 71relief) ..................... 166expense ........... 170, 171of ...................... 101 Credit for (See Elderly orCasualty loss causedDual-status taxpayers ........ 7Insurance dividends ........ 64 disabled, credit for)by ...................... 163Joint returns notMoney market funds ........ 63 Exemption fromEasements:available ................. 21Nominees receiving on behalf of withholding .............. 37Adjustment to basis for ..... 93Standard deduction ........ 134another .................. 62 Home for the aged ......... 31Education:Due dates ................... 10Nondividend Long-term care (See Long-termSavings bond program ...... 582007 dates (Table 1-5) ..... 10distributions .............. 63 care insurance contracts)
Education credits  (See alsoDisaster areas, postponedOrdinary dividends ......... 62 Nutrition Program for theHope credit; Lifetime learningdeadlines ............... 168Patronage dividends ........ 64 Elderly ................... 87credit) ............... 1, 8, 226Extension (See Extension ofQualified ............... 62, 65 Standard deduction for age 65Academic period .......... 228time to file)Real estate investment trusts or older ................. 134Nonresident aliens' Comparison chart (Table(REITs) paying ........... 63 Tax Counseling for thereturns .................. 10 35-1) ................... 226Redemption treated as ..... 96 Elderly ................... 10Dependent's educationDue diligence:Reinvestment plans ........ 63 Election precinct officials:expenses, claiming ...... 229Child and dependent careReporting of ................ 64 Fees, reporting of .......... 88Eligible educationalcredit ................... 213As interest ............... 61 Election to include child'sinstitution ............... 228Dues:Scrip dividends ............. 64 income on parent'sExpenses, qualifiedChamber of Commerce .... 192 return ................ 202-204Sold stock ................. 62 education .......... 228, 229Club ...................... 196 Inclusion of child's income onStockholder debts when General requirements ..... 226Union ..................... 193 parent's return (Figurecanceled as .............. 82 Income limits .............. 229Dwelling units  (See also Home; 31-A) ................... 203Veterans' insurance ........ 64 Married filing separately ... 22,Vacation homes) .... 24, 67, 68 Elective deferrals  (See alsoDivorced parents ............ 27 226Cooperative (See Cooperative Retirement plans) .......... 71Divorced parents, special Modified adjusted gross incomehousing) Limits ...................... 48rule ...................... 237 (MAGI) ................. 229Defined .................... 67 Elective surgery:Divorced taxpayers  (See also Phaseout of credit ......... 229Renting (See Rental income Not deductible as medicalAlimony) ................... 87 Qualified educationand expenses) expense ................ 140Child and dependent care expenses .......... 228, 229
Electric cars:credit ................... 211 Recapture of ................ 8
Credit .................... 177Child custody .............. 27 Filing requirements (TableE Credits:Definition of divorce instrument 1-3) .................... 8Early withdrawal from deferred Filing requirements (Tablefor purposes of Timing of ............... 229interest account: 1-3) .................... 8alimony ................. 127 Refund of expenses ....... 228Annuities .................. 76 Electronic filing  (See E-file)Estimated tax payments .... 42 Tuition deduction and ...... 228Form 1099-R reporting (See
Electronic paymentFiling status ............ 20, 21 Who cannot claim ......... 226Form 1099-R)
options ................. 3, 15IRAs ................. 117, 121 Education expenses  (See alsoForm 5329 reporting (See Form
Credit card ............. 15, 41Medical and dental expenses of Tuition) ................... 1325329)
Electronic Federal Tax Paymentchildren of .............. 138 Employer-provided (SeeHigher education expenses,
System (EFTPS) ..... 15, 41Mortgage interest, payment as Educational assistance)exception from
Electronic fundsalimony ................. 147 Teacher's out-of-pocketpenalty ................. 115
withdrawal ........ 15, 35, 41Personal exemption ........ 25 expenses ............... 130IRAs:
Electronic reporting:Real estate taxes, allocation Early distributions, Tuition (See Qualified tuition
of ...................... 145 defined ............... 123 programs) Returns (See E-file)
Page 274 Publication 17 (2007)

Overseas employment (See Estate beneficiaries  (See also Exchanges  (See also Trade ofElectronic reporting: (Cont.)
Foreign employment) Inheritance) ........... 94, 101 property) ............... 96, 97Tip statement from employees
Dividends received by ...... 61 Like-kind exchanges .... 93, 97Vehicles provided by ....... 46to employers ............. 52
IRAs (See Individual retirement Partially nontaxableWithholding rules ........... 37Eligible educational institution:
arrangements (IRAs)) exchange ............ 94, 97Employment:Education credits .......... 228
Losses of estate ............ 88 Taxable exchange,Agency fees .......... 88, 192Foreign schools ...... 131, 132
defined .................. 93Receiving income fromRÂ esumÂ e expenses........ 192Student loan interest estate ................... 88 Tax-free:Taxes (See also Social securitydeduction ............... 131 Rollover restrictions ........ 76 Definition of .............. 93and Medicare taxes) ...... 45Tuition and fees Holding period, determinationEstate tax:FICA withholding (See alsodeduction ............... 132 of .................... 100Deduction ................. 146Withholding) ........... 12Eligible student: Excise taxes  (See alsoTip income .......... 8, 9, 52 Estates  (See also EstateHope credit ............... 230 Penalties) ................. 122beneficiaries) .............. 88Employment taxes  (See alsoLifetime learning credit ..... 230 Basis to include ............ 91Income .................... 88Social security and MedicareStudent loan interest Deductibility (TableInvestment interest ........ 152taxes) .......... 209, 212, 215deduction ............... 130 22-1) ................... 145Tax (See also EstateFICA withholding (See alsoTuition and fees IRAs for failure to take minimumtax) ............... 146, 195Withholding) ..... 35, 36, 37,deduction ............... 133 distributions ............. 122Survivor's annuity ........ 7739, 41Embezzlement: Roth IRAs ................ 126Estimated tax ............ 35-43Empowerment zone ........ 199Losses due to ............. 163 Exclusions from gross income:Amount to pay to avoidEndowment proceeds ....... 83Reporting embezzled Accelerated deathpenalty .................. 40Energy assistance .......... 87funds .................... 89 benefits .................. 83Avoiding ................... 39Energy conservation:Emergency medical service Annuities .................. 73Change in estimated tax .... 41Measures andpersonnel: Canceled debt ............. 83Credit for ........... 35, 41, 42modifications ............. 88Life insurance proceeds when Capital gains from home saleDefinition .................. 35Subsidies .................. 88death in line of duty ...... 84 (See Sale of home)Divorced taxpayers ......... 42Exclusion as adjustment toEmotional distress Commuting benefits forElectronic fundsbasis .................. 93damages .................. 88 employees ............... 47withdrawal ........... 35, 41Utility rebates .............. 90Employee benefits  (See also De minimis benefits ........ 46Figuring amount of tax ...... 39Entertainers andFringe benefits; specific type of Disability pensions of federalFirst period, no income subjectmusicians ................ 193benefit (e.g., Health insurance, employees andto estimated tax in ........ 40EntertainmentLife insurance, etc.)) ....... 38, military .................. 50Fiscal year taxpayers ....... 40expenses ........... 171, 17345, 46 Education Savings BondMarried taxpayers .......... 3950% limit .................. 173Employee business Program ................. 89Name change .............. 42Figure 26-A summary ofexpenses ............ 168-185 Educational assistance fromNot required ............... 39rules ................. 174 employer ................ 46Commuting expenses ..... 176 Overpayment applied to .... 14Allocation of costs .... 175, 180 Elective deferrals, limit onPayment vouchers ......... 41Deductions for ............ 168 Business-related gifts exclusion ................ 48Payments .............. 15, 41Form 2106 for vs. ..................... 175 Employee awards .......... 44Figuring amount of eachdeducting ............. 180 Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to Energy conservationpayment ............... 41Impairment-related work fill out .................. 184 subsidies ............ 88, 90Schedule ................ 40expenses, deduction Meal expenses Foreign earned income ...... 2When to start ............ 40for ................. 141, 185 included ................ 174 Frozen deposit interest ..... 89Who must make .......... 39Meals (See Meal and lodging Proof of expenses ......... 178 Group-term lifePenalty forexpenses) Table 26-2 summary .... 179 insurance ................ 47underpayment ....... 35, 41,Reimbursements (See also Per Recordkeeping Holocaust victims42, 203diem) ...... 37, 44, 180, 181, requirements ............ 178 restitution ................ 89IRS computation of, Form182 Reporting of ............... 180 2210 .................. 43 Long-term care insuranceReturning excess ... 37, 182 Table 26-3 showing forms to Pension payments .......... 72 contracts ............ 50, 51Travel (See Travel and be used .............. 183 Safe harbor for higher income Parking fees,transportation expenses) Taking turns paying for meals or individuals ............... 35 employer-provided ....... 47Work-related entertainment ........... 175 Saturday, Sunday, holiday Public safety officers who diededucation .......... 187, 191 Tickets ................... 175 rule ..................... 40 or were killed in line of duty,Employee expenses: Face-value as deductible Separate returns ........... 42 death benefits ............ 84Cell phone ................ 192 amount ............... 174 Social security or railroad Sale of home ............... 90Home computer ...... 192, 194 Gift vs. entertainment retirement benefits ....... 79 Scholarships ............... 90Miscellaneous ............. 192 deduction ............. 175 State and local income taxes, Strike benefits .............. 90
Employees  (See also Fringe Entertainment facilities: deduction of ............ 143 Terrorist attack as cause of
benefits) ............... 45, 46 Unemployment injury, disabilityExpenses for use of ....... 175
Awards for service .......... 44 compensation ............ 86 payments ................ 72Equipment  (See also
Business expenses (See Estimates: Executors andTools) .................... 177
Employee business Travel expenses .......... 178 administrators ............. 6Rental for rental
expenses) Related partyproperty ................. 66 Excess benefits tax  (See
Discounts for, effect on transactions ............. 98Section 72(m)(5))Equitable relief  (See Innocentbasis .................... 93 Exempt-interestspouse relief) Excess reimbursements:Form W-4 to be filled out when dividends ................. 54Business expenseErrors:starting new job .......... 37 Alternative minimum tax .... 64reimbursements ..... 37, 182Address label, correctionFringe benefits (See also Fringe Dividend reporting .......... 64Medical expenses ......... 141of ....................... 16benefits) ................. 38 Information-reportingExcess reimbursementDepreciation, correcting amount
Jury duty pay .............. 89 requirement .............. 64flowchart (Figureon Form 1040X .......... 70
Overseas employment (See 21-A) ................. 141 Exemption amount:Discovery after filing, need to
Foreign employment) 2007 changes ............... 1amend return ............ 17 Excess withholding
Employees of the intelligence Form 1099 showing incorrect credit ............... 246, 250 Exemption from foreign tax
community ............... 105 amount .................. 62 How to take ............... 250 credit limit ............... 248
Employers: Form W-2c for corrected wage Joint returns .............. 250 Exemptions:
and tax statement ........ 42Educational assistance from Exchange students: Dependents ............. 25-34
Refunds ................... 17(See Educational assistance) Expenses paid for, deductible From withholding ........... 37
E-file options ............... 10 Escrow: when under agreement with Personal (See Personal
Form W-4, having new Taxes placed in, when qualified exemption)
employees fill out ........ 37 deductible .............. 145 organization ............ 156 Phaseout ........... 22, 25, 34
Publication 17 (2007) Page 275

Federal judges: Finance charges: Foreign students ............ 26Exemptions: (Cont.)
Employer retirement plan Expenses paid for, deductibleCredit cards, retail installmentSecurities, tax-exempt (See
coverage ............... 117 when under agreement withcontracts, etc., notSecurities)
qualifieddeductible .............. 153State or local government Fee-basis officials:
organization ............ 156bonds, tax-exempt ....... 99 Business expenses of ..... 184 Financial institutions  (See also
Foreign tax credit .......... 247Banks) ............... 100, 116Expatriates ................. 107 Work-related education
How to take ............... 248expenses ............... 191 Financially disabledExpenses paid by
Limit on ................... 248persons ................... 18another ................... 88 Fees  (See also specific types of
deductions and income) ... 88, Forgiveness of debt  (SeeFines  (See alsoExtension of time to file ..... 10
212 Cancellation of debt)Penalties) ........... 10, 19, 20Automatic .................. 11
Professional license ....... 196Citizens outside U.S. ....... 11 Form:Deductibility ............... 196
E-file options ............... 11 Fees, comprehensive/ 843:Firefighters:
Inclusion on return .......... 11 bundled ............. 133, 229 Claim for refund and requestLife insurance proceeds when
for abatement ......... 250Extortion: Fellowships  (See Scholarships death in line of duty ...... 84
1040 ................. 60, 201Losses due to ............. 163 and fellowships) Volunteer firefighters:
Address label ............ 16Extravagant expenses ...... 175 Fertility enhancement Charitable contributions
Adoption expenses ...... 247procedures:Eye surgery: to .................... 155
Alaska Permanent FundDeductibility as medicalDeductibility as medical IRAs ................... 118
dividends .............. 64expense ................ 140expense ................ 140 Fires: Alien taxpayer identificationFICA withholding  (See alsoEyeglasses: Arson, no casualty loss numbers ............... 35Social security and MedicareAs medical expense ....... 140 for ...................... 163 Alternative minimum tax,taxes; Withholding) ..... 12, 35, Casualty loss caused nonrefundable credit for36, 37, 39, 41, 45 by ................. 163, 166 prior year tax ......... 248F Fiduciaries  (See also Executors First-time homebuyer Armed forces' retirementand administrators;Failure to comply with tax laws credit .................... 104 pay ................... 49Trustees) .......... 6, 116, 117(See Penalties) First-year expensing  (See Attachments to ........... 13Fees for services ........... 88Fair market value (FMV): Section 179 deductions) Capital gains ............. 64Prohibited transactions .... 123Casualty loss ............. 164 Fiscal year ........... 12, 40, 42 Charitable contributions,Related partyDefinition of ................ 91 Fishermen: deduction to betransactions ............. 98Sales of property ........... 96 Estimated tax .............. 39 itemized .............. 154Stolen property ............ 164 Figures  (See Tables and figures) Indian fishing rights ......... 89 Check mailed with ........ 15Fair rental price ............. 67 Figuring taxes and credits  (See Fleet operations: Child's capital gainalso Worksheets) ...... 78, 131,Fair rental value ............. 33 Standard mileage rate not distributions .......... 152133, 199, 250Family  (See also Child tax credit; allowed ................. 177 Clergy pension ........... 48Filing requirements  (See alsoChildren; Dependents; Related Deduction for alimonyFlexible spending account orMarried filingparty transactions) ....... 7, 98, paid .................. 129arrangement ........ 139, 140separately) ............ 5-20, 21207, 222 Disability retirementFloods  (See also DisasterCalendar year filers ......... 10Adoption credit (See Adoption) pay ................... 50relief) ..................... 166Citizens outside U.S. ........ 7Care credit (See Child and Dividends ................ 64Casualty loss causedDependents ............... 6, 7dependent care credit) Educator expenses ...... 130by ...................... 163Electronic (See E-file)Standard meal allowance not Excess withholdingFMV  (See Fair market value)allowed if related to Extensions ................. 10 credit ................. 250Food benefits:employer ............... 181 Gross income levels (Table FECA benefits ........... 51Nutrition program for the1-1) ...................... 5Farming: Foreign tax credit ....... 248elderly ................... 87Individual taxpayers ......... 6Activity not for profit ........ 87 Health insuranceFood stamps ................ 31Joint filing (See also JointCanceled debt, treatment credit ................. 250Foreclosure ........... 103, 151returns) .................. 21of ....................... 83 InsurancePatronage dividends ........ 64 Late filing penalties (See Foreign children: distributions ........... 64Penalties)Farmworkers: Adoption credit ............ 247 IRAs .............. 122, 124Most taxpayers (TableEstimated tax .............. 39 Foreign employment ...... 7, 49 Mortgage interest1-1) ...................... 5Withholding ................ 36 Employment abroad ........ 49 credit ................. 248Other situations requiring filingFederal crime investigations or Pension plan Personal exemption ...... 25(Table 1-3) ................ 8prosecutions: contributions ............. 73 Presidential ElectionUnmarried persons (See SingleTravel expenses .......... 170 Social security and Medicare Campaign Fund ........ 13taxpayers)Federal employees: taxes .................... 49 Railroad retirement benefits,When to file ................ 10Accrued leave payment ..... 45 U.S. citizen ................ 49 reporting on ........... 79Where to file ............. 5, 16Cost-of-living Waiver of alien status ....... 49 Recapture ofWho must file .......... 5, 6, 7allowances .............. 45 alimony ............... 129Foreign governments,Filing status ............ 6, 20-24Disability pensions ......... 50 Reporting of alimonyemployees of ............. 49Annulled marriages ......... 20Based on years of received .............. 129Foreign income:Change to, after time ofservice ................ 50 Reporting taxes on tips notDividends .................. 61filing ..................... 17Exclusion, conditions reported toEarned income exclusion .... 2for .................... 50 Divorced taxpayers ......... 20 employer .............. 53Reporting of ................. 2Terrorist attack ........... 50 Head of household ..... 20, 22 Reporting uncollected taxesSale of foreign property ..... 95FECA payments ............ 51 Qualifying person to file on tips ................. 53Foreign income taxes:as ..................... 24Federal Employees' Schedule A, MortgageDeduction of .............. 143Joint returns ............... 21Compensation Act (FECA) interest deduction ..... 248Form 1116 to claimMarried filing a jointpayments ................. 51 Social security benefits,credit ................. 146return .................. 233Federal government: reporting on ........... 79Schedule A or Form 1040Married filing separately ... 21,Charitable contributions Social securityreporting ............. 146233to ...................... 155 numbers ............... 34Definition of ............... 142Surviving spouse ........... 20Employees (See Federal Student loan interestForeign nationals  (See ResidentUnmarried persons (See alsoemployees) deduction ............. 131aliens)Single taxpayers) ...... 6, 20 Tip income reporting ..... 53Federal income tax:
Foreign organizations:Final return for decedent: Undistributed long-termInterest on, not
Charitable contributionsCapital loss deduction capital gains .......... 249deductible .............. 152
to ................. 155, 157on ...................... 109 Use of ............. 8, 21, 22Not deductible ............ 146
Foreign schools ....... 131, 132Medical expenses ......... 138Deductibility (Table Wages and salary
22-1) ................. 145 Standard deduction ........ 134 Foreign Service ............ 105 reporting .............. 44
Page 276 Publication 17 (2007)

Undistributed long-term 1040X: Life insurance policyForm:
capital gains .......... 108 surrendered forAmended individual1040 (Cont.)
cash .................. 83Worthless securities ...... 96 return ................. 17Workers'
1040, Schedule E: Retirement planAnnulled marriages ....... 20compensation .......... 51
distributions ........... 13Income-producing property, Bad debts, claim for1040, Schedule A:
deduction of interest on 1099-S ................... 108refund ................ 101Charitable
loan for ............... 153 Real estate transactionsChange of filing status .... 22contributions ...... 16, 154,
Rental income and proceeds ........ 103, 108162 Check mailed with ........ 15
expenses .............. 71 1116:Employee business expense Child's return ........... 206
Royalties ................ 85 Foreign tax credit ....... 248deduction ............. 184 Completing .............. 18
1040, Schedule F: 1120S:Federal employees buying Depreciation: Correcting
Self-employedback sick leave ........ 51 S corporation income ..... 84amount of ............. 70
persons .............. 180Gifts, deduction of ....... 180 2106:Filing .................... 18
Work-related educationHome mortgage interest Business-relatedItemized deduction, change toexpenses ............. 191deduction ............. 147 expenses ........ 180, 183standard
1040, Schedule SE ....... 7, 48Investment expenses deduction ............. 135 Performing artists ....... 185
1040A ................ 60, 201deduction ............. 152 Standard deduction, change Travel expenses ........ 182
Address label ............ 16Investment interest to itemized Work-related educationAdoption expenses ...... 247deduction ............. 153 deductions ............ 135 expenses ............. 191
Alaska Permanent FundItemized deduction Worthless securities, claim for 2106-EZ:dividends .............. 64limit .................. 135 refund ................. 96 Business-relatedAlien taxpayer identificationLoss of deposits due to 1065: expenses ............. 183numbers ............... 35bank's insolvency or Partnership income ....... 84 Performing artists ....... 185Armed forces' retirementbankruptcy cause ..... 163 1096 ..................... 108 Work-related educationpay ................... 49Medical and dental 1098: expenses ............. 191Attachments to return ..... 13expenses ............. 141 More than one borrower (not 2119:Capital gains ............. 64Outplacement services, spouse), reporting of Postponement of gain fromClergy pension ........... 48deduction .............. 45 mortgage interest sale of home .......... 104Disability retirementTravel expenses, deduction deduction by attaching 2439:pay ................... 50of .................... 182 of .................... 153 Notice to shareholder onDividend incomeUnearned commission, Mortgage insurance undistributed long-termreporting .............. 64deduction for repayment premiums reported capital gains ...... 63, 249Dividends ................ 64of ..................... 44 on .................... 151 2441 ..................... 215Educator expenses ...... 1301040, Schedule B: Mortgage interest overpaid in 2555 ..................... 233Excess withholdingDividends ................ 64 earlier year ........... 149 2555-EZ .................. 233credit ................. 2501040, Schedule C: Mortgage interest 2848:FECA benefits ........... 51 statement ..... 71, 84, 151Barter income ............ 82 Power of attorney andInsurance Points reported on ....... 151Child care providers ...... 44 declaration ofdistributions ........... 64 Prepaid interest reportedCorporate director representative ..... 14, 21IRA distributions ........ 122 on .................... 151fees ................... 88 3115 ...................... 56Personal exemption ...... 25 Refund of interest reportedForgiveness of debts ..... 82 3800:Presidential Election on .................... 151Foster-care providers ..... 89 General businessCampaign Fund ........ 13 1098-C:Kickbacks ............... 89 credit .................. 18Railroad retirement benefits, Contributions of motorNotary fees .............. 88 4029 ..................... 234reporting on ........... 79 vehicles, boats, andOil, gas, or mineral interest 4070:Reporting pay ............ 44 airplanes ........ 153, 158royalties ............... 85 Reporting tips toSocial security benefits, 1098-E ................... 131 employer .............. 52Rental income and reporting on ........... 79 1098-T ......... 229, 230, 231expenses .......... 71, 85 4070A:Social security 1099:Statutory employees .... 180 Daily record of tips ....... 52numbers ............... 34 Taxable incomeWork-related education 4137:Student loan interest report ............. 12, 44expenses ............. 191 Social security and Medicarededuction ............. 131 1099-A: taxes on tips not reported1040, Schedule C-EZ: Tip income reporting ..... 53 Acquisition or abandonment to employer ............ 53Child care providers ...... 44 Use of ............. 8, 21, 22 of secured 4361 ..................... 234Corporate director Workers' property .............. 103 4506:fees ................... 88 compensation .......... 51 1099-B ................... 108 Copy of tax returnFoster-care providers ..... 89 1040A, Schedule 1: Barter income ............ 82 request ................ 17Kickbacks ............... 89 Dividends ................ 64 Broker to report sales of 4506-T:Notary fees .............. 88 1040EZ ................... 201 stocks, bonds, or Tax return transcriptOil, gas, or mineral interest Address label ............ 16 commodities ...... 96, 108 request ................ 17royalties ............... 85 Alaska Permanent Fund 1099-C: 4562:Rental income and dividends .............. 64
Cancellation of debt ..... 82, Depreciation of rentalexpenses .......... 71, 85 FECA benefits ........... 51
103 property ............... 70Statutory employees .... 180 No attachments .......... 13
1099-DIV: 4684:Work-related education Personal exemption ...... 25
Dividend income Bank deposit, loss due toexpenses ............. 191 Presidential Election
statement ...... 48, 62, 64 bank's insolvency or1040, Schedule D: Campaign Fund ........ 13
Return of capital ......... 63 bankruptcy ........... 163Business property Reporting pay ............ 44
1099-INT .............. 54, 61 Casualty or theftsales .................. 97 Tip income reporting ..... 53
loss ............. 162, 1681099-MISC:Capital gains or Use of ................. 7, 21
4797:Brokers receivinglosses ........... 107, 108 Workers'
dividends .............. 62 Sales of businessChild's capital gain compensation .......... 51
property .......... 97, 106Nonemployeedistributions .......... 152 1040NR:
compensation .......... 88 Small business stockFractional shares, sale Nonresident alien
losses ................ 1001099-OID .................. 59of ..................... 64 return ................. 10
4868 .................. 11, 351099-R .................... 58Nonbusiness bad debts, loss 1040NR-EZ:
Automatic extension of timeof deposits due to bank's Early distributions of pensionNonresident alien easy
to file .............. 11, 35insolvency or funds .................. 76return ................. 10
bankruptcy ........... 164 Filing electronic form ..... 111040-V: IRA distributions ....... 122,
Sale expenses .......... 108 Payment voucher ........ 15 125 Filing paper form ......... 11
Publication 17 (2007) Page 277

Parents' election to report Employer retirement plan Form 1099-B:Form: (Cont.)
child's interest and participation4952: Barter income .............. 42
dividends ......... 61, 152 indicated ............. 117Investment interest expense Form 1099-C:
Reduced deductions or Employer-reported incomededuction ............. 152 Cancellation of Debt ........ 42
credits ................ 203 statement ..... 12, 13, 44,Net capital gain, election to Form 1099-DIV:Sample form ............ 204 45, 48include as investment Dividend income8815 ...................... 58 Fringe benefits ....... 45, 46income ............... 152 statement ................ 428818 ...................... 584972: Recordkeeping ........... 17 Form 1099-G:8822:Lump-sum Reimbursements reported as Government payments ..... 42Change of address ....... 17distributions ........... 75 part of income ....... 169, State tax refunds ........... 848824:5329: 180, 181, 183 Form 1099-INT:Like-kind exchanges ..... 97Early distributions of Statutory employees .... 180 Interest income8828:sheltered funds ........ 76 Uncollected taxes ........ 52 statement ................ 42Recapture of federalRequired minimum W-2G: Form 1099-MISC:mortgage subsidy ..... 107distributions, failure to Gambling winnings Miscellaneous income ...... 428839:take ......... 77, 124, 125 withholdingQualified adoption Withheld state and local6251 ..................... 200 statement ............. 89expenses ......... 46, 247 taxes ................... 143Alternative minimum W-4P:8853: Form 1099-OID:tax ................... 207 Rollover distributions, electionAccelerated death Original issue discount, from6252: not to have taxbenefits ............... 83 issuer or broker .......... 42Installment sale withheld ............... 72Archer MSAs and long-term Form 1099-Q:income ............... 106 W-4V:care insurance8275: Payments from QualifiedVoluntary withholdingcontracts .............. 46 Education Programs ...... 42Disclosure statement ..... 19 request ................ 868857:8275-R: Form 1099-R:W-5 ...................... 241Innocent spouse relief .... 21Regulation disclosure Retirement planW-7:8862 ..................... 232statement ............. 19 distributions .............. 42Individual taxpayer8863 ................ 230, 2318283: Withheld state and local taxesidentification number8874:Charitable noncash shown on ............... 143request ................ 35New markets credit, filingcontribution of more than Form 1099-S:W-7A:requirements (Table$500 value ........... 162 Adoption taxpayer Real estate transactions1-3) .................... 88379: identification number proceeds ............... 1458879:Injured spouse claim ..... 14 request ............ 13, 35 Form 1116:Authorization for E-file8396: W-9: Foreign tax credit .......... 146provider to useMortgage interest TIN of home seller and Form 2210:self-selected PIN ....... 10credit ............ 147, 248 purchaser ............ 1538880: Underpayment of estimated8453: Form 1040:Credit for Qualified tax ...................... 43Address label ............ 16 Estimated tax payments .... 42Retirement Savings Form 8332:E-file, for signature Foreign income taxes,Contributions ......... 249 Release of exemption torequirement ............ 9 deduction of ............ 1468885: noncustodial parent ...... 278453-OL: Gambling winnings ......... 38Health insurance Form 8814 .................. 204Address label ............ 16 credit ................. 250 Overpayment offset against Form 8919:E-file, for signature 8901: next year's tax ........... 41 Uncollected social security andrequirement ............ 9 Information on Qualifying Reporting sale of home .... 106 Medicare tax on8582: Children Who Are Not Schedule A: wages ................... 44Passive activity gains or Dependents .......... 222 State and local income taxes, Form RRB-1099:losses ............ 70, 108 8910: deduction of .......... 146 Railroad retirement8606: Alternative motor vehicle State benefit funds, benefits .................. 42IRA contributions, credit ................. 247 mandatory contributions Form SSA-1099:Nondeductible ....... 115, 8912: to .................... 143119, 122 Social security benefits ..... 42Credit for Clean Renewable Taxes, deduction of ..... 146IRA contributions, Form W-2:Energy and Gulf Tax Credit Schedule C:Recharacterization Employer-reported incomeBonds ........... 247, 249 Real estate or personalof .................... 121 statement ................ 419465: property taxes on property8615 ...................... 54 Filing with return ........... 41Installment agreement used in business, deductionChildren under age 18 with request ................ 16 Separate form from eachof .................... 146more than $1,700 of Requiring Form 1040 to be used employer ................ 41Schedule E:investment income .... 61, when filing ................ 9 Withheld state and localReal estate or personal204 RRB-1042S: taxes ................... 143property taxes on rentalForm 1040A may be used Railroad retirement benefits Form W-2c:property, deductionwhen filing .............. 8 for nonresident Corrected wage and taxof .................... 146Net investment aliens ................. 78 statement ................ 42Schedule F:income ............... 206 RRB-1099: Form W-2G:Real estate or personalParental information .... 204, Railroad retirement property taxes on property Gambling winnings withholding206 benefits ............... 78 used in business, deduction statement ......... 38, 41, 42Sample completed SS-5 ..................... 233 of .................... 146 Withheld state and local taxesform .................. 207 Social security number Self-employment tax, deduction shown on ............... 1438801: request ............ 13, 35 of ...................... 146 Form W-4:Alternative minimum SSA-1042S: Form 1040, Schedule D: Employee withholdingtax ................... 248 Social security benefits for Reporting sale of home .... 106 allowance certificate ..... 36,8812: nonresident aliens ..... 78 37, 39Form 1040A:Additional child tax SSA-1099: Filling out form andEstimated tax payments .... 42credit ................. 223 Social security worksheets .............. 36Overpayment offset against8814 ...................... 54 benefits ............... 78 next year's tax ........... 41 Form W-4P:Additional tax, figuring W-10 ..................... 213
Form 1040-ES: Pensions and annuitiesof .................... 204 W-2:
withholding certificate ..... 38Estimated tax .......... 39, 41Calculation of child's Box 12 with code L ..... 168,
Form W-4S:Form 1040-ES(NR):income ............... 203 182, 184
Capital gains Election precinct officials' Estimated tax for nonresident Sick pay withholding
distributions .......... 203 fees ................... 88 aliens ................... 39 request .................. 38
Page 278 Publication 17 (2007)

Form W-4V: Rental of dwelling unit used as Business-related Uncollected tax ............ 200
home .................... 68 expenses ............... 175Unemployment compensation, Guam:
voluntary withholding Children, income from propertyFuneral expenses ........... 33 Income from ................ 7
request .................. 38 given to ................. 206Funerals: Guide dogs:
Disaster victims receiving cashForm(s) 1099: Clergy, payment for ........ 48 Deductibility as medicalgifts .................... 165Taxable income report ..... 39, Expenses ................. 195 expense ................ 140Holding period, determination42 Contributions to cover, not
of ...................... 100Forms  (See also Tax deductible as charitable
Holiday gifts ................ 46returns) ..................... 5 donations ............. 157 H
Incidental costs ofFoster care: Not deductible .......... 140 H.R. 10 plans ................ 72business-relatedAdoption as motive for, no Future interests: Handicapped persons  (Seeexpenses ............... 175charitable deduction ..... 157 Definition of ............... 159 Disabilities, persons with)Not taxed .................. 89Care providers' Tangible personal property, Hawaii:Proof of expenses (Table 26-2payments ................ 88 charitable deduction Standard mealsummary) ............... 179Charitable deduction for for ...................... 159 allowance ............... 172Recordkeepingnonprofit care ........... 156 Head of household .......... 20requirements ............ 178Child tax credit ............ 222 Cost of keeping upReporting of expenses ..... 180GDifficulty-of-care home .................... 24Table 26-3 showing forms topayments ................ 89 Gains and losses  (See also Worksheet ............... 24be used .............. 183Emergency foster care, Capital gains; Capital gains or Filing requirements (TableSchedule A (Form 1040) formaintaining space in home losses; Capital losses) ....... 8, 1-1) ..................... 22deduction ............... 180for ....................... 89 22, 107 How to file ................. 22To reduce the publicExpenses unreimbursed and Casualty (See also Casualty
Qualifying person .......... 22debt ..................... 16not deductible as charitable losses) ............ 162, 163
Qualifying person to fileGirl Scouts:contributions ............ 156 Claim for refund for loss .... 18
as ....................... 24Charitable contributionsFoster care payments and Collectibles ............... 109
to ...................... 155 Summary (Table 2-1) ..... 23expenses ................. 31 Financial institution's
Glasses: Qualifying surviving spouse withbankruptcy causingFoster child .......... 27, 30, 31
As medical expense ....... 140 dependent child .......... 24deductible loss .......... 163Earned income credit ...... 235
Reporting of ............ 168 Gold and silver: Health:Foster Grandparent
Gambling (See Gambling As capital assets ........... 99 Flexible spendingProgram .................. 50
winnings and losses) Capital gains or losses from arrangement ............. 46Found property ............. 89
Hobby losses .............. 89 sale or trade of .......... 109 ReimbursementFractional shares:
Ordinary gain and loss ...... 99 IRA investments in ........ 123 arrangement ............. 46Payment for ................ 64
Bank deposit, loss due to Golden parachute payments: Savings account ........... 46Fraternal societies: bank's insolvency or Tax on .................... 200 Health coverage taxCharitable contributions bankruptcy ........... 163 Golf clubs  (See Country clubs) credit ................. 7, 249to ...................... 154 Ordinary loss ............... 99 Goodwill Industries  (See Health insurance  (See alsoDues, no charitable Passive activity (See also Charitable contributions) Accident insurance) ........ 45deduction .......... 155, 158 Passive activity) ...... 22, 70, Government employees: Auto insurance policy covering,Fraud: 108 not deductible as medicalFederal (See FederalLosses due to ............. 163 Related party sale or trade of expense ................ 140employees)Penalties .............. 19, 37 depreciable property ..... 98 State (See State or local Premiums:Reporting anonymously to Short-term ............ 98, 108 governments)IRS ...................... 3 Credit for workers displacedPriority in deducting ..... 109 Graduate school  (See also by foreign trade orFree tax services ........... 266 Sale or trade of property held Educational receiving pension fromFreight: 1 year or less ......... 100 assistance) ............... 131 PBGC ................ 137Basis to include ............ 91 Theft (See also Theft Tuition deduction (See Tuition) Deductible as medicalFringe benefits: losses) ............ 162, 163 expense .............. 140Grants  (See Scholarships andAccident and health Total net gain ............. 108 fellowships) Self-employed persons,insurance ................ 45 Gambling winnings and deductibleGrants, disaster relief ....... 86Accounting period .......... 45 losses ................ 89, 195 expenses ............. 142Gratuities  (See Tip income)Adoption, employer Form 1040 ................. 38 Reimbursement ........... 140Gross income:assistance ............... 46 Withholding ............ 38, 42 Health insuranceAdjustments other than on FormArcher MSA Gaming Industry Tip premiums ................. 331040A, Form 1040 to becontributions ............. 46 Compliance Agreement used ..................... 9De minimis benefits ........ 46 Health savings account .... 140Program .................. 53 Age, higher filing threshold afterEducation assistance ....... 46 Health Spa ................. 196Garbage pickup: 65 ........................ 6Employer-provided Hearing aids:Deductibility (Table Defined ..................... 6vehicles ................. 46 As medical expense ....... 14022-1) ................... 145 Filing requirements (TableForm W-2 .................. 45 Hedging transactions ....... 99Garnishment and 1-1) .................... 5Group-term life insurance Help  (See Tax help)attachment ................ 12premiums ................ 46 Dependent filing requirements High income taxpayers:Gas royalties ................ 85 (Table 1-2) ................ 6Holiday gifts ................ 46 Estimated tax .............. 39Gems: Rental income ............. 65Retirement planning Higher education  (See CollegesAs capital assets ........... 99services ................. 47 Gross income test ........... 30 and universities)IRA prohibited transactionsTaxable income ............ 45 Group-term life insurance: High-low rate method toin ...................... 123Transportation ............. 47 Accidental death compute per diem ........ 182General business credit .... 199Withholding ................ 38 benefits .................. 46 Hobbies .................... 194General Rule  (See Annuities)Frozen deposits: Definition .................. 46 Activity not for profit ........ 87GI Bill benefits .............. 33Interest on ................. 89 Exclusion from income ...... 47 Losses .................... 89Gift taxes:IRA rollover period Limitation on ............. 46
Holding period:extension ............... 120 Not deductible ............ 146 Permanent benefits ......... 46
Determination of .......... 100Full-time student: Gifts: Taxable cost, calculation
Holiday gifts ................ 46Child and dependent care $25 limit on business-related of ....................... 47
credit ................... 211 Holiday, deadline fallingexpenses ............... 175 Uncollected social
on ......................... 40$4 or less for business-related security/Medicare taxes .... 9Fund-raising events:
expenses ............... 175 Holocaust victimsCharitable contributions, Reporting of (Table
restitution ................. 89amount deductible ....... 155 Adjusted basis for .......... 94 1-3) .................... 8
Publication 17 (2007) Page 279

Home  (See also Casualty losses; Tuition deduction and ..... 132, Gross ..................... 30 Filing before contribution is
Mortgages; Refinancing; 228 made ................. 117Illegal income .............. 90
Vacation homes) ....... 67, 68, Nondeductible .......... 119Interest .................... 53Hospitals:
147, 149, 162 Charitable contributions to Investment income ........ 206 Not required
Abandonment of .......... 103 nonprofits ............... 155 annually .............. 117Jury duty pay .............. 89
Acquisition debt (See also 50% limit on Life insurance proceeds .... 83 Roth IRA contribution for
Mortgages) ............. 147 deduction ............. 160 same year ............ 126Nonemployee
Aged, home for ............. 31 Meals and lodging provided for compensation ............ 88 Time of ................. 117
patients, deductibility .... 140As capital asset ............ 99 Paid to agent ............... 12 Withdrawal before filing due
Payments for services forBasis (See Sale of home) Paid to third party .......... 12 date .................. 121
specific patient, notBusiness use of ........... 192 Partnership ................ 84 Cost basis ........... 119, 122
deductible as charitableClosing costs ............. 103 Prepaid .................... 12 Deduction for .......... 8, 117contributions ............ 157Cost of keeping up ......... 24 Recovery .................. 84 Participant covered byServices fees, deductibility ofWorksheet ............... 24 Rental (See Rental income and employer retirement planmedical expense ........ 140Damage to (See also Casualty expenses) (Table 17-1) .......... 118
Host or hostess ............. 83losses) ................. 162 Royalties .................. 85 Participant not covered by
Hotels:Foreclosure ............... 103 S corporation .............. 84 employer retirement plan
Club dues:Improvements: Tax exempt ................ 31 (Table 17-2) .......... 118
Not entertainmentFor medical care, Taxable income in excess of Phaseout ............ 1, 118
expenses ............. 175deductibility ........... 140 $100,000 ................. 9 Definition of ............... 116
Not considered dwellingLoans for ............... 149 Taxable income less than Distributions:units ..................... 67Jointly owned: $100,000 ................. 8 At age 591/2 ........ 123, 124
Household employees ...... 215 Tips (See Tip income)Mortgage payments as Required minimum
Household furnishings:alimony ............... 127 Underreported ............. 17 distributions (See this
Antiques (See Collectibles)Separate residences in and Income aid payment ........ 193 heading: Required
As capital assets ........... 99alimony payments ..... 128 distributions)Income from nonqualified
Taxes and insurance Household items, charitable Divorced taxpayers ........ 121deferred compensation plans:
premiums as deduction for ............ 158 Additional tax on .......... 200 Early distributions (See Early
alimony ............... 127 Household members  (See also withdrawal from deferredIncome taxes:
Main home, defined ....... 102 Head of household) ........ 20 interest account)Federal (See Federal income
Office ..................... 192 Alimony payments, spouses Employer retirement plantax)
Points ..................... 92 cannot be members of same participants ...... 2, 117, 118Foreign (See Foreign income
household .............. 128Possession before final Establishing account ....... 116taxes)
settlement, rent not Household services ........ 212 Time of ................. 116State or local (See State or local
deductible as Household workers  (See income taxes) Where to set up
interest ................. 147 Domestic help) account .............. 116Income-producingRepossession ............. 103 Household workers, no Excess contributions ....... 123expenses ................ 193
Security system ........... 196 exemption for ............. 25 Figuring modified AGIIncome-producing property:Settlement fees ........... 103 (Worksheet 17-1) ....... 119Housing  (See also Home; Deduction of interest on loanTax home, determination for Forms to use:Vacation homes) .... 24, 67, 68 for ...................... 153travel-related business Alimony payments made to Form 1099-R for reportingIndefinite absence from job:expenses ............... 169 cover ................... 127 distributions ...... 42, 122Work-related educationTenants in common, taxes and Clergy ..................... 48 Form 8606 for nondeductibleduring .................. 188insurance premiums as Cooperative (See Cooperative contributions .......... 115Independent contractors:alimony ................. 127 housing) Inherited IRAs ......... 89, 119,Homeworkers, deduction ofHome equity loans: Rental property (See Rental 120, 121expenses ............... 180Car purchased by ......... 178 income and expenses) Conversion to RothIndians:Interest deduction ......... 147 Hurricanes  (See also Disaster IRAs ................. 121Employment credit, recaptureProceeds invested in relief) ..................... 166 Requiredof:tax-exempt securities, interest Casualty loss due to ....... 163 distributions .......... 122Filing requirements (Tablenot deductible ........... 147 Interest on, treatment1-3) .................... 8Home improvement of ...................... 115Fishing rights .............. 89Iloans ..................... 149 Married couples (See thisTaxes collected by tribalIcons, use of ................. 4Home office: heading: Spousal IRAs)governments, deductionCapital gains exclusion .... 106 Identification number, Modified adjusted gross incomeof ...................... 142
Travel to another work qualifying person ........ 211 (MAGI):Individual retirementlocation ................. 177 Illegal income: Computation of ......... 118arrangements (IRAs)  (See
Home schooling: Reporting of ................ 89 Effect on deduction if coveredalso Rollovers; Roth
Expenses not by employer retirementImpairment  (See Disabilities, IRAs) ........ 75, 115-127, 120,
deductible .............. 130 plan (Table 17-1) ...... 118persons with) 125
Homeowners' associations: Effect on deduction if notImpairment-related work Administrative fees ....... 116,
Charges .................. 146 covered by employerexpenses ................ 191 117, 194
retirement plan (TableDeductibility (Table Age 591/2 forImprovements:
17-2) ................. 11822-1) ................. 145 distribution .............. 123Real estate, adjustments to
Charitable contributions Worksheet 17-1 ......... 119Exception to rule ........ 124basis for ................. 92
to ................. 155, 157 NondeductibleRental property (See Rental Age 70 1/2:
contributions ............ 119Homeworkers: income and expenses) Contributions cut off
Early withdrawal ........ 124Deduction of expenses .... 180 at .................... 117Incidental expenses:
Tax on earnings on ...... 119Distributions requiredHope credit ................. 230 Business-related gifts ...... 175
Ordinary income, distributionsat ............... 122, 124Claiming the credit ........ 230 Travel-related ............. 171
as ...................... 122Compensation, defined .... 116Comparison with lifetime Income  (See also Alimony;
Penalties ................. 123Contribution limits ......... 116learning chart (Table Wages and salaries) .... 44-51,
35-1) ................... 226 Age 50 or older, ......... 116 Early distributions (See Early81-90, 87
withdrawal from deferredEligible student ............ 230 Under age 50, .......... 116Bartering ................... 82
interest account)Figuring the credit ......... 230 Contributions ............. 8, 22Canceled debts ............ 82
Excess contributions .... 123Married filing separately ... 22, Designating year for whichConstructive receipt of ..... 12,
226 contribution is60 Form 8606 not filed for
made ................. 117Modified adjusted gross income Excess reimbursement of nondeductible
(MAGI) ................. 229 medical expenses ....... 141 Excess ................. 123 contributions ..... 115, 119
Page 280 Publication 17 (2007)

Financial institution's insolvency Interest income ............. 53 IRAs  (See Individual retirementIndividual retirement
causing deductible arrangements (IRAs))Children:arrangements (IRAs)
loss .................... 100 Israel:Gifts to children ......... 206Penalties (Cont.)
Reporting of ............ 168 Contributions to charitableDividends as ............... 61Overstatement of
organizations in .... 155, 157Installment agreements ..... 16nondeductible Form 1099-INT ......... 12, 42
contributions .......... 119 Itemized deductions:Installment sales ............ 96 Frozen deposits, from ...... 89
Adjusted gross incomeProhibited Capital gains and .......... 108 Property purchase financed
limiting ............ 147, 187transactions .......... 123 Home sale ................ 106 without adequate stated
Changing from standard toRequired distributions, failure interest, treatment of ..... 96Insulin:
itemized deduction (or viceto take .......... 122, 124 Recovery of income, on ..... 84Deductibility as medical
versa) .................. 135Prohibited transactions .... 123 Reporting on Forms 1040,expense ................ 140
Choosing to itemize ....... 1351040A, or 1040EZ ......... 8Recharacterization of Insurance:
Form 1040 to be used .... 9, 84contribution ............. 121 Form 1040EZ filingAccident (See Accident
Limits on .............. 22, 197threshold ............... 8Reporting of: insurance)
Charitable donations,Savings bonds (See also U.S.Distributions ............ 122 Alimony deduction for, when
deduction for ......... 154savings bonds) ........... 89Filing requirements (Table home owned as tenants in
Married filing separately ... 22,Securities, Form 1040 to be1-3) .................... 8 common ................ 127
135used ..................... 9Recharacterization of Casualty or theft loss,
One spouse hasTax refunds, from .......... 17contributions .......... 121 reimbursement to adjust
itemized .............. 134loss .................... 165Required distributions .... 120, Interest payments  (See also
Recovery .................. 84122 Distributions from, reporting Mortgages) ... 71, 84, 146-153
Standard deduction to beof ....................... 64Excess Allocation of interest according compared with .......... 135Dividends:accumulations ........ 124 to use of loan ........... 153
State tax, for .............. 135Interest on ............... 64Retirement savings contribution Canceled debt including .... 82
Itinerant workers:credit ............... 22, 249 Form 1099-R to report Car loans ................. 178
Deduction of expenses .... 180benefits .................. 42Self-employed persons .... 116 Deductions:
Tax home, determinationLife (See also Group-term lifeSpousal IRAs ....... 115, 117, Forms to use (Table of ...................... 169insurance; Life118 23-1) ................. 153
ITINs  (See Individual taxpayerinsurance) ........... 38, 46Taxability ................. 124 Not allowed ............. 152
identification numbers (ITINs))Living expenses paid by,Distributions ............ 122 Reporting of ............ 153
possible incomeTime of taxation ........... 116 Investment interest ........ 151
from .................... 165Transfers permitted ........ 120 Limit on deduction ....... 152 JReimbursements:To Roth IRAs ...... 120, 121 Personal interest not Jewelry:From casualtyTrustee administrative deductible .............. 152 As capital assets ........... 99insurance .............. 87fees .................... 194 Reporting of
State insurer delinquency Job  (See also headings startingTrustee-to-trustee deductions .............. 153
proceedings preventing with ``Employee'' ortransfers ................ 120 Student loan interestminimum pension ``Employer'') ........... 38, 168IRA to Roth IRA ......... 126 deduction ............... 130distributions .............. 77 Search:Types of .................. 116 Student loans deduction ..... 8,Trade of policies and Expenses ............... 19222, 153Withdrawals .......... 121, 123 annuities ................ 97 Job search:Unstated interest ....... 91, 96Early (See Early withdrawal Withholding against Deduction of expenses forfrom deferred interest Interference with businessbenefits .................. 13 Interviews ............... 89account) operations:Insurance agents: Joint accounts .............. 54Required (See this heading: Damages as income ........ 87Deduction of expenses .... 180 Dividends, reporting of ...... 61Required distributions) Internal Revenue Service (IRS):Insurance companies: Joint return of parents:Withholding ........ 13, 38, 122 Fraud or misconduct ofState delinquency proceedings, Investment income of childIndividual taxpayer employee, reportingIRA distributions not made under 18 ................ 202identification numbers anonymously ............. 3due to .................. 124 Joint return test ............. 25(ITINs) ................. 13, 35 Mission of ................... 4Insurance premiums: Joint returns:Individual taxpayers  (See Single Underpayment penalties,Alimony when spouse owns life Accounting period .......... 21taxpayers) computation by .......... 43insurance policy ......... 127 After separate return ........ 22Information returns  (See also International employment  (SeeCasualty insurance ......... 92 Carryover of capitalForm 1099; Form W-2) .... 12, Foreign employment)Health insurance: loss .................... 10913, 39, 41, 44, 45, 48 International organizations,Credit for workers displaced Deceased spouse .......... 21Partnerships to provide ..... 84 employees of ............. 49by foreign trade or Dependents on ............. 30Inheritance  (See also Estate Internet:receiving pension from Divorced taxpayers ......... 21beneficiaries) .............. 88 Electronic filing over (See E-file)PBGC ................ 137 Estimated tax .............. 39Adjusted basis for .......... 94 Standard meal allowanceDeductible as medical Excess social security/railroadHolding period, determination rates ................... 172expense .............. 140 retirement tax withholdingof ...................... 101 Inventory, retail ............. 99Self-employed persons, credit ................... 250IRAs (See Individual retirement Investment property:deductible ............ 142 Extension for citizens outsidearrangements (IRAs)) Rental property (See RentalLiability ................... 192 U.S. ..................... 11Not taxed .................. 89 income and expenses)Life ................... 33, 196 Filing status ................ 21Inheritance tax: Investments:Life insurance ............. 140 Form 1040EZ, use of ........ 8Deductibility of ............ 146 Classes as travelAlimony ................ 127 Fraud penalty .............. 20Deduction ................. 146 expenses ............... 173Medical .................... 33 Guardian of spouse, signingInjured spouse .............. 14 Expenses ................. 152Paid in advance ............ 55 as ....................... 21Claim for refund ............ 14 Fees ..................... 194Rental expenses, deduction of Injured spouse ............. 14Inmate ..................... 211 Property:premiums paid in Innocent spouse ........... 21Innocent spouse relief: advance ................. 66 As capital asset .......... 99 Nonresident or dual-status alien
Form 8857 ................. 21 Definition ............... 151Insurance proceeds: spouse .................. 21
Joint returns ............... 21 Like-kind exchanges ..... 97Dividends, interest on ....... 55 Pensions or annuities ....... 73
Insider stock compensation Installment payments ....... 59 Seminars ................. 196 Worksheet ............... 74
from expatriated corporation: Life ........................ 59 Involuntary conversion  (See Personal exemption ........ 25
Tax on .................... 200 also Condemnation ofInterest: Responsibility for ......... 3, 21
property) ............. 162, 163Insolvency: Fees to collect ............ 194 Separate return after
Basis computation .......... 93Frozen deposits ............ 55 joint ..................... 22Canceled debt not deemed to
Signing ................ 14, 21be income ............... 83 Usurious ................... 55 Basis for depreciation ....... 93
Publication 17 (2007) Page 281

Liability insurance: Local government employees: MACRS (Modified AcceleratedJoint returns: (Cont.)
Cost Recovery System):Reimbursements from ...... 87Social security and railroad Section 457 plans for
Rental property:retirement benefits ....... 81 License fees: employees (See Section 457
Alternative minimumState and local income taxes, deferred compensation plans)Deductibility of ............ 146
tax .................... 70deduction of ............ 143 Nondeductibility of ......... 195 Local income taxes, itemized
MAGI  (See Modified adjustedJudges, federal: deductions ............... 135Life insurance  (See also
gross income (MAGI))Employer retirement plan Accelerated death benefits; Local law violated ........... 30
coverage ............... 117 Mailing returns  (See TaxGroup-term life Lockout benefits ............ 90
returns)Jury duty pay ............... 89 insurance) ........... 9, 46, 83 Lodges  (See Social clubs)
Maintenance of rental propertyAlimony, premiums when Lodging  (See Meal and lodging (See Rental income andspouse owns policy ..... 127 expenses)K expenses)Demutualization of Long-term care insuranceKeogh plans  (See also companies ............... 97 Mandatory retirementcontracts .................. 50Retirement plans) ...... 71, 72 age ....................... 220Form 1099-R for surrender of Chronically ill individual .... 51,Kickbacks ................... 89 policy for cash ........... 83 Market discount bonds ..... 10083Kiddie tax  (See Children, Premiums ................. 196 Married dependents, filing jointDeductibility of medicalsubheading: Investment income Not deductible .......... 140 return ..................... 25expense ................ 140of child under age 18) Proceeds .................. 59 Married filing a jointExclusion, limit of ........... 51Kidnapped children ........ 236 As income ............... 83 return .................... 233Qualified servicesLosses due to ransom ..... 163 Public safety officers who died Married filing separately .... 21,defined .................. 51Qualifying child ............. 27 or were killed in line of duty, 233Long-term debtQualifying relative .......... 29 tax exclusion ............. 84 Carryover of capitalinstruments .............. 100Surrender of policy for loss .................... 109
Long-term gains and lossescash ..................... 83 Community propertyL (See Capital gains or losses)Withholding ................ 38 states ................... 22Labels ....................... 16 Losses  (See also Gains andLife insurance premiums .... 33 Credits, treatment of ........ 22Address correction ......... 16 losses; Passive activity) .... 18, Deductions:Life-care fees:Social security number to be 22, 70 Changing method from or toPaid to retirement home andwritten on ................. 2 Capital (See Capital gains or itemizeddesignated for medical care,Labor unions: losses) deductions ............ 135deductibility ............. 140Collective bargaining Treatment of ............. 22Casualty (See also CasualtyLifetime learning credit:agreements .............. 38 Earned income credit ....... 22losses) ....... 162, 163, 193,Claiming the credit ........ 231Contributions to, no charitable Gross income filing195Comparison with Hope creditdeduction for ............ 155 requirements (Tablechart (Table 35-1) ....... 226 Gambling (See GamblingDues and fees ........ 90, 157 1-1) ..................... 22winnings and losses)Eligible student ............ 230Sick pay withholding under How to file ................. 22Figuring the credit ......... 231 Records of ................ 164union agreements ........ 38 Itemized deductions ....... 22,Married filing separately ... 22, Theft (See also TheftStrike and lockout 135226 losses) ....... 162, 163, 193,benefits .................. 90 One spouse has itemized soModified adjusted gross income 195Trips from union hall to place of other must as well ..... 134(MAGI) ................. 229 Lost property ............... 196work .................... 177 Joint state and local incomeTuition deduction and ..... 132,Unemployment compensation When deemed casualty taxes filed, but separate228payments from ........... 86 loss .................... 163 federal returns .......... 143Like-kind exchanges ........ 97Land  (See also Real Lotteries and raffles  (See also Medical and dentalBasis for depreciation ....... 94estate) ..................... 91 Gambling winnings and expenses ............... 137Qualifications .............. 93Depreciation not allowed losses) .................... 89 Rollovers .................. 22Sale of home .............. 106for ....................... 70 Social security and railroadNo charitable deduction forLimit on credit. ............. 221Landlords  (See Rental income retirement benefits ....... 79tickets ............. 155, 158
Limit on itemized deduction:and expenses) State and local incomeLump-sum distributions ..... 742007 changes ............... 1Landscaping: taxes ................... 14310-year tax option .......... 75Limits:Cost of, when casualty or theft Student loan interest deductionCapital gain treatment ...... 75loss involved ....... 163, 164 Itemized deductions ....... 197 and .................... 131Cost calculation ............ 75 Tenants by the entirety,MiscellaneousLarceny: Election of ................. 75 allocation of real estatedeductions .............. 192Losses due to ............. 163
Form 4972 ................. 75 taxes ................... 145Line of credit for home:Late filing .................... 3
Tuition deduction and ...... 132Net unrealized appreciationInterest ................... 147Penalties .............. 10, 19
(NUA) ................... 75 Married taxpayers  (See alsoLiquidating distributions .... 63Late payment:
Joint returns; Married filingRollovers of ................ 75Penalties on tax Living expenses:
separately; Spouse; Tenants bypayments ................ 19 Taxable and tax-freeInsurance paying, possible the entirety) ....... 3, 8, 21, 22,Public utility charges, not parts .................... 75income from ............ 165 61, 73deductible .............. 153 Luxury travel:Loans  (See also Debts; Student Age 65 or older spouse:Laundry: loans) ......... 8, 18, 130, 153 Travel expenses when Standard deduction ..... 134Business-related travel Fees for, not incidental business Blind spouse:expense ........... 170, 171 deductible .............. 152 activities ................ 172 Standard deduction ..... 134Lavish or extravagant Home improvement Work-related education, Child and dependent careexpenses ................ 175 loans ................... 149 deduction of credit ................... 213Law enforcement officers: Home mortgages (See expenses ............... 190 Deceased spouse (See alsoLife insurance proceeds when Mortgages) Surviving spouse) ...... 5, 6,death in line of duty ...... 84 Origination fees (See Points) 20, 21Retirement plans, from ..... 72Lead-based paint removal: M Definition of spouse forDeductibility as medical Lobbying: M&IE (Meals and incidental purposes of alimony ..... 127expense ................ 140 Contributions for, not charitable expenses)  (See also Incidental Dual-status alien spouse .... 21Leased property: deductions ......... 155, 157 expenses; Meal and lodging Educator expenses ........ 130Casualty or theft loss ...... 164 expenses) ...... 170, 171, 178,Lobbying expenses ........ 196 Estimated tax .............. 39
181Leased vehicles: Local assessments: Filing status ........... 5, 6, 20
Car expenses ............. 178 Machinery  (See alsoAdjusted basis for .......... 92 Form 1040EZ, use of ........ 8
Tools) .................... 177Leases  (See Rental income and Deductibility of ............ 145 Gross income filing
expenses) Rental property, deductions Rental for rental requirements (Table
Legal expenses ....... 194, 196 for ....................... 66 property ................. 66 1-1) ..................... 22
Page 282 Publication 17 (2007)

Deduction ................. 137 Resident of ............ 26, 30 Discounted mortgageMarried taxpayers  (Cont.)
loan ..................... 82Checklist for deductibleIRAs ...................... 117 Mileage deduction for
Ending early, treatment ofexpenses (Table work-relatedSpouse covered by employer
points .................. 15121-1) ................. 139 education ................ 187plan ............. 117, 118
Federally subsidized mortgage,Dependent's expenses .... 138Living apart ................ 20 Mileage rates  (See Standard
recapture of tax paid on homeDetermination of date mileage rates)Medical and dental purchased with .......... 248paid .................... 137expenses ............... 137 Military  (See Armed forces) Interest:Form 1040, Schedule A, forDeceased spouse's Military personnel: Definition ............... 147reporting ................ 141expenses ............. 138 Earned income credit ...... 236 Form 1098 (interestFuture expenses, settlementNonresident alien Mineral royalties ............ 85 statement) ........ 71, 151including ................ 141spouse .............. 13, 21 Ministers  (See Clergy) Refund of ................ 84Health insurance credit .... 249Performing artists ......... 185 Miscellaneous Interest credit (See MortgageHealth insurance premiumsRoth IRAs ................ 125 deductions ............... 191 interest credit)(See Health insurance)Signatures when spouse unable Federal employees buying back Interest deduction:Included expenses:to sign ................... 14 sick leave ................ 51 Sale of home ........... 147Individuals covered ...... 137Social security or railroad Outplacement agency Schedule A (Form 1040) toMeals and lodging related toretirement benefits, fees ..................... 45 deduct ............... 153receiving medicaltaxability ................. 78 Missing children: Late payment charges,care ............... 140, 172Transfer of home to Photographs of, included in IRS deduction of ............ 147Medical care, defined ...... 137spouse ................. 103 publications ............... 3 Lender's charges forPurpose of expenses ...... 137Transfers between services ................ 149Mistakes  (See Errors)Reimbursements, treatmentspouses ............. 94, 97 More than one borrower (notModified adjusted gross incomeof .................. 51, 140Travel expenses for spouse), reporting of interest(MAGI):Work-related .............. 213spouse ................. 171 deduction ............... 153Child tax credit limits ....... 222Medical devices:Mass transit passes, Preparation costs for notes orEducation credits .......... 229Deductibility of ............ 140employer-provided ........ 48 deeds of trust ........... 151Hope credit ............... 229Medical insurance  (See Prepayment:Maternity clothes: IRAs, computation for:Accident insurance) Allocation ofNot deductible as medical Effect on deduction if coveredMedical insurance deduction ............. 147expense ................ 140 by employer retirementpremiums ................. 33 Penalty for, deductionMCC (Mortgage credit plan (Table 17-1) ..... 118,Medical research organizations: of .................... 147certificate) ............... 248 119Charitable contributions Points .................. 149Meal and lodging Effect on deduction if notto ...................... 155 Reported on Formexpenses ............ 171-174 covered by employerMedical savings accounts 1098 ................. 151retirement plan (Table50% deduction for (MSAs)  (See also Archer Proceeds used for business or17-2) ................. 118business-related MSAs) ................. 46, 89 investment, deductionWorksheet 17-1 ......... 119meals ............. 171, 173 Additional tax on .......... 200 of ...................... 153Lifetime learning credit ..... 229Figure 26-A summary of Medicare Advantage Refinancing ............... 149Roth IRAs, computationrules ................. 174 MSA .................... 89 Refund of interest:for ...................... 125Work-related Medical expenses paid for Reported on FormPhaseout (Tableeducation ............. 190 decedent from ........ 138 1098 ................. 15117-3) ................. 125Business-related entertainment Treatment of ............ 149Medicare  (See also Social Worksheet 17-2 ......... 124including ........... 171, 174 Seller-financed ............ 106security and Medicare Money marketBusiness-related travel expense taxes) ............... 9, 45, 49 Mosques  (See Churches,certificates ................ 55including ........... 170, 171 Benefits ................... 87 temples, etc.)Money market funds ........ 63Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to Medicare A, when deductible as Motels  (See Hotels)fill out .................. 184 Money orders:medical expense ........ 139 Moth damage:Lodging .............. 170, 172 Payment of tax ............. 15Medicare Advantage MSA (See Not casualty losses ........ 163Proof of expenses ......... 178 Penalty if not honored ...... 15Medical savings accounts Motor vehicles, donationsTable 26-2 summary .... 179 More information  (See Tax help)(MSAs)) of ........................ 158Recordkeeping Medicare B, when deductible as Mortgage: Moving expenses:requirements ....... 171, 178 medical expense ........ 139 Relief ...................... 82 Standard mileage rates ...... 1Reporting of ............... 180 Medicare D, when deductible as Mortgage credit certificate MSAs  (See Medical savingsmedical expense ........ 140Table 26-3 showing forms to (MCC) .................... 248 accounts (MSAs))be used .............. 183 Medicare tax ............... 200 Mortgage insurance premiums: Multiple supportRestaurant receipts ........ 178 Medicare taxes, not Basis in property not to agreement ................ 33Standard meal support ................... 33 include .................. 92 Municipal bonds ............ 59allowance ..... 171, 172, 181 Medications: Definition ................. 151 Museums:Amount of .............. 172 Deductibility as medical Form 1098 reporting ....... 151 Charitable contributionsAreas outside continental expense ................ 140 Limit on deduction ......... 151 to ...................... 155U.S. .................. 172 Member of household or Schedule A (Form 1040) to Musicians andProrating on partial days of relationship test ........... 30 deduct .................. 153 entertainers .............. 193travel ................. 182 Members of the uniformed Mortgage interest credit .... 248 Mutual funds ............... 194Taking turns paying for meals or services or Foreign Carryforward .............. 248 Adjusted basis of shares .... 95entertainment ........... 175 Service ................... 105 Form 8396 ................ 147 Allocated expenses ........ 194Transportation workers .... 172 Membership fees  (See specific How to take ............... 248 Capital gains ............... 63Deduction limits ......... 174 type of organization) Recapture ................ 248 Dividends from ............. 63Medical and dental Mentally incompetent persons Reduced deduction ........ 248 Exempt-interestexpenses ............ 137-142 (See also Disabilities, persons Mortgages  (See also dividends ................ 64Adjusted gross income and limit with; Elderly or disabled, credit Points) ............... 149, 153 Nonpublicly offered ........ 194of deduction ............ 137 for) .................. 8, 50, 72 Alimony, payments as ..... 127 Publicly offered ............ 194Adopted child ............. 138 Signing of return by Assistance payments ...... 87, Undistributed capitalcourt-appointedAlimony payments made to 147 gains ................... 108representative ........... 14cover ................... 127 Assumption of .............. 91 Credit for tax on ......... 249
Contributions to cover, not Metals, precious  (See Gold and Fees not included in
deductible as charitable silver) basis .................. 92
Ndonations ............... 157 Mexico: Credit certificate (MCC) from
Name change ........... 12, 42Damages including ........ 141 Contributions to charitable state or local
Decedent's expenses ...... 138 organizations in .... 155, 157 government ............. 147 Nanny tax  (See Domestic help)
Publication 17 (2007) Page 283

National Housing Act: Nursing care: Peace Corps allowances .... 49P
Employment taxes for worker Pell grants:Mortgage assistance ...... 87, Paper vs. electronic return  (See
providing medical care,147 Tuition deduction, effectE-file)
deductibility of .......... 140 on ...................... 132National of the United Paperwork Reduction Act ofFor healthy baby, not deductibleStates ..................... 26 Penalties:1980 ....................... 3as medical expense ..... 140 Accuracy-related ........... 19Native Americans  (See Indians) Parental responsibility  (SeeWages for, deductibility as Alimony deduction, failure toNegligence penalties ........ 19 Children)medical expense ........ 140 provide social securityNet investment income ..... 152 Parents who neverNursing homes: number of recipient ...... 129married ................... 28Net operating losses: Insurance for care in (See Backup withholding ......... 39Parents, divorced orCasualty or theft losses .... 168 Long-term care insurance Check not honored ......... 15separated ............ 27, 237Refund of carryback ........ 18 contracts) Civil penalties .............. 19Divorced parents .......... 238New Jersey Nonoccupational Meals and lodging, deductible Criminal ................... 20Parking fees:Disability Benefit as medical expense ..... 140 Deductibility .......... 152, 196Business-related travel .... 178Fund ..................... 143 Nutrition Program for the Defenses .................. 19Commuting expense ....... 177New Jersey Unemployment Elderly .................... 87 Estimated tax (See thisEmployer-provided fringeCompensation Fund ..... 143 Nutritional supplements: heading: Underpayment ofbenefit:New job, trade, or business: Not deductible as medical estimated tax)Exclusion fromEmployment agency expense ................ 140 Failure to include social securityincome ................ 47fees .................... 192 number .............. 13, 20Medical-related travel ...... 140Job search expenses ...... 192 Failure to pay tax ........... 19Sports arena, business-relatedOTravel expenses .......... 192 Failure to provide social securityentertainment subject to 50%OASDI ....................... 87 number or TIN:Work-related education limit .................... 174Occupational taxes ......... 193 Alimony deduction ....... 129expenses ............... 189 Parks and recreation facilities:Deduction of: Home seller andNew York Nonoccupational Charitable contributionsTaxes that are deductible purchaser ............ 153Disability Benefit to ...................... 155(Table 22-1) .......... 145 To dividend payers ....... 61Fund ..................... 143 Parochial school tuition:Office rent, deductibility Form 8606 not filed forNightclubs: No charitableof ........................ 193 nondeductible IRAdeduction ............... 158Cover charges, 50% limit on contributions ....... 115, 119Office, use of home as ..... 192deduction ............... 174 Partners and Fraud .................. 19, 20Offset against debts ....... 9, 14 partnerships ............. 194Nobel Prize .................. 89 Frivolous tax submission .... 20OID  (See Original issue discount Capital gains or lossesNominees ............... 54, 59 Interest on ................. 15(OID)) from .................... 108Dividends that belong to IRAs ...................... 123Oil, gas, and minerals: Income .................... 84someone else ........ 62, 64 Early distributions ....... 123Future production sold ...... 86 Investment interest ........ 152Nonaccountable plans for Excess contributions .... 123Royalties from ............. 85 Related partyemployee Form 8606 not filed forSchedule C or C-EZ ...... 85 transactions ............. 98reimbursements ..... 181, 183 nondeductibleSale of property interest .... 86 Passive activity ............. 96Noncapital assets ........... 99 contributions ..... 115, 119Older taxpayers: Losses ............... 22, 152Nonemployee Overstatement ofCredit for the elderly ....... 218 Exception for real estatecompensation ............. 88 nondeductibleprofessionals .......... 70Online help:Nonrefundable credits ...... 246 contributions .......... 119Investment interestEITC Assistant ............ 232Nonresident alien ..... 211, 233 Required distributions, failureand .................. 151Online Payment AgreementNonresident aliens ........... 7 to take ............... 122Rental property .......... 70application ................ 16 Late filing .............. 10, 19Due dates ................. 10 Reporting of gains orOptions ................. 48, 63 Exception ................ 19losses .................. 108Estimated tax .............. 39 Charitable contributions, date Late payment .............. 19Pass-through entities ...... 194Form 1040EZ, use of ........ 8 of ...................... 160 Negligence ................ 19Patents:Individual taxpayer identification Ordinary dividends  (See Reportable transactionInfringement damages ...... 87number (ITIN) ............ 13 Dividends) understatements ......... 19Royalties .................. 85Spouse .................... 13 Ordinary gain ............... 99 Roth IRAs:Patronage dividends ........ 64Joint returns not Ordinary gain and loss  (See Conversion contributionsPayment of tax .... 3, 10, 15, 16,available .............. 21 Gains and losses) withdrawn in 5-year18Organ donors:Separated ............... 23 period ................ 127By check or money order .... 3,Deductibility of medicalTransfers between spouses Excess contributions .... 12615, 41expense ................ 140when one spouse is Substantial understatement ofBy credit card ........ 3, 11, 15Original issue discountnonresident alien ....... 97 income tax ............... 19By electronic means ........ 15(OID) ...................... 59Standard deduction ........ 134 Tax evasion ................ 20Credit card ........... 15, 41Adjusted basis and ......... 95Tuition deduction and ...... 132 Tips, failure to report ........ 52Electronic Federal TaxDiscounted debt Underpayment of estimatedWaiver of alien status ....... 49 Payment Systeminstruments .............. 99 tax .......... 35, 41, 42, 203Nontaxable payments: (EFTPS) ........... 15, 41Form 1099-OID ............ 42 Willful failure to file ......... 20Funds withdrawal .... 15, 35,Credit for the elderly or the Origination fees  (See Points) Withholding ............ 37, 3941disabled ................ 220 Other taxes ................. 199 Pennsylvania UnemploymentDelivery services ......... 3, 10Nontaxable trades  (See Tax-free Out of work ................ 218 Compensation Fund ..... 143Estimated tax .......... 15, 41exchanges) Outplacement services ...... 45 Installment agreements (See Pensions  (See also Annuities;Northern Mariana Islands: Deduction of agency Installment agreements) Railroad retirement benefits;Income from ................ 7 fees ..................... 45 Late payment penalties ..... 19 Rollovers) .... 71-77, 72, 75, 77Notary fees .................. 88 Overpayment of tax  (See also Payable to ''United States 457 plans (See Section 457Not deductible as Tax refunds) ............... 14 Treasury`` ................. 3 deferred compensation plans)interest ................. 151 Overseas work  (See Foreign Vouchers .................. 41 Clergy ..................... 48Notes: employment) Payments ............. 200, 201 Contributions:As obligations of Over-the-counter drugs: Disaster relief .............. 87 Elective deferralindividuals .............. 100 Not deductible as medical Payroll deductions .... 146, 161 amounts ................ 1
Discounted ............ 45, 59 expense ................ 140 Withholding (See also Retirement savings
Received for services ....... 45 Overtime pay ................ 37 Withholding) ............. 35 contribution credit ..... 22,
Not-for-profit activities ...... 87 249Oxygen equipment and oxygen: Payroll taxes  (See also Social
Taxation of .............. 48Deductibility as medicalNursery schools  (See Child and security and Medicare taxes;
expense ................ 140dependent care credit) Withholding) ........... 35, 45 Cost computation .......... 73
Page 284 Publication 17 (2007)

Work-related education Power of attorney ....... 14, 21 Psychiatric care:Pensions  (Cont.)
expenses ............... 191Decedent's unrecovered Preferred stock: Specially equipped medical
investment in ............ 13 Permanent and total centers, deductibility ofRedeemable at a
disability ................. 218Definition of ............ 76, 77 expense ................ 140premium ................. 64
Disability pensions ......... 50 Personal exemption ..... 24-35, Public assistancePremature distributions  (See
Credit for ................ 72 25 benefits ................... 86Early withdrawal from deferred
Joint return ................ 25Early distributions: interest account) Public debt:
Limits ...................... 22Exceptions to tax on ...... 76 Prepaid: Gifts to reduce ............. 16
Phaseout ........... 22, 25, 34Qualified retirement plans, Insurance .................. 55 Public parks and recreationSpouse's exemption ........ 25exceptions for .......... 76 Preparer's fee: facilities:
Tax on ................... 76 Personal injury suits: Deductible amount ........ 193 Charitable contributionsDamages from ............. 87Elderly persons, credit Preparers of tax returns ..... 14 to ...................... 155for ....................... 72 Personal interest: Prepayment: Public safety officers insuranceElective deferral Not deductible ............ 152 premiums ................. 71Insurance premiums:limitation ................. 48 Personal property  (See also Deductibility as medical Public transportation passes,Employer plans: Casualty losses) .......... 166 expense .............. 140 employer-provided ........ 48Benefits from previous As capital assets ........... 99 Mortgage interest (See Public utilities  (See Utilities)employer's plan ....... 118 Rental income from ......... 85 Mortgages) Publication 1244:Rollover to IRA .......... 121 Taxes (See Personal property Rent paid in advance ....... 65 Daily record of tips (FormSituations in which no taxes) Prescription medicines: 4070A) .................. 52coverage ............. 118 Theft of (See Theft losses) Deductibility as medical Reporting tips toEstimated tax .............. 72 Personal property taxes: expense ................ 140 employer ................ 52Excess accumulation, tax on Car taxes ................. 178 Presidential Election Campaign Publication 584:(See also this heading: Deduction of .............. 146 Fund ...................... 13 Casualty and theft losses,Required Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form Presidentially declared workbook for ............ 162distributions) ......... 76, 77 1040) ................ 146 disasters  (See Disaster relief) Publication 78 .............. 155Foreign employment Taxes (See Personal property Prevention of cruelty to childrencontributions ............. 73 List of qualified organizations fortaxes) or animals organizations:Form 1099-R ............... 42 charitablePersonal representatives  (See CharitableGeneral Rule for nonqualified contributions ............ 154Fiduciaries) contributions ............ 154plans and qualified plans for Publications  (See Tax help)Persons with disabilities  (See Price reduced afterrecipients over 75 Puerto Rico:Disabilities, persons with) purchase .................. 83years .................... 73 Residents of ................ 7Photographs: Principal residence  (See Home)Inherited pensions .......... 89 Casualty or theft loss Pulitzer Prize ................ 89Prisoner .................... 211Joint returns ............... 73 claims .................. 165 Punitive damages:Loans from plan ............ 72 Privacy Act and paperworkPhysician certification ...... 218 As income ................. 87reduction information ...... 3Lump-sum distributions (See Physician's statement ...... 218also Lump-sum Private delivery services ..... 3,Veterans .................. 220distributions) ............. 74 10 QPlace for filing ............. 5, 16Military (See Armed forces) Private schools: Qualified dividends ...... 62, 65Planes  (See Aircraft)Multiple pension plan Charitable deduction for Qualified domestic relationsPlants and trees:benefits .................. 72 tuition .................. 158 orders (QDROs):Cost of, when casualty or theftPartly taxable payments .... 73 Prizes and awards  (See alsoloss involved ....... 163, 164 Rollover of retirement planReporting of ................ 72 Bonuses) ........... 37, 44, 89 distribution ............... 76Plastic surgery:Required distributions: Exclusion from income ...... 44Not deductible as medical Qualified education expenses:At age 701/2 .............. 77 Pulitzer, Nobel, and similarexpense when Education credits ..... 228, 229Excise tax for failure to take prizes ................... 89cosmetic ................ 140minimum Work-related education,Scholarship prizes .......... 90Points ...................... 149distributions ........... 77 businessProbationary work periods:Basis in property not toForm 5329 for failure to deduction ........... 189-190Travel expenses during .... 171include .................. 92receive required Qualified Education Programs,Professional licenseDefinition ................. 149minimum, .............. 77 Payments from:fees ...................... 196Excess points ............. 151State insurer delinquency Form 1099-Q .............. 42ProfessionalForm 1098 reporting ....... 151proceedings preventing Qualified individuals:Reputation ............... 196Limits on deduction ........ 151minimum Under age 65 and retired onProfessionals:Main home purchase, specialdistributions ........... 77 permanent and totalEntertainment expenses fortreatment of .............. 92State and local government disability ................ 218attending associationMortgage ending early ..... 151employees (See Section 457 Qualified plans  (See alsomeetings ............... 175Paid by seller ............. 151deferred compensation plans) Retirement plans;Profit-sharing plans:Refinancing ............... 149Unrecovered investment Rollovers) .......... 71, 75, 120Form 1099-R ............... 42Schedule A (Form 1040) toin ...................... 195 Qualified student loan  (SeeLump sums (See Lump-sumdeduct .................. 153Withholding ..... 13, 38, 72, 75 Student loan interest deduction)distributions)Second home ............. 149Pentagon attacks  (See Terrorist Qualified tuitionWithholding ............ 13, 38Settlement statement shows asattacks) programs ................. 90Promissory notes:charged forPer capita taxes: Additional tax on .......... 200mortgage ............... 149 Charitable contributions, dateDeductibility of ............ 146 of ...................... 160 Filing requirements (TablePolitical campaignPer diem: 1-3) ...................... 8expenses ................ 196 Proof of businessAllowance or expense .................. 178 Qualifying child ............. 26Political contributions  (Seereimbursement .... 180, 181, Table 26-2 summary ....... 179Campaign contributions) Qualifying person:182
Proof of loss ............... 164Political conventions: Child and dependent careCharitable organization service,
Travel expenses .......... 173 credit ................... 209Property  (See also Realfor ...................... 157
estate) ................ 91, 101Post office employees: Qualifying relative ........... 29Federal rate ............... 181
Found ..................... 89Rural mail carriers ......... 177High-low rate method to
Stolen ..................... 90compute ................ 182 Postponed tax deadlines:
RProstheses:Standard meal Disaster areas ............ 168
allowance ............... 172 Raffles ...................... 89Deductibility of medicalPostponement of gain:
expense ................ 140Performing artists: Sale of home .............. 104 No charitable deduction for
tickets ............. 155, 158Business expenses ........ 185 Adjusted basis ........... 93 Protective clothing ......... 193
Publication 17 (2007) Page 285

Railroad retirement benefits Rebates  (See Refunds) Regulated investment Deductions ............ 66, 70
(See also Excess withholding companies: Losses that exceed passiveRecapture:
credit) ...... 72, 77-81, 90, 246 income ................ 70Undistributed capital gains,Alimony ................... 129
Deductions related to ....... 81 Depreciation (See alsocredit for tax on ......... 249Reporting on Form
Employer retirement plans Depreciation) ........ 66, 701040 ................. 129 Rehabilitative program
different from ........... 118 Dwelling unit not used asAlternative motor vehicle payments ................. 49
home .................... 70Equivalent tier 1 (social security credit ................... 247 Reimbursement  (See also Per Dwelling unit used asequivalent benefit Credits ..................... 8 diem; Recovery of amounts home .................... 67(SSEB)) ............. 78, 90 Filing requirements (Table previously deducted) ...... 84, Capital gainsEstimated tax .............. 79 1-3) .................... 8 180, 181, 182, 184 exclusion ............. 106Form RRB-1099 ........ 42, 78 New markets credit, filing Accountable plans, definition Computation of income andIncome ..................... 8 requirements (Table of ...................... 181 expenses .............. 70Joint returns ............... 81 1-3) ...................... 8 Allocation of ............... 184 Days used for repairs andLump-sum election ......... 79 Taxes .................... 200 Casualty losses ........... 165 maintenance ........... 68Married filing separately ... 22, Recharacterization: Employee business Determining if used as79 IRA contributions .......... 121 expenses ........ 37, 44, 174 home .................. 67Repayment of benefits ...... 79 Recording fees: Gain from casualty or theft Division of expenses ..... 68Reporting of ................ 79 Basis to include ............ 91 loss .................... 165 Donation of use ofTaxability of ............ 78, 79 Recordkeeping: Health insurance, property ............... 68Withholding ................ 38 Gambling ................. 195 reimbursement in later Figuring days of personalNot tax deductible ....... 146 General requirements ..... 191 year .................... 141 use ................... 68Withholding for ............. 79 Sale of home .............. 104 Medical and dental Limit for rental losses ..... 70Railroad retirement tax (RRTA) Savings bonds used for expenses ............... 140 Main home(See also Excess withholding education ................ 58 Excess reimbursement determination .......... 68credit) .................... 246 Recordkeeping flowchart (Figure Rented for 15 days orRailroad Unemployment requirements .............. 17 21-A) ................. 141 more .................. 70Insurance Act ............. 51 Business travel Rented for fewer than 15Mileage (See Standard mileageReal estate  (See also Mortgages; expenses .......... 171, 178 days ........... 65, 67, 70rates)Vacation homes) ....... 67, 68, Copies of returns ........... 17 Shared equity financingPersonal expenses ........ 180147 Destroyed records ......... 179 agreement ............. 68Received after deductingAs noncapital assets ........ 99 Documentary evidence .... 178 Equipment rental for rentalloss .................... 166Basis ...................... 91 Electronic records of tips .... 52 property ................. 66Returning excess for businessCanceled business debt, Form W-2 .................. 17 Expenses paid by tenant .... 65expenses ........... 37, 182treatment of .............. 83 Gambling .................. 89 Fair rental price ............ 67Tax year of inclusion forCasualty loss ............. 167 Incomplete records ........ 179 Home possession before finalinsuranceClosing costs .............. 91 Meal expenses: settlement, rent notreimbursement .......... 166Definition of ................ 91 Actual cost .............. 171 deductible asDivision of real estate Theft losses ............... 165Standard meal interest ................. 147taxes ................... 144 Travel advances .......... 182allowance ............ 171 Improvements .............. 66Fair market value (FMV) .... 91 Types of .................. 165Period of retention ..... 17, 180 Defined .................. 66Form 1099-S to report sale Tip income ................. 51 Unclaimed ................ 190 Increase due to higher realproceeds .......... 108, 145 Travel expenses ..... 171, 178 Work-related education estate taxes ............ 146Holding period, determination Work-related education expenses ............... 190 Deductibility (Tableof ...................... 101 expenses ............... 191 22-1) ................. 145Reinvestment plans:Itemized charges for services Records of loss ............ 164 Insurance premiums paid inDividends used for ......... 63not deductible ........... 146 advance ................. 66Records to keep ............ 160 Related partyPoints .................... 149 Local assessments ......... 66Recovery of amounts transactions .............. 98Progressive deterioration, not Losses from rental real estatepreviously deducted ...... 84 Indirect transactions ........ 98casualty loss ............ 163 activities ............. 22, 70Itemized deductions ........ 84 Like-kind exchanges .... 97, 98Real estate-related items not Not-rented-for-profitMortgage interest refund .... 84 Multiple property sales ordeductible .............. 145 property ................. 66Over multiple years ......... 84 trades ................... 98Rental (See Rental income and Part interest ............ 65, 66Stolen property, adjustment of Relationship test ........ 26, 30expenses) Part of property rented ...... 67theft loss ............... 164Settlement fees ............ 91 Relative, qualifying .......... 29 Personal property rental .... 85Tax refunds ................ 84Taxes (See Real estate taxes) Relief fund Personal use of propertyRed Cross:Transfer taxes ............ 146 contributions ............ 196 including vacationBlood donations notReal estate investment trusts Relief funds  (See also Disaster home .................... 67deductible ......... 155, 158(REITs): relief) ..................... 166 Allocation ofCharitable contributionsDividends from ............. 63 Religious organizations  (See expenses .............. 66to ...................... 155Undistributed capital also Churches, temples, etc.; Pre-rental expenses ........ 66Redeemable ground rents:gains ................... 108 Clergy) ........ 7, 48, 155, 156 Property or services receivedDeduction as mortgageCredit for tax on ..... 63, 249 instead of money ......... 65Charitable contributionsinterest ................. 147Real estate taxes: Purchaser's payment of rent,to ................. 154, 155Redemption of bonds ....... 96Alimony deduction for, when not included in property50% limit onState and local bonds, beforehome owned as tenants in basis .................... 92deduction ............. 160maturity ................. 99common ................ 127 Repairs .................... 66Written statement notRedemption of stock ........ 96Assessments (See Local Reporting of ................ 71needed ............... 156Refinancing:assessments) Sale of rental property ...... 66Remainder interest, saleFees for, not part of propertyBasis of property and ....... 91 Schedule E for reportingof ........................ 107basis .................... 92When not reimbursed by of ....................... 71Rental income:Points .................... 149property seller ......... 92 Security deposits ........... 65Uncollected rent ............ 66Refund of expenses  (See nameCooperative housing (See Self-employment tax, whenRental income andof benefit)Cooperative housing) applicable ............... 71expenses .............. 65-71Refundable credits ......... 249deduction of ............... 144 Tax return preparation ...... 66
Advance rent ............... 65List of deductible taxes (Table Refunds .................... 200 Tax shelters and at-risk
Canceling lease, payments22-1) ................. 145 Mortgage interest, treatment rules .................... 70
for ....................... 65Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form of ...................... 149 Time to report .............. 65
Capitalized costs ........... 661040) ................ 146 State tax ................... 84 Travel expenses associated
Refund, treatment of ....... 145 Taxes (See Tax refunds) Change of property to rental with management and
Taxes (See Real estate taxes) Tuition refunds ............ 132 use .................. 67, 95 maintenance ............. 66
Page 286 Publication 17 (2007)

Retirement plans  (See also Retirement savings contribution To traditional IRA for sameRental income and expenses
Annuities; Railroad retirement credit .................... 249 year .................. 126(Cont.)
benefits; Rollovers; Roth Adjusted gross income Conversion ............... 126Vacant rental property ...... 66
IRAs) ........ 22, 71, 72, 75, 77 limit ..................... 22 Definition of ............... 125Reorganizations, corporate:
Distributions:457 plans (See Section 457 Returns, tax  (See Tax returns)Nontaxable trade of
Qualifieddeferred compensation plans) Revenue stamps:stock .................... 97
distributions .......... 126Clergy ..................... 48 Basis to include ............ 91Repairs: Effect of modified AGI onContributions ............... 48 Revolving charge accounts:Basis, effect on ......... 91, 92 contributions (TableCredit for (See Retirement Finance charges, notCost of, when casualty or theft 17-3) ................... 125savings contribution credit) deductible .............. 153loss involved ............ 164 Establishing account ....... 125Elective deferralRental expenses ........... 66 Rewards .................... 90 Excess contributions ....... 126amounts ................ 1Repayment: Rhode Island Temporary Failed conversions andTaxation of .............. 48 Disability BenefitAmount previously included in recharacterizations ..... 121,Fund ..................... 143income ................. 195 Cost computation .......... 73 126Decedent's unrecovered Robbery:Repayments ................. 85 IRA transfer to ....... 120, 121investment in ............ 13 Losses due to ............. 163Social security benefits .... 79, Modified adjusted gross income85 Definition of ............ 76, 77 Rollovers ............... 75, 120 (MAGI) ................. 125Unemployment Disability pensions ......... 50 Beneficiaries, Computation (Worksheetcompensation ............ 86 restrictions ............... 76Credit for ................ 72 17-2) ................. 124Definition of ............... 120Reporting: Early distributions: Phaseout (TableDesignated RothRollovers ................. 121 Exceptions to tax on ...... 76 17-3) ................. 125account .................. 75Repossession of home ..... 103 Tax on ................... 76 Penalties ................. 126Direct rollovers ............. 75Requests for information from Elderly persons, credit Conversion contributionsEligible distributions ........ 75IRS ........................ 17 for ....................... 72 withdrawn in 5-yearExcess due to incorrect rolloverRequired minimum period ................ 127Elective deferral information ............. 123distributions  (See also Excess contributions .... 126limitation ................. 48 From 403 plan to IRA ...... 120Individual retirement Spousal contributions ...... 125Employer plans: From employer's plan toarrangements (IRAs); Taxability ................. 126Benefits from previous IRA ............... 120, 121Pensions) ........ 77, 120, 122 Withdrawals ............... 127employer's plan ....... 118 From IRA to IRA .......... 120 Excess contributions .... 126Rescue squad members: Rollover to IRA .......... 121 From IRA to Roth IRA ..... 126 Not taxable ............. 126Life insurance proceeds when Situations in which no From Roth IRA to Rothdeath in line of duty ...... 84 Rounding off dollars ........ 13coverage ............. 118 IRA .................... 126Research expenses: Royalties .................... 85Estimated tax .............. 72 From section 457 plan toCollege professor ......... 193 RRTA tax  (See also ExcessExcess accumulation, tax on IRA .................... 120Reservists: withholding credit) ......... 246(See also this heading: From SIMPLE IRA to RothDeduction for transportation Required Rural mail carriers ......... 177IRA .................... 126expense ................ 176 distributions) ......... 76, 77 Gain from publicly tradedIRAs ...................... 118 Foreign employment securities ............... 101Repayments .............. 116 Scontributions ............. 73 Inherited IRAs ............. 120Residency: S corporations ............. 194Form 1099-R ............... 42 Lump-sum distributions ..... 75Home outside U.S. (See Capital gains or lossesGeneral Rule for nonqualified Married filing separately .... 22Citizens outside U.S.) from .................... 108and qualified plans for Nonspouse beneficiary .... 71,
Main home, defined ....... 102 Related partyrecipients over 75 76
transactions ............. 98Residency test .............. 27 years .................... 73 Nontaxable amounts ........ 75
Shareholders .............. 84Resident aliens: Inherited pensions .......... 89 Partial rollovers ........... 120
Investment interest ...... 152Earned income credit ...... 233 Qualified domestic relationsIRAs (See Individual retirement
Safe deposit box ........... 194Estimated tax .............. 39 orders for distribution ofarrangements (IRAs))
IRA distributions, withholding retirement plan funds ..... 76 Salaries  (See Wages andJoint return ................ 73
from .................... 122 Reporting: salaries)Keogh plans ............... 72
Social security number From employer's plan to Sale of home  (See also RealLoans from plan ............ 72
(SSN) ................... 13 IRA .................. 121 estate) ........ 70, 90, 102-107Lump-sum distributions (SeeSpouse treated as .......... 23 IRA to IRA .............. 120 Abandonment ............. 103also Lump-sum Retirement bondResidential energy Adjusted basis ............ 103distributions) ............. 74 redemption .............. 76credits ................... 248 Amount realized ........... 103Military (See Armed forces) Surviving spouse ........... 76 Basis ..................... 103Resorts: Multiple pension plan Taxability ............ 120, 125 Capital gains exclusion .... 104Travel expenses when benefits .................. 72 Time limits (60-day Division of real estateincidental business Partly taxable payments .... 73 rule) .................... 120 taxes ................... 144activities ................ 172 Reporting of ................ 72 Treatment of .............. 120 Employer, payment by ..... 102Restaurant employees: Required distributions ...... 77 Waiting period Federal subsidy, recaptureTips (See Tip income) At age 701/2 .............. 77 between ................ 120 of ...................... 107Retail installment contracts: Excise tax for failure to take Withholding tax ............. 75 Foreclosure orFinance charges, not minimum Roth IRAs  (See also repossession ........... 103deductible .............. 153 distributions ........... 77 Rollovers) ........ 125-127, 126 Form 1099-S .............. 103Retail inventory ............. 99 Form 5329 for failure to Age: Gain or loss, figuring of .... 102Retention of records  (See receive required minimum Distributions after age Interest deduction forRecordkeeping requirements) retirement plan 59 .................... 127 mortgage ............... 147Retired Senior Volunteer distributions ........... 77 No limit for Interest paid to seller, reportingProgram .................. 50 State insurer delinquency contributions .......... 125 of ...................... 153
Retirees  (See also Retirement proceedings preventing No required distribution Jointly owned home ....... 103
plans) ..................... 71 minimum age .................. 127 Land ..................... 102
Armed forces: distributions ........... 77 Compensation, defined .... 125 Main home, defined ....... 102
Taxable income .......... 49 Section 457 plans (See Section Contribution limits ......... 125 More than one home ...... 102
Withholding .............. 36 457 deferred compensation Age 50 or older, ......... 126 Sold in 2-year period .... 106
plans)Retirement of bonds ... 96, 100 Under age 50, .......... 126 Option to buy ............. 102
Rollover of amount State and local government Contributions .............. 125 Period of ownership and
redeemed ............... 76 employees (See Section 457 No deduction for ........ 125 use ..................... 104
deferred compensation plans)Retirement planning Roth IRA only ........... 125 Points paid by seller ....... 151
services ................... 47 Withholding ..... 13, 38, 72, 75 Time to make ........... 126 Postponed gain from ....... 93
Publication 17 (2007) Page 287

Scholarships and Interest to purchase or carry, Deductibility of ............ 152Sale of home  (Cont.)
fellowships ................. 8 not deductible ......... 152 Employer treating as wages forRecordkeeping ............ 104
Tenants by the entirety owning, tip income ............... 52Earned incomeReporting of gain .......... 106
reporting of dividends ..... 61including ................ 135 Service Corps of RetiredSeller-financed
Tenants in common owning,Exclusion from gross Executives (SCORE) ...... 50mortgage ............... 106
reporting of dividends ..... 61income .................. 90 Services:Selling price ............... 102
Worthless securities ........ 96Teaching or research No charitable deduction forSettlement fees or closing fellowships ............... 90 Security deposits: value of ................. 155costs ................... 103
Tuition deduction, effect Rental property, for ......... 65 Property received for ....... 93Trading homes ............ 103 on ...................... 132 Self-employed persons  (See Settlement date of securitiesTransfer to spouse ....... 103, Scientific organizations: also Self-employment transaction ............... 100105
Charitable contributions tax) ....................... 146 Settlement fees:Undeducted points ........ 102 to ...................... 154 Corporate directors as ...... 88 Real propertySale of property ......... 95-101 Definition ................... 7Scrip dividends ............. 64 transactions ............. 91Adjusted basis ............. 96 Filing requirements (TableSecond homes  (See Vacation Sale of home .............. 103Amount realized ............ 96 1-3) ...................... 8homes) Severance pay .............. 45Basis other than cost ....... 97 Foreign government orSecond mortgages: Accrued leave payment ..... 45Business property that has international organizations,Interest ................... 147 Outplacement services ..... 45undergone change of U.S. citizens employedSection 1202 exclusion: Shipping:use ...................... 95 by ........................ 7Capital gains or losses Business-related travelCash payment ............. 97 Gross income ............... 6under ................... 109 expense ................ 170Debt payoff included in ..... 96 Health insurance costs,Section 1244 stock: Shipwrecks:Definition of ................ 96 deductible as medicalLosses on ................ 100 Casualty loss due to ....... 163Fair market value (FMV) .... 96 expense ................ 142Section 1250 gains: Short tax year:Figuring gain or loss ........ 96 Homeworkers, deduction of Change in annual accountingSale of real property subjectForm 1099-B ............... 96 expenses ............... 180 period .................. 134to ...................... 109 IRAs ...................... 116Like-kind exchanges ........ 97 Short-term debt instruments:Section 179 deductions: Meal allowance not permittedPersonal items ............. 90 Government obligations ..... 99Adjustment to basis for ..... 92 when more than 10%Redemption of stock ........ 96 Ordinary gain .............. 99Car expenses ............. 178 ownership ofRental property that has Short-term gains andSection 457 deferred corporation ............. 181undergone change of losses ................ 98, 108compensation plans ...... 72 Ministers .................... 7use ...................... 95 Priority in deducting ....... 109Early distributions from ..... 76 NonemployeeTransfers between Sale or trade of property held 1Required distributions ...... 77 compensation ............ 88spouses ................. 97 year or less ............. 100Rollovers: Qualified retirement plansSales and exchanges: Sick leave:To IRAs ................ 121 for ....................... 72Bonds ..................... 59 Cash payments for unusedSection 72(m)(5) ............ 200 Travel outside U.S. ........ 173Sales tax: leave ................... 140Work-related educationSecurities  (See also CapitalBasis to include ............ 91 Federal employees buyingexpenses ............... 191gains; Dividends) ...... 61, 107Car purchase ............. 178 back ..................... 51Adjusted basis for .......... 95 Self-employment tax ....... 199Deductibility of ....... 143, 145 Sick pay:As capital assets ........... 99 Deduction of .............. 146Sales to related persons, FECA payments ............ 51Bought at various times, how to List of deductible taxes (Tableexception ................ 107 Income .................... 45indicate ................. 108 22-1) ................. 145
Railroad UnemploymentSalvation Army  (See Charitable Rental income ............. 71Claim for refund ............ 18
Insurance Act ............ 51contributions) Constructive ownership of Seller-financed Withholding ............ 37, 38Saturday, deadline falling stock, determination mortgages ............... 106
Signatures .................. 14on ......................... 40 of ....................... 98 Seminars: Agent, use of ............... 14Savings: Convertible stocks and Investment-related ........ 196 E-file Form 8453-OL forbonds ................... 97Bonds ................. 56, 61 Senior Companion signature requirement ..... 9Fractional shares ........... 64Bonds used for Program .................. 50 Joint returns ............... 21Holding period, determinationeducation ................ 58 Separate returns  (See Married Mentally incompetent ....... 14of ...................... 100Certificate .............. 55, 60 filing separately) Parent for child ............. 14Joint owners, reporting ofSchedule  (See also Form Separated parents ...... 27, 238 Physically disabled ......... 14dividends ................ 611040) ........ 16, 44, 45, 48, 51 Separated parents, special Self-Select PIN acting asNontaxable trades .......... 971 (Form 1040A), Part I ...... 60 rule ...................... 237 electronic signature ....... 9Options ................ 48, 632 of Form 1040A .......... 215 Separated taxpayers ........ 20 Silver  (See Gold and silver)Preferred stock, redeemable at3 of Form 1040A .......... 220 Filing status ............ 21, 22 SIMPLE plans:a premium ............... 64Form 1040, A-F, R, SE (See IRAs ...................... 117 Contribution limits ........... 1Redemption of stock ........ 96Form 1040) Medical and dental expenses of Rollover to Roth IRA ....... 126Reinvestment plan, dividendsK-1: children of .............. 138 Simplified employee pensionsused for ................. 63Beneficiaries receiving Mortgage interest ......... 147 (SEPs):Rollover of gain from publiclyincome from estate or Nonresident alien IRAs as ................... 116traded securities ........ 101trust ................... 61 spouse .................. 23 Simplified Method:Sale expenses, how to adjustPartnership income ....... 84 Personal exemption ........ 25 Computation of taxablefor ...................... 108S corporation income ..... 84 Separation agreements: annuity .................. 73Short-term gains and Defined for purposes ofK-1, Form 1041 ............ 54 Worksheet ............... 73losses .................. 108 alimony ................. 127R of Form 1040 ........... 220 Stock appreciation rights .... 45 Single taxpayers ............ 21SEPs  (See Simplified employeeX: Stock rights: Charitable contributions to, nopensions (SEPs))Tax rates for single As capital assets ......... 99 deduction for ....... 155, 157persons ............... 21 Series EE and E savings bonds Filing requirements .......... 6Dividends as ............. 63 (See U.S. savings bonds)Y-1: Filing status .......... 6, 20, 21Holding period, determination
Tax rates for married filing Series HH and H savings Form 1040EZ, use of ..... 8, 21of .................... 101
jointly ................. 21 bonds ..................... 56 Gross income filingWorthless ................ 96
Y-2: Series I savings bonds ...... 56 requirements (TableSurrender of stock .......... 96
Tax rates for married filing Service Center 1-1) ...................... 5Tax-exempt:
separately ............. 22 addresses ................. 16Home equity loan proceeds Small businesses:
Schedules A±F, R, SE (Form invested in ............ 147 Service charges ............ 194 Capital gains or losses from
1040)  (See Form 1040) Interest incurred to produce Credit card payment of stock of ................. 109
Scholarships ......... 28, 30, 33 income from .......... 151 taxes .................... 15 Keogh plans ............... 72
Page 288 Publication 17 (2007)

Spouse  (See also Married Schedule A (Form Students ................... 160Small businesses: (Cont.)
taxpayers; Surviving 1040) ................ 146 Credit (See Education credits)Losses on stock of ........ 100
spouse) ...... 6, 13, 14, 20, 21, Defined .................... 27Electronic returns filed withSmoking cessation programs:
76, 83 Exemption fromfederal .................... 9Deductibility as medical
withholding .............. 37Disabled, qualifying for Exception to deduction .... 143expense ................ 140
Foreign .................... 26dependent care Federal changes, effectSocial clubs: Foreign students .......... 156credit ................... 211 on ....................... 19Contributions to, no charitable Loans (See Student loans)Student ................... 211 Form W-2 to show withhelddeduction for ............ 155 Scholarships (See ScholarshipsSSN  (See Social security number taxes ................... 143Dues: and fellowships)(SSN)) Interest on, notNot entertainment Tuition deduction (See Tuition)Stamp taxes: deductible .............. 152expenses ............. 175 Tuition programs, qualified (SeeReal estate transactions Joint state and local returns butSocial security and Medicare Qualified tuition programs)and .................... 146 federal returns filedtaxes  (See also Excess Work-related education (SeeStamps  (See Collectibles) separately .............. 143withholding credit) ........ 200, Work-related education)Married filing215, 246 Standard deduction ....... 134, Substantial gainfulseparately .............. 1431352007 changes ............... 1 activity ................... 2182007 changes ............... 1 Refunds, treatment of ...... 143Reporting of (Table 1-3) ..... 8 Substitute forms ............ 12Age 65 or older ............ 134Support, not included in ..... 33 State or local taxes: Suggestions forAmount ................... 134Social security benefits .... 31, Refunds ................... 84 publication ................. 4Blind persons ............. 13477, 81 Statute of limitations: Sunday, deadline fallingChanging from itemized toDeductions related to ....... 81 Claim for refund ............ 15 on ......................... 40standard deduction (or viceEmployer retirement plans Claim for refunds ........... 18 Supplemental wages ........ 37versa) .................. 135different from ........... 118 Statutory employees ....... 180 Supplies:Comparison with itemizedEstimated tax .............. 79 Stillborn child ............... 27 Regularly used or consumed indeduction amount ....... 135Foreign employer ........... 49 Stock appreciation ordinary course of trade orDefined ................... 134Form SSA-1042S for rights ..................... 45 business ................. 99Dependents ............... 135nonresident aliens ........ 78 Stock bonus plans .......... 38 Support test:Final return ofForm SSA-1099 ........ 42, 78 Stock certificates: Qualifying child ............. 28decedent ............... 134Group-term life insurance, taxes Charitable contributions, date Qualifying relative .......... 31Increase in ................ 134owed on .................. 9 of ...................... 159 Surveys:Married filing separately:Income ..................... 8 Stock options ........... 48, 63 Property basis to include .... 91One spouse hasIRAs for recipients of
Stockholders  (See alsoitemized .............. 134 Surviving spouse:benefits ................. 118
Securities) ................. 18Purpose of ................ 134 Annuity .................... 77Joint returns ............... 81
Debts ...................... 82 Filing status ................ 20Lump-sum election ......... 79 Standard meal
Stockholders' meeting With dependent child ..... 24allowance ...... 171, 172, 181Married filing separately ... 22,
expenses ................ 197 Gross income filing79 Amount of ................ 172
requirements (TableStocks  (See also Dividends;Paid by employer ........... 45 Areas outside continental
1-1) ...................... 5Securities) ............. 18, 42U.S. .................... 172Repayment of benefits ..... 79,
Life insurance proceeds paid85 Prorating on partial days of Stolen funds:
to ....................... 83travel ................... 182Repayments .............. 194 Reporting of ................ 90
Rollovers by ............... 76Reporting of ................ 79 Standard mileage rates ..... 177 Stolen property  (See Theft Single filing status .......... 21Taxability of ............ 78, 79 2007 rates .................. 1 losses) Tax (See Estate tax)Tips, taxes owed on ......... 9 Business-related miles .... 168, Stop-smoking programs: Synagogues  (See Churches,Withholding for ......... 38, 79 177 Deductibility as medical temples, etc.)Not deductible .......... 146 Car expenses ............. 177 expense ................ 140
Charitable organization service,Social security number Storms  (See also Disasterauto use for ............. 157(SSN) ..................... 12 relief) ..................... 166 TMedical reasons for use ofCorrespondence with IRS, Casualty loss due to ....... 163 Tables and figures:car ................ 137, 140include SSN ............. 13 Straddles: Adjusted basis, examples ofNot allowed ............... 177Dependents ................ 12 Interest from .............. 151 (Table 13-1) ............. 92Work-relatedException ................ 12 Strike benefits ............... 90 Alimony requirementseducation .......... 187, 190Failure to include Student loan interest deduction: (instruments executed afterpenalty .................. 13 State: 1984) (Table 18-1) ...... 128Loan repaymentForm SS-5 to request Obligations, interest on ..... 59 Capital gain rates (Tableassistance .............. 131number .................. 13 State bar associations: 16-1) ................... 109Student loans:Nonresident alien Bar review courses ........ 189 Car expenses, reporting ofCancellation of debt ........ 82spouse .................. 13 Charitable contributions (Table 26-3) ............ 183Interest deduction ...... 8, 130,Resident aliens ............. 13 to ...................... 157 Casualty and theft losses:153Social security numbers State or local governments: Deduction limits for personalAcademic period ........ 130(SSNs) ................... 211 Bonds, tax-exempt ......... 99 property (TableAmount of deduction .... 131Alimony recipient's number Charitable contributions 25-1) ................. 166Claiming ................ 131required ................ 129 to ...................... 155 Deduction of loss, when toDouble deduction notChild's ...................... 2 Employees: take (Table 25-2) ...... 167allowed ............... 131Number to be obtained at Section 457 plans for (See Charitable contributions,birth ................... 35 Eligible educationalSection 457 deferred deductibility of (Tableinstitution ............. 131Dependents ................. 2 compensation plans) 24-1) ................... 154Dividend payers to use ..... 61 Eligible student ......... 130Unemployment Children's income:Earned income credit ..... 233, Features of (Tablecompensation .......... 86 Inclusion on parent's return236 19-1) ................. 130Fee-basis officials: (Figure 31-A) ......... 203Label, number need to be Married filingBusiness expenses Investment income more thanwritten in ................. 2 separately ............. 22of .................... 184 $1,700, reporting of (FigurePenalty for failure to provide: Qualified studentWork-related education 31-B) ................. 204To dividend payers ....... 61 loan .................. 130expenses ............. 191 Education credits:
Social security card ........ 233 Worksheet .............. 131State or local income Comparison chart (Table
Sonic booms: Interest, defined ........... 130taxes ..................... 135 35-1) ................. 226
Casualty loss due to ....... 163 Deduction of ......... 142, 143 Student claimed as exemption Entertainment expenses:
Special needs children: List of deductible taxes (Table on tax return of another 50% limit (Figure
Adoption credit ............ 246 22-1) ................. 145 person .................. 131 26-A) ................. 174
Publication 17 (2007) Page 289

Tax computation Filing of (See also Filing Section 457 deferredTables and figures:
worksheet ................ 263 requirements) ............. 5 compensation plans .... 72Entertainment expenses: (Cont.)
Forms to use ................ 7Tax counsel fees ........... 193 Tax-exempt income ......... 31Proof of (Table 26-2) .... 179
Free preparation help ....... 10Reporting of (Table Tax Counseling for the Tax-exempt obligations:
How to file ................. 1126-3) ................. 183 Elderly .................... 10 Adjusted basis for .......... 95
Joint returns (See JointEstimated tax, who must make Tax credits  (See Credits) Tax-free exchanges:
Returns)payments (Figure 4-A) .... 40 Tax evasion ................. 20 Definition of ................ 93Mailing of ................ 1, 16Filing requirements: Tax figured by IRS ......... 201 Holding period, determinationPaid preparer .............. 14Dependents (Table of ...................... 100Tax help ........... 3, 4, 10, 266 Payment with .............. 151-2) .................... 6 Taxis:Tax Counseling for the Phone number to beGross income levels (Table Elderly ................... 10 Business-related travelincluded .................. 31-1) .................... 5 Volunteer counseling (Volunteer expense ................ 170Preparation fees .......... 193Other situations requiring Income Tax Assistance Standard mileage rate notfiling (Table 1-3) ........ 8 Private delivery services ..... 3,program) ............ 10, 50 allowed ................. 17710Gift expenses: Tax preference items ....... 200 Taxpayer Advocate ......... 266Request copy of, FormProof of (Table 26-2) .... 179 Tax rates: Taxpayer Assistance4506 .................... 17Reporting of (Table Married filing jointly (Schedule Center ..................... 326-3) ................. 183 Request transcript of, FormY-1) ..................... 21 Taxpayer identification number4506-T .................. 17Head of household, qualifying Married filing separately (TIN):person (Table 2-1) ....... 23 Steps to prepare (Table(Schedule Y-2) ........... 22 Adoption (ATIN) ............ 131-6) ..................... 12Individual retirement Single person filing (Schedule Individual (ITIN) ............ 13arrangements (IRAs): Third party designee ...... 3, 13X) ....................... 21 Social security number (SeeFiguring modified AGI Transcript of ............... 17Tax refunds: Social security number(Worksheet 17-1) ..... 119 Who must file .......... 5, 6, 7Agreement with IRS extending (SSN))Modified AGI, effect on Tax shelters:assessment period, claim Taxpayer identificationdeduction if covered by Rental property and at-riskbased on ................ 18 numbers (TINs) ..... 209, 211retirement plan at work rules .................... 70Bad debts .................. 18(Table 17-1) .......... 118 Child and dependent careTax table ............... 251-262Business tax creditModified AGI, effect on credit ................... 213Tax year  (See also Accountingcarrybacks ............... 18deduction if not covered by Childcare provider ......... 213periods) ............... 10, 12Cashing check ............. 14retirement plan at work Individual (ITIN) ............ 35Taxable exchanges:Check's expiration date ..... 14(Table 17-2) .......... 118 Social security numbers (SeeDefinition of ................ 93Claim for ............... 17, 18Roth IRAs, effect of modified Social security numbersTaxes  (See also SalesLimitations period ........ 18AGI on contributions (Table (SSNs))tax) ......... 142-146, 178, 199Litigation ................ 1917-3) ................. 125 Teachers:Alternative minimum ....... 200Direct deposit .............. 14Roth IRAs, modified AGI Expenses, deduction of .... 130Business taxes, deduction(Worksheet 17-2) ..... 124 Erroneous refunds .......... 17 Work-relatedof ...................... 142Interest deductions, forms to Federal income tax education .......... 188, 189Deduction of .............. 143use (Table 23-1) ........ 153 refunds .................. 84 Telephones ................ 197Schedules to use ........ 146Meal expenses and 50% limit Financially disabled ........ 18 Business-related travelTypes of taxes deductible(Figure 26-A) ........... 174 Foreign tax paid or expense ................ 170(Table 22-1) .......... 145Medical and dental expenses: accrued ................. 18 Fraud or misconduct of IRSEstate (See Estate tax)Checklist for deductible General rules ............... 9 employee, number forEstimated (See Estimated tax)expense (Table Inquiries ................... 10 reporting anonymously .... 3Excise (See Excise taxes)21-1) ................. 139 Interest on .......... 17, 19, 55 Tax return to include phoneFederal income taxes, notReimbursement, excess Late filed returns ............ 3 number ................... 3deductible .............. 146algorithm (Figure Less than $1 ............... 14 Foreign taxes ............. 142 Temples  (See Churches,21-A) ................. 141 Limits ...................... 18 Income tax. deduction temples, etc.)Roth IRA and modified adjusted Exceptions ............... 18 of .................... 143 Temporary absence from job:gross income (MAGI) More or less than Gift taxes ................. 146 Work-related educationphaseout (Table expected ................ 14 How to figure .............. 199 during .................. 18717-3) ................... 125 Net operating loss Income taxes, deduction Temporary absences .... 27, 30Student loan interest deduction carryback ................ 18 of ...................... 143(Table 19-1) ............ 130 Temporary job assignments:Offset: Indian tribal government taxes,Tax returns: Travel expenses .......... 170Against debts .......... 9, 14 deduction of ............ 142Due dates (Table 1-5) .... 10 Tenants  (See also Rental incomeAgainst next year's Inheritance tax ............ 146Steps to prepare (Table and expenses) ............. 65tax ................ 14, 41 Kiddie tax (See Children,1-6) ................... 12 By the entirety ............. 54Past-due ............... 10, 17 subheading: InvestmentTaxes that are deductible (Table In common ................. 54Real estate taxes, treatment income of child under age 18)22-1) ................... 145 Tenants by the entirety:of ...................... 145 Nanny tax (See Domestic help)Travel and transportation Alimony, no deduction for taxesReduced ................... 19 Not deductible ............ 146expenses: and insurance paid on homeState and local income tax Personal property taxes:Examples of deductible owned as ............... 127refunds ................. 143 Car taxes ............... 178expenses (Table Dividends, reporting of ...... 61State liability, effect on ...... 19 Deduction of ............ 14626-1) ................. 170 Real estate taxes, allocationWithholding ................. 7 Real estate taxes (See RealLocal transportation (Figure when filingWorthless securities ........ 18 estate taxes)26-B) ................. 176 separately .............. 145Claim for refund .......... 96 Sales tax .................. 91Proof of (Table 26-2) .... 179 Tenants in common:Withholding ................ 35Tax return preparation:Reporting of (Table Alimony deduction for taxes andRental expenses ........... 66 Taxes, not support .......... 3326-3) ................. 183 insurance paid on homeTax returns  (See also Due dates; Tax-exempt:Tuition deduction (Table owned as ............... 127Joint Returns; Bonds and other19-2) ................... 132 Dividends, reporting of ...... 61Signatures) ......... 10, 14, 21 obligations ............... 59Claiming dependent's
Terminal illness:Aliens ...................... 7 Income ................... 197expenses (Table
Accelerated payment of lifeAmended (See also Form Interest .................... 5919-3) ................. 133
insurance proceeds (See1040X) .......... 17, 18, 135 Obligations:Volunteers, deductibility of
Accelerated death benefits)Attachments to returns ...... 13 Adjusted basis ........... 95contributions (Table
Viatical settlements ......... 83Child ...................... 1424-2) ................... 156 Organizations:
Termite damage:Copies of .................. 17Work-related education (Figure Related party
27-A) ................... 188 Dating of ................... 14 transactions ........... 98 Not casualty losses ........ 163
Page 290 Publication 17 (2007)

Terrorist attacks: Tip-splitting or tip-pooling Allocation of types of Proof of expenses ......... 178
arrangements ........ 51, 52 costs .............. 171, 180 Summary (TableCasualty loss due to ....... 163
Bona fide business 26-2) ................. 179Disability payments for injuries Uncollected taxes ...... 52, 53
purpose ................ 171 Recordkeepingfrom, tax exclusion ....... 72 Withholding ............ 37, 52
Business associates ....... 171 requirements ....... 171, 178Disability pensions for federal Employee contributing
Business travel ............ 170 Rental property maintenanceemployees ............... 50 to ..................... 52
$75 or less .............. 178 and management, for ..... 66Theft losses ...... 162-168, 193, Underwithholding .... 38, 52
Confidential information Reporting of ............... 180195 Title insurance: and .................. 179 Table 26-3 showing forms to$100 Rule ................ 167 Property basis to include .... 91 Employees' be used .............. 183Adjusted basis in Title to property: expenses ............. 171 Resorts or cruise ships .... 172property ......... 92, 93, 165 Abstract fees, property basis to Incidental expenses ..... 171 School children, transportingAmount of loss ............ 164 include .................. 91 Proof of business of ....................... 90Appraisals ........... 164, 165 Attorneys' fees: purpose .............. 179 Summary of rules (FigureCost of cleaning up or making Property basis to Receipt not readily available 26-B) ................... 176repairs .................. 164 include ................ 91 to prove .............. 178 Tax home, determinationCosts of photographs and Tolls: Spouse or of ...................... 169appraisals .............. 165 Business-related travel .... 178 dependents ........... 171 Temporary assignment orDeduction of loss: Tools ....................... 193 Trip outside U.S. ....... 172, job ..................... 170When to take (Table 173Hauling to and from Temporary work25-2) ................. 167 Trip primarily forwork .................... 177 location ................. 176Definition of theft .......... 163 business ............. 172Rental for use on rental Tips ................. 170, 171Fair market value of stolen Trip primarily for personalproperty ................. 66 Transit pass ................ 48property ................ 164 reasons .............. 172Tornadoes  (See also Disaster Work-relatedForm 4684 to be filed ...... 162 U.S. travel .............. 172relief) ..................... 166 education .......... 189, 190Insurance proceeds, treatment Unproved amounts ...... 183Casualty loss due to ....... 163 Traveling salespersons:of ...................... 165 Visiting clients orTotal support ................ 31 Deduction of expenses .... 180Net operating losses ....... 168 customers ............ 175 Tax home, determinationTour guides:Proof of loss .............. 164 Charitable organization service, of ...................... 169Free tour for organizingProperty used partly for deduction for ............ 157 Treasury bills, notes, andtour ..................... 89business and partly for Commuting expenses ..... 176 bonds ..................... 58Trade Act of 1974:personal purposes ...... 167 Employer-provided commuter Treasury Inspector General:Recovered stolen Trade readjustment allowances vehicle ................ 47 Telephone number to reportproperty ................ 164 under .................... 86 Conventions .............. 173 anonymously fraud orReimbursement ........... 165 Trade associations: Delegates, deduction of misconduct of IRSReporting of gain or Meetings and entertainment unreimbursed employee ................. 3loss ............... 167, 168 expenses ............... 175 amount ............... 156
Treasury notes .............. 55Third parties: Deductible expenses ...... 171Trade of property  (See also Sale
Treaties:Alimony payments made Examples of (Tableof property) ................ 95
Foreign charitableto ................. 127, 128 26-1) ................. 170Definition of ................ 96
organizations, contributionsDesignee for IRS to discuss Definition of ............... 169Form 8824 for reporting ..... 97
to ...................... 155return with ............. 3, 13 Employer-providedLike property and money
Income from taxpayer's property vehicles ................. 46 Trees and plants:transferred ........... 94, 97
paid to ................... 12 Estimates of .............. 178 Cost of, when casualty or theftLike-kind exchanges .... 93, 97 Expenses paid for loss involved ....... 163, 164Threats: Nontaxable exchanges .... 93, others .................. 197 Trust beneficiaries:Losses due to ............. 163 97 Federal crime investigators or Dividends received by ...... 61Tickets  (See Entertainment Holding period, determination prosecutors ............. 170 Losses of trust ............. 88expenses) of .................... 100 Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to Receiving income fromTip expense: Partially nontaxable fill out .................. 184 trust ................. 88, 89Business meal or entertainment exchange ............ 94, 97 Fringe benefits ............. 47 Rollover restrictions ........ 76activity, 50% deduction Reporting of ................ 97 Getting from home to temporary Trustees:limit .................... 174 Taxable exchange, workplace when multiple Administrative fees ........ 194Business travel defined .................. 93 regular workplaces ...... 176 IRA ....................... 194expense ........... 170, 171 Trade-in of car ............. 178 Going home on days off from IRAs:Tip income ............... 51-53 Trading date of securities temporary Fees .............. 116, 117Allocated tips .......... 38, 53 transaction ............... 100 assignment ............. 170 Notification ofDaily record of tips ..... 51, 52 Traditional IRAs  (See Individual Going to business meeting recharacterization ..... 121Electronic tip record ........ 52 retirement arrangements away from regular Transfer from trustee toForm 4070A for daily (IRAs)) workplace .............. 175 trustee .......... 120, 126records .................. 52 Traffic violations: Going to family home ...... 170 Trusts  (See also TrustNoncash tips ........ 51, 52, 53 Indefinite assignment ...... 170Fines not deductible ....... 178 beneficiaries) ...... 61, 88, 200Penalty for failure to Job search expenses ....... 89Transfer taxes: Grantor trusts .............. 88report ................... 52 Medical purposes, for ...... 140Property basis to include .... 91 Income .................... 88Reporting on tax return ..... 53 Mileage rates (See StandardReal estate transactions Child beneficiary ........ 206Reporting tips to mileage rates)and .................... 146 Investment interest ........ 152employer ............ 51, 52 New employment .......... 192Transit passes .............. 48 Related party transactions withFailure to report to No main place of business orTransportation ............. 212 fiduciaries ............... 98employer ............ 9, 52 work .................... 169Transportation expenses  (See TTY/TDD information ....... 266Form 4070 for ............ 52 Nonaccountable plans,Travel and transportation Tubal ligation:Service charges paid by definition of ............. 183expenses) Deductibility as medicalemployer as wages ....... 52 Parking fees:Transportation workers: expense ................ 140Social security and Medicare Business-relatedMeal expenses ............ 172tax: Tuition  (See also Hopetravel ................. 178
Deduction limits ......... 174Employer reporting for credit) ............... 132, 230Commuting expense .... 177
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, howpurposes of ............ 52 Alimony payments made toEmployer-provided fringe
to complete ........... 184Filing requirements (Table cover ................... 127benefit ................ 48
Travel and transportation1-3) .................... 8 Charitable deduction notMedical-related
expenses ........... 169-173,Uncollected ............... 9 allowed for paying ...... 155,travel ................. 140
175-178 158Tip Rate Determination and Probationary work
Education Program ....... 52 Advances ............ 180, 182 periods ................. 171 Credit (See Education credits)
Publication 17 (2007) Page 291

Uniform Settlement Statement Veterans' organizations: Retirement plan contributions byTuition  (Cont.)
(Form HUD-1): employer ................ 48Charitable contributionsDeduction for ............. 132
to ................. 154, 155 Severance pay ............. 45Points shown on .......... 149Claiming for
30% limit ............... 160 Sick pay ............... 45, 51dependent ............ 133 Uniformed services ........ 105
Viatical settlements ......... 83 Social security and MedicareRefund of expenses ..... 132 Uniforms ................... 193
taxes paid byVictims of terrorism  (SeeEligible educational institution, Charitable organization
employer ................ 45Terrorist attacks)defined ................. 132 requiring, deduction for cost
Stock appreciation rights .... 45VISTA volunteers ............ 49and upkeep of .......... 156Expenses that do not
Stock options .............. 48qualify .................. 133 Vitamins:Unions  (See also Labor
Supplemental .............. 37unions) ............. 38, 86, 90 Not deductible as medicalQualified programs (See
Volunteer work ............. 49expense ................ 140Qualified tuition programs) Assessments ............. 193
Withholding (See Withholding)Related expenses, Volunteer firefighters:Dues ..................... 193
Waiters and waitresses:defined ................. 132 Charitable contributionsUnited States  (See headings
Tips (See Tip income)to ...................... 155Tuition and fees deduction: starting with ªFederalº or ªU.S.º)
IRAs ...................... 118 War veterans' organizationsRefund of expenses ....... 132 United Way  (See Charitable
(See Veterans' organizations)Volunteer work ......... 49, 212contributions)Tuition programs, qualified
Deductibility of contributions War zone  (See Combat zone)(See Qualified tuition programs) Universities  (See Colleges and
(Table 24-2) ............ 156 Wash sales .......... 96, 98, 101universities)Tuition, benefits under GI
Out-of-pocket expenses,Bill ........................ 33 Washington State SupplementalUnlawful discrimination suits: deductible when serving for Workmen's CompensationDeduction for costs ......... 88 qualified Fund ..................... 143Unmarried persons  (See Single organization ....... 154, 156U Welfare benefits ......... 31, 86taxpayers) Tax counseling (VolunteerU.S. citizen: What's new ................. 1, 2Unrecaptured Section 1250 Income Tax AssistanceEarned income credit ...... 233 Adoption benefits ............ 1gain .................. 98, 109 program) ............ 10, 50U.S. citizen or resident ...... 26 Earned income credit ........ 1Unstated interest ........ 91, 96 Value of income lost by, not Educator expenses ........ 130U.S. national ................ 26 Unused sick leave: deductible .............. 158 Elective deferral amounts .... 1U.S. obligations, Cash payments for ........ 140 Vouchers for payment of Exemption amount .......... 1interest ............... 55, 56 Use of home in tax ........................ 41 Hope credit ............ 1, 226U.S. possessions: business ................. 192
Individual retirementCharitable contributions Used clothing and household arrangements (IRAs) ...... 1to ...................... 155 goods: W Lifetime learning credit ....... 1,Deduction of income tax paid Charitable deduction W-2 form  (See Form W-2) 226to ...................... 143 for ...................... 158 Wages and salaries  (See also Limit on itemizedIncome from ................ 7 Used clothing and household Form W-2) ....... 12, 44-51, 48 deduction ................. 1U.S. Postal Service  (See Post items: Accident and health Medical and dental expenses:office employees) Charitable deduction for fair insurance ................ 45 Standard mileage ......... 1U.S. savings bonds: market value ............ 159 Accrued leave payment ..... 45 Moving expenses:Education, used for ......... 22 Adoption, employerUsurious interest ............ 55 Standard mileage ......... 1assistance ............... 46Interest on ................. 89 Utilities: Social security and MedicareAdvance commissions ...... 44Transfer between Charges for installing included taxes ..................... 1Allowances andspouses ................. 94 in property basis ......... 91 Standard deduction .......... 1reimbursements ...... 37, 44U.S. Treasury bills or notes: Emergency energy programs, Standard mileage rates ...... 1Archer MSATrade of ................... 97 charitable contributions Wheelchairs:contributions ............. 46to ...................... 155U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and As medical expense ....... 140Awards and prizes .......... 44bonds ..................... 58 Energy conservation Babysitting ................. 44 Widow/widower  (See Survivingsubsidies ............ 88, 90U.S. Virgin Islands: Back pay awards ........... 44 spouse)Late payment charges, notIncome from ................ 7 Bonuses ................... 44 Winter energy payments .... 88deductible .............. 153Unclaimed Child care providers ........ 44 Withholding  (See also FormRebates ................... 90reimbursement ........... 189 Children's earnings .......... 7 W-2) ............. 12, 35-43, 36Uncollected rent: Clergy ..................... 48 Agricultural Act of 1949Income .................... 66 De minimis benefits ........ 46 payments ................ 38VUnderpayment penalties ... 35, Disability income ........... 50 Changing amountVacation homes:41, 42 Elective deferrals ........... 48 withheld ................. 36Determining if used asIRS computation ........... 43 Employee achievement For 2008 ................ 36home .................... 67 award ................... 44Undistributed capital Checking amount of ....... 36,Points .................... 149 Employee compensation .... 44gains ............ 63, 108, 249 223Rental expenses ....... 67, 68 Farmworkers ............... 36Unearned income of child  (See Claim for refund ............. 7Valuations  (See also Appraisals; Foreign employer ........... 49Children, subheading: Commodity credit loans ..... 38Fair market value Form W-2 (See Form W-2)Investment income of child Credit for .............. 35, 41(FMV)) ........... 91, 164, 165 Fringe benefits ............. 45under age 18) Cumulative wageGarnisheed ................ 12Value of time or services:Unemployment method .................. 37Government cost-of-livingNo charitable deductioncompensation ........... 8, 86 Definition .................. 35allowances .............. 45for ............ 155, 156, 158Credit card insurance Determining amount toHousehold workers ......... 36Vandalism:paying ................... 88 withhold ................. 36Income ..................... 8Casualty loss due to ....... 163Mandatory contributions to state Disaster Assistance Act of 1988Foreign .................. 44Vasectomy:funds, deduction of ...... 143 payments ................ 38Long-term careDeductibility as medicalPrivate fund, from .......... 86 Dividend income ........... 62coverage ................ 45expense ................ 140Repayment of benefits ...... 86 Employers, rules for ........ 37Military retirees ......... 36, 49Vehicles  (See Cars)Reporting on Forms 1040, Exemption from ............ 37Military service ............. 491040A, or 1040EZ ........ 86 Veterans' benefits ........... 49 Federal income taxes, notMiscellaneousSupplemental benefits ...... 86 Educational assistance ..... 90 deductible .............. 146compensation ............ 44
Voluntary benefit fund Tuition deduction, effect Fiscal years ................ 42Note for services ........... 45
contributions ............ 197 on .................... 132 Form W-4:Outplacement services ..... 45
Withholding ............ 38, 86 Retroactive Provided by employer .... 37Religious orders ............ 48
determination ............ 50Unemployment tax: Fringe benefits ............. 38Restricted property ......... 48
Veterans' insurance: Gambling winnings ..... 38, 42State employment Dividends on restricted
Dividends on ............... 64taxes ................... 215 stock .................. 48 General rules .............. 35
Page 292 Publication 17 (2007)

Workers' compensation ..... 51 Temporary absence from Social security or railroadWithholding  (Cont.)
Mandatory contributions to state work .................... 187 retirement benefits, to figureHighest rate, employer must
funds, deduction of ...... 143 Travel expenses for ....... 190 taxability ............. 78, 79withhold at if no W-4 ...... 37
Return to work ............. 51 Unclaimed Student loan interestIncorrect form .............. 42
reimbursement .......... 189 deduction ............... 131IRA distributions ........... 122 Work-related education .... 187
Support test ................ 31New job ................... 36 Business deduction: Worksheets:
Withholding (Form W-4) .... 36Penalties ........... 35, 37, 39 Qualified Capital loss carryover ...... 109
Pensions and annuities .... 13, expenses ......... 189-190 Casualty and theft World Trade Center attacks
38, 72, 75 Reimbursements ........ 190 losses .................. 162 (See Terrorist attacks)
Railroad retirement Tax benefit of ........... 187 Excess withholding Worthless securities ........ 96
benefits .............. 38, 79 Education required by employer credit ................... 250 Wristwatch ................. 197
Repaying withheld tax ...... 37 or by law ............... 187 Head of household status and Write-offs  (See Cancellation ofRollovers .................. 75 Education that qualifies for new cost of keeping up debt)Salaries and wages ........ 35 trade or business ........ 189 home .................... 24
Separate returns ........... 42 Education to maintain or Individual retirement
YSick pay ................... 38 improve skills ........... 187 arrangements (IRAs),
Social security benefits .... 38, Yard-care workers  (SeeEducation to meet minimum modified AGI computation
79 Domestic help)requirements ............ 188 (Worksheet 17-1) ....... 119
State and local income taxes, Indefinite absence from Pensions or annuities, joint Youth groups:
deduction for ............ 143 work .................... 188 returns .................. 74 Troop leader's travel
Supplemental wages ....... 37 Meal expenses ............ 190 Roth IRA modified adjusted expenses ............... 157
Tips (See Tip income) Qualifying education (Figure gross income (MAGI),
■Unemployment 27-A) ................... 188 computation (Worksheet
compensation ........ 38, 86 Recordkeeping 17-2) ................... 124
requirements ............ 191 Simplified Method computationWork clothes ............... 193
Reimbursement for ........ 190 of taxable annuity ........ 73
Teachers ............ 188, 189
Publication 17 (2007) Page 293

Where To File
Note. Use this table only if you are an individual taxpayer filing your own return.
AND use the zip code below according to the form you are filing and whether you
are enclosing payment
Form 1040 Form 1040A Form 1040EZ
THEN send your return No payment Payment No payment Payment No payment Payment
IF you live in... to... enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed
Department of theAlabama, Delaware, Florida, TreasuryGeorgia, North Carolina, Internal Revenue 39901±0002 39901±0102 39901±0015 39901±0115 39901±0014 39901±0114Rhode Island, South Carolina, Service CenterVirginia Atlanta, GA
Alaska, Arizona, California,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Department of theIowa, Kansas, Minnesota, TreasuryMontana, Nebraska, Nevada, Internal Revenue 93888±0002 93888±0102 93888±0015 93888±0115 93888±0014 93888±0114New Mexico, North Dakota, Service CenterOklahoma, Oregon, South Fresno, CADakota, Utah, Washington,
Wisconsin, Wyoming
Department of the
Kentucky, Louisiana, Treasury
Mississippi, Tennessee, Internal Revenue 73301±0002 73301±0102 73301±0015 73301±0115 73301±0014 73301±0114
Texas, APO, FPO Service Center
Austin, TX
Department of theArkansas, Connecticut, TreasuryIllinois, Indiana, Michigan, Internal Revenue 64999±0002 64999±0102 64999±0015 64999±0115 64999±0014 64999±0114Missouri, New Jersey, Ohio, Service CenterPennsylvania, West Virginia Kansas City, MO
Department of theDistrict of Columbia, Maine, TreasuryMaryland, Massachusetts, Internal Revenue 05501±0002 05501±0102 05501±0015 05501±0115 05501±0014 05501±0114New Hampshire, New York, Service CenterVermont Andover, MA
American Samoa,
nonpermanent residents of
Guam* or the Virgin Islands**, Department of the
Puerto Rico (or if excluding Treasury
income under Internal Internal Revenue 73301±0215 73301±0215
Revenue Code section 933), Service Center
dual status aliens, Austin, TX, USA
non-resident aliens, and
anyone filing Form 4563
Department of theU.S. citizens or tax residents Treasuryin a foreign country, and Internal Revenue 73301±0215 73301±0215anyone filing Form 2555 or Service Center2555EZ Austin, TX, USA
* Permanent residents of Guam should use:
Department of Revenue and Taxation
Government of Guam, P.O. Box 23607
GMF, GU 96921
**Permanent residents of the Virgin Islands should use:
V.I. Bureau of Internal Revenue
9601 Estate Thomas
Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas VI 00802

Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2008
Highlights of 2007 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2008
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
ServiceU.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Que es lo que Debemos Saber sobre
el Proceso de Cobro del IRS
594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (Hope and Lifetime Learning
Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465

Package 1040-1 -- 12115e
Order Blank
for Forms and
Publications
The most frequently ordered forms and publications are listed on the order blank below.
You will receive two copies of each form, one copy of the instructions, and one copy of
each publication you order. To help reduce waste, please order only the items you need
to prepare your return.
For faster ways of getting the items you need, go to www.irs.gov/formspubs.
How To Use the Order
Blank
Circle the items you need on the order blank
below. Use the blank spaces to order items
not listed. If you need more space, attach a
separate sheet of paper.
Print or type your name and address
accurately in the space provided below to
ensure delivery of your order. Enclose the
order blank in an envelope and mail it to
the IRS address shown on this page. You
should receive your order within 10 days
after receipt of your request.
Do not send your tax return to the address
listed below. Instead, see Where To File.
N
TIP
Mail Your Order Blank To:
National Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
Circle the forms and
publications you need. The
instructions for any form
you order will be included.
Cut here
Name
Postal mailing address
City
Order Blank
Please print
Apt./Suite/Room
Foreign country
Daytime phone number
State ZIP code
International postal code
()
/H17073/H17073
Schedule R
(1040)
4506
1040
1040EZ
Schedule SE
(1040) Pub. 590
8917
Schedules
A&B
(1040)
1040-ES
(2008)
Pub. 334
1040A
Pub. 526
Pub. 910
Schedule C
(1040) 1040X
4684
Pub. 463
Pub. 529
Schedule D
(1040)
Schedule 1
(1040A)
2106
Pub. 501
Pub. 535
6251
Schedule E
(1040)
Schedule 2
(1040A)
8606
Pub. 502
Pub. 547
Schedule 3
(1040A)
Schedule F
(1040)
Pub. 525
Schedule EIC
(1040A or
1040)
Pub. 596
8863
Schedule
C-EZ (1040)
8812
8822
Pub. 505
Pub. 523 Pub. 554
Pub. 583
Pub. 575
2441
Schedule H
(1040)
Pub. 915
1040-VSchedule J
(1040)
8829
9465
Pub. 919
Schedule D-1
(1040)
Pub. 17
Pub. 946
4506-T Pub. 550
4868
Pub. 527
Pub. 551
Use the blank spaces to
order items not listed.
Save Money and Time by Going Online!
Download or order these and other tax products at www.irs.gov
4562
8283
Pub. 1
Pub. 587
Pub. 970
Pub. 972