Contents
Important Changes ............................1
Important Reminder...........................2
Introduction ........................................2
Employee Compensation ..................2
Miscellaneous Compensation .........2
Fringe Benefits ................................3
Retirement Plan Contributions ........6
Stock Options .................................7
Restricted Property .........................8
Special Rules for Certain Employees 9
Clergy ..............................................9
Members of Religious Orders .........10
Foreign Employer ...........................11
Military .............................................11
Volunteers .......................................11
Business and Investment Income.... 11
Rents From Personal Property .......11
Royalties .........................................12
Partnership Income .........................12
S Corporation Income .....................12
Sickness and Injury Benefits............12
Disability Pensions ..........................13
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts ..................................13
Workers' Compensation .................14
Other Sickness and Injury Benefits14
Miscellaneous Income.......................14
Bartering .........................................14
Canceled Debts ..............................15
Life Insurance Proceeds .................15
Recoveries ......................................16
Worksheet for Recoveries of
Itemized Deductions—
Deducted After 1986 ..........17
Standard Deduction Tables .......18
Survivor Benefits .............................22
Unemployment Benefits ..................22
Welfare and Other Public Assistance
Benefits ....................................22
Other Income ..................................23
Repayments ........................................27
How To Get Tax Help.........................27
Index ....................................................29
Important Changes
Photographs of missing children. The
Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner
with the National Center for Missing and Ex-
ploited Children. Photographs of missing
children selected by the Center may appear
in this publication on pages that would other-
wise be blank. You can help bring these
children home by looking at the photographs
and calling 1–800–THE-LOST (1–800–843–
5678) if you recognize a child.
Paid preparer authorization.Beginning with
your return for 2000, you can check a box and
authorize the IRS to discuss your tax return
with the paid preparer who signed it. If you
check the “Yes” box in the signature area of
your return, the IRS can call your paid
preparer to answer any questions that may
Department
of the
Treasury
Internal
Revenue
Service
Publication 525
Cat. No. 15047D
Taxable and
Nontaxable
Income
For use in preparing
2000 Returns


arise during the processing of your return.
Also, you are authorizing your paid preparer
to perform certain actions. See your income
tax package for details.
Important Reminder
Foreign source income. If you are a U.S.
citizen or resident alien, you must report in-
come from sources outside the United States
(foreign income) on your tax return unless it
is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether
you reside inside or outside the United States
and whether or not you receive a Form W–2
or 1099 from the foreign payer. This applies
to earned income (such as wages and tips)
as well as unearned income (such as interest,
dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, and
royalties).
If you reside outside the United States,
you may be able to exclude part or all of your
foreign source earned income. For details,
see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citi-
zens and Resident Aliens Abroad.
Introduction
You can receive income in the form of money,
property, or services. This publication dis-
cusses many kinds of income and explains
whether they are taxable or nontaxable. It in-
cludes discussions on employee wages and
fringe benefits, and income from bartering,
partnerships, S corporations, and royalties. It
also includes information on disability pen-
sions, life insurance proceeds, and welfare
and other public assistance benefits. Check
the index for the location of a specific subject.
Generally, income is taxable unless it is
specifically exempted by law. Income that is
taxable must be reported on your return and
is subject to tax. Income that is nontaxable
may have to be shown on your tax return, but
is not subject to tax.
Constructively received income.You are
generally taxed on income that is available to
you, regardless of whether it is actually in
your possession.
A valid check that you received or that was
made available to you before the end of the
tax year is considered income constructively
received in that year, even if you do not cash
the check or deposit it to your account until
the next year. For example, if the postal ser-
vice tries to deliver a check to you on the last
day of the tax year but you are not at home
to receive it, you must include the amount in
your income for that tax year. If the check was
mailed so that it could not possibly reach you
until after the end of the tax year, and you
could not otherwise get the funds before the
end of the year, you include the amount in
your income for the next tax year.
Income received by an agent for you is
income you constructively received in the
year the agent received it. If you agree by
contract that a third party is to receive income
for you, you must include the amount in in-
come when the third party receives it.
Example. You and your employer agree
that part of your salary is to be paid directly
to your former spouse. You must include that
amount in income when your former spouse
receives it.
Prepaid income. Prepaid income such as
compensation for future services, is generally
included in your income in the year you re-
ceive it. However, if you use an accrual
method of accounting, you can defer prepaid
income you receive for services to be per-
formed before the end of the next tax year.
In this case, you include the payment in your
income as you earn it by performing the ser-
vices.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and
your suggestions for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web
site at www.irs.gov/help/email2.html.
You can write to us at the following ad-
dress:
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications Branch
W:CAR:MP:FP:P
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would
include your daytime phone number, includ-
ing the area code, in your correspondence.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publications
/H18554520 Scholarships and Fellowships
/H18554523 Selling Your Home
/H18554527 Residential Rental Property
/H18554550 Investment Income and Expenses
/H18554564 Mutual Fund Distributions
/H18554575 Pension and Annuity Income
/H18554915 Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
See How To Get Tax Help, near the end
of this publication, for information about get-
ting these publications.
Employee
Compensation
Generally, you must include in gross income
everything you receive in payment for per-
sonal services. In addition to wages, salaries,
commissions, fees, and tips, this includes
other forms of compensation such as fringe
benefits and stock options.
You should receive a Form W–2, Wage
and Tax Statement,  from your employer
showing the pay you received for your ser-
vices. Include your pay on line 7 of Form 1040
or Form 1040A, or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ,
even if you do not receive a Form W–2.
Child-care providers.If you provide child
care, either in the child's home or in your
home or other place of business, the pay you
receive must be included in your income. If
you are not an employee, you are probably
self-employed and must include payments for
your services on Schedule C, Profit or Loss
from Business, or Schedule C–EZ, Net Profit
or Loss from Business, of Form 1040. You
are generally not an employee unless you are
subject to the will and control of the person
who employs you as to what you are to do
and how you are to do it.
Babysitting.If you babysit for relatives
or neighborhood children, whether on a reg-
ular basis or only periodically, the rules for
child-care providers apply to you.
Miscellaneous
Compensation
This section discusses many types of em-
ployee compensation. The subjects are ar-
ranged in alphabetical order.
Advance commissions and other
earnings. If you receive advance commis-
sions or other amounts for services to be
performed in the future and you are a cash
method taxpayer, you must include these
amounts in your income in the year you re-
ceive them.
If you repay unearned commissions or
other amounts in the same year you receive
them, reduce the amount to include in your
income by the repayment. However, if you
repay the unearned commissions or other
amounts in a later tax year, you can deduct
the repayment as an itemized deduction on
your Schedule A (Form 1040), or you may be
able to take a credit for that year. See Re-
payments, later.
Allowances and reimbursements. If you
receive travel, transportation, or other busi-
ness expense allowances or reimbursements
from your employer, get Publication 463,
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Ex-
penses. If you are reimbursed for moving ex-
penses, get Publication 521, Moving Ex-
penses.
Back pay awards. Include in income
amounts you are awarded in a settlement or
judgment for back pay. These include pay-
ments made to you for damages, unpaid life
insurance premiums, and unpaid health in-
surance premiums. They should be reported
to you by your employer on Form W–2.
Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awards
you receive for outstanding work are included
in your income and should be shown on your
Form W–2. These include prizes such as va-
cation trips for meeting sales goals. If the
prize or award you receive is goods or ser-
vices, you must include the fair market value
of the goods or services in your income.
However, if your employer merely promises
to pay you a bonus or award at some future
time, it is not taxable until you receive it or it
is made available to you.
Employee achievement award. If you
receive tangible personal property (other than
cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item)
as an award for length of service or safety
achievement, you can exclude its value from
your income to the extent of your employer's
cost for all such awards you receive during
the year up to $1,600 ($400 for awards that
are not qualified plan awards). Your em-
ployer can tell you whether your award is a
qualified plan award. Your employer must
make the award as part of a meaningful
presentation, under conditions and circum-
stances that do not create a significant likeli-
hood of it being disguised pay.
However, the exclusion does not apply to
the following awards.
Page 2

 A length-of-service award if you received
it for fewer than 5 years of service or if
you received another length-of-service
award during the year or the previous 4
years.
 A safety achievement award if you are a
manager, administrator, clerical em-
ployee, or other professional employee
or if more than 10% of eligible employees
previously received safety achievement
awards during the year.
Example. Ben Green received three em-
ployee achievement awards during the year:
a nonqualified plan award of a watch valued
at $250, and two qualified plan awards of a
stereo valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs
valued at $500. Assuming that the require-
ments for qualified plan awards are otherwise
satisfied, each award by itself would be ex-
cluded from income. However, since the
$1,750 total value of the awards is more than
$1,600, Ben must include $150 ($1,750 −
$1,600) in his income.
Government cost-of-living allowances.
Cost-of-living allowances are generally in-
cluded in your income. However, these al-
lowances are generally not included in your
income if you are a federal civilian employee
or a federal court employee who is stationed
in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United
States.
Allowances and differentials that increase
your basic pay as an incentive for taking a
less desirable post of duty are part of your
compensation and must be included in in-
come. For example, your compensation in-
cludes Foreign Post, Foreign Service, and
Overseas Tropical differentials. For more in-
formation, get Publication 516, U.S. Govern-
ment Civilian Employees Stationed Abroad.
Cost-of-living allowances paid to Red
Cross staff members stationed outside the 48
contiguous states and the District of Columbia
are included in salary or wages.
Holiday gifts.If your employer gives you a
turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value
at Christmas or other holidays, you do not
have to include the value of the gift in your
income. However, if your employer gives you
cash, a gift certificate, or a similar item that
you can easily exchange for cash, you include
the value of that gift as extra salary or wages
regardless of the amount involved.
Note received for services.If your em-
ployer gives you a secured note as payment
for your services, you must include the fair
market value (usually the discount value) of
the note in your income for the year you re-
ceive it. When you later receive payments on
the note, a proportionate part of each pay-
ment is the recovery of the fair market value
that you previously included in your income.
Do not include that part again in your income.
Include the rest of the payment in your in-
come in the year of payment.
If your employer gives you an unsecured
note as payment for your services, payments
on the note that are credited toward the prin-
cipal amount of the note are compensation
income when you receive them.
Severance pay. Amounts you receive as
severance pay are taxable. A lump-sum pay-
ment for cancellation of your employment
contract is income in the tax year you receive
it and must be reported in gross income.
Accrued leave payment. If you are a
federal employee and receive a lump-sum
payment for accrued annual leave when you
retire or resign, this amount will be included
on your Form W–2.
If you resign from one agency and are
reemployed by another agency, you may
have to repay part of your lump-sum annual
leave payment to the second agency. You
can reduce gross wages by the amount you
repaid in the same tax year in which you re-
ceived it. You should attach to your tax return
a copy of the receipt or statement given to
you by the agency to which you make repay-
ment to explain the difference between the
wages on your return and the wages on your
Forms W–2.
Outplacement services. If you choose
to accept a reduced amount of severance pay
so that you can receive outplacement ser-
vices (such as training in resumé writing and
interview techniques), you must include the
unreduced amount of the severance pay in
income.
However, you can deduct the value of
these outplacement services (up to the dif-
ference between the severance pay included
in income and the amount actually received)
as a miscellaneous deduction (subject to the
2% limit) on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Sick pay. Pay you receive from your em-
ployer while you are sick or injured is part of
your salary or wages. In addition, you must
include in your income sick pay benefits re-
ceived from any of the following payers.
1) A welfare fund.
2) A state sickness or disability fund.
3) An association of employers or employ-
ees.
4) An insurance company, if your employer
paid for the plan.
However, if you paid the premiums on an
accident or health insurance policy, the ben-
efits you receive under the policy are not
taxable. For more information, see Other
Sickness and Injury Benefits under Sickness
and Injury Benefits, later.
Social security and Medicare taxes paid
by employer.If you and your employer have
an agreement that your employer pays your
social security and Medicare taxes without
deducting them from your gross wages, you
must report the amount of tax paid for you as
taxable wages on your tax return. The pay-
ment is also treated as wages for figuring your
social security and Medicare taxes and your
social security and Medicare benefits. How-
ever, these payments are not treated as so-
cial security and Medicare wages if you are
a household worker or a farm worker.
Stock appreciation rights.Do not include
a stock appreciation right granted by your
employer in income until you exercise (use)
the right. When you use the right, you are
entitled to a cash payment equal to the fair
market value of the corporation's stock on the
date of use minus the fair market value on the
date the right was granted. You include the
cash payment in income in the year you use
the right.
Work-training programs.If you are enrolled
in a state or local work-training program under
the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, pay-
ments you receive from the sponsor as com-
pensation for services are taxable wages.
Fringe Benefits
Fringe benefits you receive in connection with
the performance of your services are included
in your income as compensation unless you
pay fair market value for them or they are
specifically excluded by law. Abstaining from
the performance of services (for example,
under a covenant not to compete) is treated
as the performance of services for purposes
of these rules.
See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later, in
this discussion, for information on how to de-
termine the amount to include in income.
Recipient of fringe benefit.You are the
recipient of a fringe benefit if you perform the
services for which the fringe benefit is pro-
vided. You are considered to be the recipient
even if it is given to another person, such as
a member of your family. An example is a car
your employer gives to your spouse for ser-
vices you perform. The car is considered to
have been provided to you and not to your
spouse.
You do not have to be an employee of the
provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit.
If you are a partner, director, or independent
contractor, you can also be the recipient of a
fringe benefit.
Provider of benefit.Your employer or an-
other person for whom you perform services
is the provider of a fringe benefit regardless
of whether that person actually provides the
fringe benefit to you. The provider can be a
client or customer of an independent con-
tractor.
Accounting period.You must use the same
accounting period your employer uses to re-
port your taxable noncash fringe benefits.
Your employer has the option to report taxa-
ble noncash fringe benefits by using either of
the following rules.
1) The general rule: benefits are reported
for a full calendar year (January 1 – De-
cember 31).
2) The special accounting period rule: ben-
efits provided during the last 2 months
of the calendar year (or any shorter pe-
riod) are treated as paid during the fol-
lowing calendar year. For example,
each year your employer reports the
value of benefits provided during the last
2 months of the prior year and the first
10 months of the current year. 
Your employer does not have to use the same
accounting period for each fringe benefit, but
must use the same period for all employees
who receive a particular benefit.
You must use the same accounting period
that you use to report the benefit to claim an
employee business deduction (for use of a
car, for example).
Form W–2. Your employer reports your tax-
able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips,
other compensation) of Form W–2. The total
value of your fringe benefits may also be
noted in box 12. The value of your fringe
benefits may be added to your other com-
pensation on one Form W–2, or you may re-
ceive a separate Form W–2 showing just the
value of your fringe benefits in box 1 with a
notation in box 12.
Page 3

Accident or Health Plan 
Generally, the value of accident or health plan
coverage provided to you by your employer
is not included in your income. Benefits you
receive from the plan are generally taxable,
as explained later under Sickness and Injury
Benefits.
Long-term care coverage.Contributions by
your employer to provide coverage for long-
term care services are generally not included
in income. However, contributions made
through a flexible spending or similar ar-
rangement (such as a cafeteria plan) must
be included in your income. This amount will
be reported as wages in box 1 of your Form
W–2.
Medical savings account contributions.
Contributions by your employer to your med-
ical savings account are not included in your
income. Their total will be reported in box 13
of Form W–2 with code R designating that it
is excludable from income. You must report
this amount on Form 8853, Medical Savings
Accounts and Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts, and attach the form to your return.
Executive health program.If your employer
pays for a fitness program provided to you at
an off-site resort hotel or athletic club, the
value of the program is included in your
compensation.
Adoption Assistance 
You may be able to exclude from your income
amounts paid or expenses incurred by your
employer for qualified adoption expenses in
connection with your adoption of an eligible
child. The amounts must be paid or the ex-
penses must be incurred before January 1,
2002, as part of an adoption assistance pro-
gram. See Publication 968, Tax Benefits for
Adoption, for more information.
Adoption benefits are reported by your
employer in box 13 of Form W–2 with code
T. They are also included as social security
and Medicare wages in boxes 3 and 5. How-
ever, they are not included as wages in box
1. To determine the taxable and nontaxable
amounts, you must complete Part III of Form
8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses. Attach
the form to your return.
Dependent Care Benefits
Dependent care benefits include:
1) Amounts your employer pays directly to
either you or your care provider for the
care of your qualifying person while you
work, and
2) The fair market value of care in a day-
care facility provided or sponsored by
your employer.
If your employer provides dependent care
benefits under a qualified plan, you may be
able to exclude these benefits from your in-
come. Your employer can tell you whether
your benefit plan qualifies. If it does, you must
complete Part III of either Form 2441, Child
and Dependent Care Expenses, or Schedule
2 (Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers, to claim the
exclusion. You cannot use Form 1040EZ.
The amount you can exclude is limited to
the smallest of:
1) The total amount of dependent care
benefits you received during the year,
2) The total amount of qualified expenses
you incurred during the year,
3) Your earned income,
4) Your spouse's earned income, or
5) $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-
rately).
Your employer must show the total
amount of dependent care benefits provided
to you during the year under a qualified plan
in box 10 of your Form W–2. Your employer
will also include any dependent care benefits
over $5,000 in your wages shown in box 1
of your Form W–2.
See the instructions for Form 2441 or
Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) for more informa-
tion.
Educational Assistance
You can exclude from your income up to
$5,250 of qualified employer-provided edu-
cational assistance. The exclusion applies to
courses beginning before 2002. The exclu-
sion does not apply to graduate-level courses.
For more information, get Publication 508,
Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education.
Financial Counseling Fees
Financial counseling fees paid for you by your
employer are included in your income and
must be reported as part of wages. If the fees
are for tax or investment counseling, they can
be deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as
a miscellaneous itemized deduction subject
to the 2% limit.
Group-Term Life Insurance 
Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 of
group-term life insurance coverage provided
to you by your employer (or former employer)
is not included in your income. However, you
must include in income the cost of employ-
er-provided insurance to the extent it is more
than the cost of $50,000 of coverage reduced
by any amount you pay towards the purchase
of the insurance.
For exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost
excluded, and Entire cost taxed, later.
If your employer provided more than
$50,000 of coverage, the amount included in
your income is reported as part of your wages
in box 1 of your Form W–2. It is also shown
separately in box 13 with code C.
Former employer. If your former employer
provides more than $50,000 of group-term life
insurance coverage during the year, the
amount included in your income is reported
as wages in box 1 of Form W–2. It is also
shown separately in box 13 with code C. Box
13 will also show the amount of uncollected
social security and Medicare taxes on the
excess coverage with codes M and N. You
must pay these taxes with your income tax
return. Include them in your total tax on line
57, Form 1040, and enter “UT” and the
amount of the taxes on the dotted line next
to line 57.
Two or more employers.Your exclusion for
employer-provided group-term life insurance
coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000
of coverage, whether the insurance is pro-
vided by a single employer or multiple em-
ployers. If two or more employers provide in-
surance coverage that totals more than
$50,000, the amounts reported as wages on
your Forms W–2 will not be correct. You must
figure how much to include in your income.
See Figuring the taxable cost, later. Reduce
the amount you figure by any amount re-
ported with code C in box 13 of your Forms
W–2, add the result to the wages reported in
box 1, and report the total on your return.
Group-term life insurance.This insurance
is term life insurance protection (insurance for
a fixed period of time) that:
1) Provides a general death benefit, 
2) Is provided to a group of employees, 
3) Is provided under a policy carried by the
employer, and 
4) Provides an amount of insurance to each
employee based on a formula that pre-
vents individual selection.
Permanent benefits.If your group-term
life insurance policy includes permanent
benefits, such as a paid-up or cash surrender
value, you must include in your income, as
wages, the cost of the permanent benefits
minus the amount you pay for them. Your
employer should be able to tell you the
amount to include in your income.
Accidental death benefits.Insurance
that provides accidental or other death bene-
fits but does not provide general death bene-
fits (travel insurance, for example) is not
group-term life insurance.
Figuring the taxable cost.You figure the
taxable cost for each month of coverage by
multiplying the number of thousands of dollars
of insurance coverage for the month (figured
to the nearest tenth), less 50, by the cost from
the following table. Use your age on the last
day of the tax year. You must prorate the cost
from the table if less than a full month of
coverage is involved.
Your payment. If you pay any part of the
cost of the insurance, your entire payment
reduces, dollar for dollar, the amount you
would otherwise include in your income.
However, you cannot reduce the amount to
include in your income by:
1) Payments for coverage in a different tax
year, 
2) Payments for coverage through a cafe-
teria plan, unless the payments are
after-tax contributions, or 
3) Payments for coverage not taxed to you
because of the exceptions discussed
later under Entire cost excluded.
Example. You are 51 years old and work
for employers A and B. Both employers pro-
vide group-term life insurance coverage for
you for the entire year. Your coverage is
$35,000 with employer A and $45,000 with
COST PER $1,000 OF PROTECTION
FOR ONE MONTH
Age Cost
Under 25 ....................................................... $ .05
25 through 29 ...............................................  .06
30 through 34 ............................................... .08
35 through 39 ............................................... .09
40 through 44 ............................................... .10
45 through 49 ............................................... .15
50 through 54 ............................................... .23
55 through 59 ............................................... .43
60 through 64 ............................................... .66
65 through 69 ............................................... 1.27
70 and older ................................................. 2.06
Page 4

employer B. You pay premiums of $4.15 a
month under the employer B group plan. You
figure the amount to include in your income
as follows:
The total amount to include in income for
the cost of excess group-term life insurance
is $33. Because neither employer provided
over $50,000 insurance coverage, the wages
shown on your Forms W–2 do not include any
part of that $33. You must add it to the wages
shown on your Forms W–2 and include the
total on your return.
Entire cost excluded.You are not taxed on
the cost of group-term life insurance if any of
the following circumstances apply.
1) You are permanently and totally disabled
and have ended your employment.
2) Your employer is the beneficiary of the
policy for the entire period the insurance
is in force during the tax year.
3) A charitable organization to which con-
tributions are deductible is the only ben-
eficiary of the policy for the entire period
the insurance is in force during the tax
year. (You are not entitled to a deduction
for a charitable contribution for naming
a charitable organization as the benefi-
ciary of your policy.)
4) The plan existed on January 1, 1984,
and:
a) You retired before January 2, 1984,
and were covered by the plan when
you retired, or
b) You reached age 55 before January
2, 1984, and were employed by the
employer or its predecessor in
1983.
Entire cost taxed.You are taxed on the
entire cost of group-term life insurance if ei-
ther of the following circumstances apply.
1) The insurance is provided by your em-
ployer through a qualified employees'
trust, such as a pension trust or a qual-
ified annuity plan.
2) You are a key employee and your em-
ployer's plan discriminates in favor of key
employees.
Meals and Lodging
You do not include in your income the value
of meals and lodging provided to you and
your family by your employer at no charge if
the following conditions are met.
1) The meals are: 
a) Furnished on the business prem-
ises of your employer, and 
b) Furnished for the convenience of
your employer. 
2) The lodging is: 
a) Furnished on the business prem-
ises of your employer, 
b) Furnished for the convenience of
your employer, and 
c) A condition of your employment
(you must accept it in order to be
able to properly perform your du-
ties).
Faculty lodging.If you are an employee of
an educational institution or an academic
health center and you are provided with
lodging that does not meet the three condi-
tions above, you may not have to include in
income the value of the lodging. However, the
lodging must be qualified campus lodging,
and you must pay an adequate rent.
Academic health center.This is an or-
ganization that meets the following condi-
tions.
1) Its principal purpose or function is to
provide medical or hospital care or
medical education or research.
2) It receives payments for graduate med-
ical education under the Social Security
Act.
3) One of its principal purposes or functions
is to provide and teach basic and clinical
medical science and research using its
own faculty.
Qualified campus lodging. Qualified
campus lodging is lodging furnished to you,
your spouse, or one of your dependents by,
or on behalf of, the institution or center for use
as a home. The lodging must be located on
or near a campus of the educational institu-
tion or academic health center.
Adequate rent.The amount of rent you
pay for the year for qualified campus lodging
is considered adequate if it is at least equal
to the smaller of:
1) 5% of the appraised value of the lodging,
or 
2) The average of rentals paid by individ-
uals (other than employees or students)
for comparable lodging held for rent by
the educational institution. 
If the amount you pay is less than the smaller
of these amounts, you must include the dif-
ference in your income.
The lodging must be appraised by an in-
dependent appraiser and the appraisal must
be reviewed on an annual basis.
Example. Carl Johnson, a sociology
professor for State University, rents a home
from the university that is qualified campus
lodging. The house is appraised at $100,000.
The average rent paid for comparable uni-
versity lodging by persons other than em-
ployees or students is $7,000 a year. Carl
pays an annual rent of $5,500. Carl does not
include in his income any rental value since
the rent he pays equals at least 5% of the
appraised value of the house (5% × $100,000
= $5,000). If Carl paid annual rent of only
$4,000, he would have to include $1,000 in
his income ($5,000 − $4,000).
Transportation
If your employer provides you with a qualified
transportation fringe benefit, it can be ex-
cluded from your income, up to certain limits.
A qualified transportation fringe benefit is:
1) Transportation in a commuter highway
vehicle (such as a van) between your
home and work place, 
2) A transit pass, or 
 3) Qualified parking.
Cash reimbursement by your employer for
these expenses under a bona fide re-
imbursement arrangement is also excludable.
However, cash reimbursement for a transit
pass is excludable only if a voucher or similar
item that can be exchanged only for a transit
pass is not readily available for direct distri-
bution to you.
Exclusion limit.The exclusion for commuter
highway vehicle transportation and transit
pass fringe benefits cannot be more than a
total of $65 a month, regardless of the total
value of both benefits.
The exclusion for the qualified parking
fringe benefit cannot be more than $175 a
month, regardless of its value.
If the benefits have a value that is more
than these limits, the excess must be included
in your income.
Commuter highway vehicle. This is a
highway vehicle that seats at least six adults
(not including the driver). At least 80% of the
vehicle's mileage must reasonably be ex-
pected to be:
1) For transporting employees between
their homes and work place, and
2) On trips during which employees occupy
at least half of the vehicle's adult seating
capacity (not including the driver).
Transit pass. This is any pass, token,
farecard, voucher, or similar item entitling a
person to ride mass transit (whether public
or private) free or at a reduced rate or to ride
in a commuter highway vehicle operated by
a person in the business of transporting per-
sons for compensation.
Qualified parking.This is parking provided
to an employee at or near the employer's
place of business. It also includes parking
provided on or near a location from which the
employee commutes to work in a commuter
highway vehicle or carpool. It does not in-
clude parking at or near the employee's
home.
Tuition Reduction
You can exclude a qualified tuition reduction
from your income. This is the amount of a
reduction in tuition for education (below
graduate level) furnished by an educational
institution to an employee (or former em-
ployee) or his or her family. For more infor-
mation, get Publication 520.
Valuation of Fringe Benefits
If a fringe benefit is included in your income,
the amount included is generally its value
determined under the general valuation rule
or under the special valuation rules. For an
exception, see Group-Term Life Insurance,
earlier.
Employer A coverage (in thousands) ........ $ 35
Employer B coverage (in thousands) ........ + 45
Total coverage (in thousands) ................... $ 80
Minus: Exclusion (in thousands) ................− 50
Excess amount (in thousands) .................. $ 30
Multiply by cost per $1,000 per month,
age 51 (from table) ....................................× .23
Cost of excess insurance for 1 month ...... $ 6.90
Multiply by number of full months
coverage at this cost .................................× 12
Cost of excess insurance for tax year ....... $82.80
Minus: Premiums you paid ........................−49.80
Cost to include in income as wages $33.00
Page 5

General valuation rule.You must include in
your income the amount by which the fair
market value of the fringe benefit is more than
the sum of:
1) The amount, if any, you paid for the
benefit, and 
2) The amount, if any, specifically excluded
from your income by law. 
If you pay fair market value for a fringe ben-
efit, no amount is included in your income.
Fair market value.The fair market value
of a fringe benefit is determined by all the
facts and circumstances. It is the amount you
would have to pay a third party to buy or lease
the benefit. This is determined without regard
to:
1) Your perceived value of the benefit, or 
2) The amount your employer paid for the
benefit.
Employer-provided vehicles. If your
employer provides a car (or other highway
motor vehicle) to you, your personal use of
the car is usually a taxable noncash fringe
benefit.
Under the general valuation rules, the
value of an employer-provided vehicle is the
amount you would have to pay a third party
to lease the same or a similar vehicle on the
same or comparable terms in the same ge-
ographic area where you use the vehicle. An
example of a comparable lease term is the
amount of time the vehicle is available for
your use, such as a 1-year period. The value
cannot be determined by multiplying a cents-
per-mile rate times the number of miles driven
unless you prove the vehicle could have been
leased on a cents-per-mile basis.
Flights on employer-provided aircraft.
Under the general valuation rules, if your flight
on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is
primarily personal and you control the use of
the aircraft for the flight, the value is the
amount it would cost to charter the flight from
a third party.
If there is more than one employee on the
flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must be
divided among those employees. The divi-
sion must be based on all the facts, including
which employee or employees control the use
of the aircraft.
Special valuation rules. You generally can
use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefit
only if your employer uses the rule. If your
employer uses a special valuation rule, you
cannot use a different special rule to value
that benefit. You can always use the general
valuation rule discussed earlier, based on
facts and circumstances, even if your em-
ployer uses a special rule.
If you and your employer use a special
valuation rule, you must include in your in-
come the amount your employer determines
under the special rule less the sum of:
1) Any amount you repaid your employer,
and
2) Any amount specifically excluded from
income by law.
 The special valuation rules are the fol-
lowing.
1) The automobile lease rule.
2) The vehicle cents-per-mile rule. 
3) The commuting rule.
4) The unsafe conditions commuting rule.
5) The employer-operated eating-facility
rule.
For more information on these rules, see
Publication 15–B, Employer's Tax Guide to
Fringe Benefits.
For information on the non-commercial
flight and commercial flight valuation rules,
see sections 1.61–21(g) and 1.61–21(h) of
the regulations.
Retirement Plan
Contributions
You must include in income amounts you pay
into a retirement plan through payroll de-
ductions. You recover your contributions tax
free when you retire and receive benefits from
the plan. See Publication 575 for information
about the tax treatment of retirement plan
benefits.
Employer's contributions to qualified plan.
Your employer's contributions to a qualified
retirement plan for you are not included in
income at the time contributed. (Your em-
ployer can tell you whether your retirement
plan is qualified.) However, the cost of life
insurance coverage included in the plan may
have to be included. See Group-Term Life
Insurance, earlier, under Fringe Benefits.
Employer's contributions to nonqualified
plan. If your employer pays into a nonqual-
ified plan for you, you generally must include
the contributions in your income as wages for
the tax year in which the contributions are
made. However, if your interest in the plan is
subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture (you
have a good chance of losing it) at the time
of the contribution, you do not have to include
the value of your interest in your income until
it is no longer subject to a substantial risk of
forfeiture.
Elective Deferrals
If you are covered by certain kinds of retire-
ment plans, you can choose to have part of
your compensation contributed by your em-
ployer to a retirement fund, rather than have
it paid to you. The amount you set aside
(called an elective deferral) is treated as an
employer contribution to a qualified plan. It is
not included in wages subject to income tax
at the time contributed. However, it is in-
cluded in wages subject to social security and
Medicare taxes.
Elective deferrals include elective contri-
butions to the following retirement plans.
 Cash or deferred arrangements (section
401(k) plans).
 Section 457 plans.
 The Thrift Savings Plan for federal em-
ployees.
 Salary reduction simplified employee
pension (SARSEP) plans.
 Simple retirement account (SIMPLE)
plans.
 Tax-sheltered annuities.
 Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see
Reporting by employer, later.)
Limit on deferrals.For 2000, you generally
should not have deferred more than a total
of $10,500 for all qualified plans by which you
are covered. This amount may be further
limited if you are a highly compensated em-
ployee. The amount deferred by a highly
compensated employee as a percentage of
pay can be no more than 125% of the aver-
age deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligible
nonhighly compensated employees. Your
employer or plan administrator can probably
tell you the amount of the deferral limit under
this ADP test and whether it applies to you.
Your employer or plan administrator
should apply the proper annual limit when
figuring your plan contributions. However, you
are responsible for monitoring the total you
defer to ensure that the limit is not exceeded.
Check with your employer or plan adminis-
trator to learn the deferral limit for 2001. 
If your deferrals exceed the annual limit,
you must notify your plan by the date required
by the plan. If the plan permits, the excess
amount will be distributed to you. If you par-
ticipate in more than one plan, you can have
the excess paid out of any of the plans that
permit these distributions. You must notify
each plan by the date required by that plan
of the amount to be paid from that particular
plan. The plan must then pay you the amount
of the excess, along with any income earned
on that amount, by April 15 of the following
year (April 16, 2001, for a 2000 excess
deferral). See Excess deferrals, later.
Special limit for deferrals under
SIMPLE plans. If you are a participant in a
SIMPLE plan, you generally should not have
deferred more than $6,000 in 2000. Amounts
you defer under a SIMPLE plan count toward
the $10,500 overall limit and may affect the
amount you can defer under other elective
deferral plans.
Special limit for deferrals under section
457 plans.If you are a participant in a sec-
tion 457 plan (a deferred compensation plan
for employees of state or local governments
or tax-exempt organizations), you should
generally have deferred no more than 
1/3 of
your compensation, up to $8,000 in 2000.
Your plan may also allow a special catch-up
limit of up to $15,000 for each of your last 3
years of service before reaching normal re-
tirement age. Amounts you defer under other
elective deferral plans may affect your limits
under section 457 plans. Amounts you defer
under section 457 plans may affect the
amount you can defer in tax-sheltered annui-
ties under the special limit discussed next.
Special limit for tax-sheltered annui-
ties.If you are a participant in a tax-sheltered
annuity plan with at least 15 years of service
for an educational organization, hospital,
home health service agency, health and wel-
fare service agency, church, or convention
or association of churches (or associated or-
ganization), the limit on elective deferrals to
the plan for 2000 was $10,500 plus the
smaller of the following amounts.
 1) $3,000.
2) $15,000, reduced by elective deferrals
exceeding the basic amount that you
were allowed in earlier years because
of this years-of-service rule.
3) $5,000 times the number of your years
of service for the organization, minus the
total elective deferrals under the plan for
earlier years.
Page 6

Reporting by employer. Your employer
generally should not include elective deferrals
in your wages in box 1 of Form W–2. Instead,
your employer should mark the “Deferred
compensation” checkbox in box 15 and show
the total amount deferred in box 13.
Section 501(c)(18)(D) contributions.
Wages shown in box 1 of your Form W–2
should not have been reduced for contribu-
tions you made to a section 501(c)(18)(D)
retirement plan. The amount you contributed
should be identified with code “H” in box 13.
You may deduct the amount deferred subject
to the limits that apply. Include your deduction
in the total on line 32 (Form 1040). Enter the
amount and “501(c)(18)” on the dotted line
next to line 32.
Excess deferrals.If the total you defer is
more than the limit for the year, you must in-
clude the excess in your income for the year
of the deferral. File Form 1040 to add the
excess deferral amount to your wages on line
7. Do not use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ
to report excess deferral amounts.
Excess not distributed.If you do not
take out the excess amount, you cannot in-
clude it in the cost of the contract even though
you included it in your income. Therefore, you
are taxed twice on the excess deferral left in
the plan—once when you contribute it, and
again when you receive it as a distribution.
Excess distributed to you.If you take
out the excess after the year of the deferral,
do not again include it in your income if you
receive the corrective distribution by April 15
of the following year. If you receive it later,
you must include it in income in both the year
of the deferral and the year you receive it.
Any income on the excess deferral taken out
is taxable in the tax year in which you take it
out. If you take out part of the excess deferral
and the income on it, allocate the distribution
proportionately between the excess deferral
and the income.
You should receive a Form 1099–R, Dis-
tributions From Pensions, Annuities, Retire-
ment or Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance
Contracts, etc., for the year in which the ex-
cess deferral is distributed to you. Use the
following rules to report a corrective distribu-
tion shown on Form 1099–R for 2000.
 If the distribution was for a 2000 excess
deferral, your Form 1099–R should have
the code “8” in box 7. Report the excess
deferral on your 2000 tax return.
 If the distribution was for a 1999 excess
deferral, your Form 1099–R should have
the code “P” in box 7. If you did not report
the excess deferral on your 1999 tax re-
turn, you must file an amended return on
Form 1040X. If you did not receive the
distribution by April 17, 2000, you must
also report it on your 2000 tax return. 
 If the distribution was for a 1998 excess
deferral, your Form 1099–R should have
the code “D” in box 7. If you did not report
the excess deferral on your 1998 tax re-
turn, you must file an amended return on
Form 1040X. You must also report the
distribution on your 2000 income tax re-
turn.
 If the distribution was for the income
earned on an excess deferral, your Form
1099–R should have the code “8” in box
7. Report the income on your 2000 in-
come tax return regardless of when the
excess deferral was made.
Report a loss on a corrective distribution
of an excess deferral in the year the excess
amount (reduced by the loss) is distributed to
you. Include the loss as a negative amount
on line 21 (Form 1040) and identify it as “Loss
on Excess Deferral Distribution.”
TIP
Even though a corrective distribution
of elective deferrals is reported on
Form 1099–R, it is not otherwise
treated as a distribution from the plan. It
cannot be rolled over into another plan, and
it is not subject to the additional tax on early
distributions.
Excess Contributions
If you are a highly compensated employee,
the total of your elective deferrals and other
contributions made for you for any year under
a section 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as
a percentage of pay, no more than 125% of
the average deferral percentage (ADP) of all
eligible nonhighly compensated employees.
Your employer or plan administrator should
be able to tell you whether this ADP test ap-
plies to you and the amount of elective
deferrals allowed under the test.
If the total contributed to the plan is more
than the amount allowed under the ADP test,
the excess contributions must be either dis-
tributed to you or recharacterized as after-tax
employee contributions by treating them as
distributed to you and then contributed by you
to the plan. You must include the excess
contributions in your income as wages on line
7 of Form 1040. You cannot use Form 1040A
or Form 1040EZ to report excess contribution
amounts.
If you receive excess contributions from a
401(k) plan and any income earned on the
contributions within 2
1/2 months after the close
of the plan year, you must include them in
your income in the year of the deferral. If you
receive them later, or receive less than $100
excess contributions, include the excess
contributions and earnings in your income in
the year distributed. If the excess contribu-
tions are recharacterized, you must include
them in income in the year a corrective dis-
tribution would have occurred. For a
SARSEP, the employer must notify you by
March 15 following the year in which excess
contributions are made that you must with-
draw the excess and earnings. You must in-
clude the excess contributions in your income
in the year of the deferral (or the year of the
notification if less than $100) and include the
earnings in your income in the year with-
drawn.
You should receive a Form 1099–R for the
year in which the excess contributions are
distributed to you (or are recharacterized).
Report excess contributions or earnings
shown on Form 1099–R for 2000 on your
2000 tax return if code “8” is in box 7. If code
“P” or “D” is in box 7, you may have to file an
amended 1999 or 1998 return on Form 1040X
to report the excess contributions or earnings.
TIP
Even though a corrective distribution
of excess contributions is reported on
Form 1099–R, it is not otherwise
treated as a distribution from the plan. It
cannot be rolled over into another plan, and
it is not subject to the additional tax on early
distributions.
Excess Annual Additions
The amount contributed in 2000 to a defined
contribution plan is generally limited to the
lesser of 25% of your compensation or
$30,000. Under certain circumstances, con-
tributions that exceed these limits (excess
annual additions) may be corrected by a dis-
tribution of your elective deferrals or a return
of your after-tax contributions and earnings
from these contributions.
A corrective payment of excess annual
additions consisting of elective deferrals or
earnings from your after-tax contributions is
fully taxable in the year paid. A corrective
payment consisting of your after-tax contri-
butions is not taxable.
If you received a corrective payment of
excess annual additions, you should receive
a separate Form 1099–R for the year of the
payment with the code “E” in box 7. Report
the total payment shown in box 1 of Form
1099–R on line 16a of Form 1040 or line 12a
of Form 1040A. Report the taxable amount
shown in box 2a of Form 1099–R on line 16b
of Form 1040 or line 12b of Form 1040A.
TIP
Even though a corrective distribution
of excess annual additions is reported
on Form 1099–R, it is not otherwise
treated as a distribution from the plan. It
cannot be rolled over into another plan, and
it is not subject to the additional tax on early
distributions.
Stock Options
If you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or
sell stock or other property as payment for
your services, you will usually have income
either when you receive the option or when
you exercise the option (use it to buy or sell
the stock or other property). However, if your
option is a statutory stock option (defined
later), you usually will not have any income
until you sell or exchange your stock. Your
employer can tell you which kind of option you
hold.
Nonstatutory Stock Options
If you are granted a nonstatutory stock option,
the amount of income to include and the time
to include it depend on whether the fair mar-
ket value of the option can be readily deter-
mined. The fair market value of an option can
be readily determined if it is actively traded
on an established market.
The fair market value of an option that is
not traded on an established market can be
readily determined only if all of the following
conditions exist.
1) You can transfer the option.
2) You can exercise the option immediately
in full.
3) The option or the property subject to the
option is not subject to any condition or
restriction (other than a condition to se-
cure payment of the purchase price) that
has a significant effect on the fair market
value of the option.
4) The fair market value of the option privi-
lege can be readily determined. 
The option privilege for an option to buy is the
opportunity to benefit during the option's ex-
ercise period from any increase in the value
of property subject to the option without risk-
ing any capital. For example, if during the
exercise period the fair market value of stock
Page 7

subject to an option is greater than the
option's exercise price, a profit may be real-
ized by exercising the option and immediately
selling the stock at its higher value. The op-
tion privilege for an option to sell is the op-
portunity to benefit during the exercise period
from a decrease in the value of the property
subject to the option.
Option with readily determined value.If
you receive a nonstatutory stock option that
has a readily determined fair market value at
the time it is granted to you, the option is
treated like other property received as com-
pensation. See Restricted Property, later, for
rules on how much income to include and
when to include it. However, the rule de-
scribed in that discussion for choosing to in-
clude the value of property in your income for
the year of the transfer does not apply to a
nonstatutory option.
Option without readily determined value.
If the fair market value of the option is not
readily determined at the time it is granted to
you (even if it is determined later), you do not
have income until you transfer or exercise the
option. When you exercise this kind of option,
the restricted property rules apply to the
property received. The amount to include in
your income is the difference between the
amount you pay for the property and its fair
market value when it becomes substantially
vested. Your basis in the property you acquire
under the option is the amount you pay for it
plus any amount you must include in your
gross income under this rule. For more infor-
mation on restricted property, see Restricted
Property, later.
If you transfer this kind of option in an
arm's-length transaction, you must include in
your income the money or other property you
received for the transfer, as if you had exer-
cised the option.
Statutory Stock Options
There are two kinds of statutory stock options:
1) Incentive stock options, and 
2) Options granted under employee stock
purchase plans. 
For either kind of option, you must be an
employee of the company granting the option,
or a related company, at all times beginning
with the date the option is granted, until 3
months before you exercise the option (for
an incentive stock option, 1 year before if you
are disabled). Also, the option must be
nontransferable except at death. If you do not
meet the employment requirements, or you
receive a transferable option, your option is
a nonstatutory stock option. See Nonstatutory
Stock Options, earlier, in this discussion.
If you receive a statutory stock option, do
not include any amount in your income either
when the option is granted or when you ex-
ercise it. You have taxable income or
deductible loss when you sell the stock that
you bought by exercising the option. Your in-
come or loss is the difference between the
amount you paid for the stock (the option
price) and the amount you receive when you
sell it. You generally treat this amount as
capital gain or loss and report it on Schedule
D (Form 1040), Capital Gains and Losses, for
the year of the sale.
However, you may have ordinary income
for the year that you sell the stock in either
of the following situations.
 You do not meet the holding period re-
quirement. This situation applies only if
you sell the stock within 1 year after its
transfer to you or within 2 years after the
option was granted.
 You meet the holding period requirement
but the option was granted under an
employee stock purchase plan for an
option price that was less than the stock's
fair market value at that time.
Report your ordinary income as wages on line
7, Form 1040, for the year of the sale. 
Incentive stock options (ISOs).If you sell
stock acquired by exercising an ISO and meet
the holding period requirement, your gain or
loss from the sale is capital gain or loss.
If you do not meet the holding period re-
quirement and you have a gain from the sale,
the gain is ordinary income up to the amount
by which the stock's fair market value when
you exercised the option exceeded the option
price. Any excess gain is capital gain. If you
have a loss from the sale, it is a capital loss
and you do not have any ordinary income.
Example. Your employer, X Corporation,
granted you an ISO on March 11, 1998, to
buy 100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10
a share, its fair market value at the time. You
exercised the option on January 19, 1999,
when the stock was selling on the open mar-
ket for $12 a share. On January 25, 2000, you
sold the stock for $15 a share. Although you
held the stock for more than a year, less than
2 years had passed from the time you were
granted the option. In 2000, you must report
the difference between the option price ($10)
and the value of the stock when you exer-
cised the option ($12) as wages. The rest of
your gain is capital gain figured as follows:
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).For the
AMT, you must treat stock acquired through
the exercise of an ISO as if no special treat-
ment applied. This means that, when your
rights in the stock are transferable and no
longer subject to a substantial risk of forfei-
ture, you must include as an adjustment in
figuring alternative minimum taxable income
the amount by which the fair market value of
the stock exceeds the option price. However,
no adjustment is required if you dispose of the
stock in the same year you exercise the op-
tion.
See Restricted Property, later, for more
information.
Enter this adjustment on line 10 of Form
6251, Alternative Minimum Tax— Individuals.
Increase your AMT basis in any stock you
acquire by exercising the ISO by the amount
of the adjustment.
Example. The facts are the same as in
the previous example. On January 19, 2000,
when the stock was selling on the open mar-
ket for $14 a share, your rights to the stock
first became transferable. You include $400
($1,400 value when your rights first became
transferable minus $1,000 purchase price) as
an adjustment on line 10 of Form 6251.
TIP
Your AMT basis in stock acquired
through an ISO is likely to differ from
your regular tax basis. Therefore,
keep adequate records for both the AMT and
regular tax so that you can figure your ad-
justed gain or loss.
Employee stock purchase plan.If you sold
stock acquired by exercising an option
granted under an employee stock purchase
plan, determine your ordinary income and
your capital gain or loss as follows.
Option granted at discount.If you meet
the holding period requirement and you have
a gain from the sale, the gain is ordinary in-
come up to the amount by which the stock's
fair market value when the option was
granted exceeded the option price. Any ex-
cess gain is capital gain. If you have a loss
from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you do
not have any ordinary income.
Example. Your employer, Y Corporation,
granted you an option under its employee
stock purchase plan to buy 100 shares of
stock of Y Corporation for $20 a share at a
time when the stock had a value of $22 a
share. Eighteen months later, when the value
of the stock was $23 a share, you exercised
the option, and 14 months after that you sold
your stock for $30 a share. In the year of sale,
you must report as wages the difference be-
tween the option price ($20) and the value at
the time the option was granted ($22). The
rest of your gain ($8) is capital gain figured
as follows:
Holding period requirement not met.If
you do not meet the holding period require-
ment, your ordinary income is the amount by
which the stock's fair market value when you
exercised the option exceeded the option
price. This ordinary income is not limited to
your gain from the sale of the stock. Increase
your basis in the stock by the amount of this
ordinary income. The difference between your
increased basis and the selling price of the
stock is a capital gain or loss.
Example. The facts are the same as in
the previous example, except that you sold
the stock only 6 months after you exercised
the option. Because you did not hold the stock
long enough, you must report $300 as wages
and $700 as capital gain, figured as follows:
Restricted Property
Generally, if you receive property for your
services, you must include its fair market
value in your income in the year you receive
the property. However, if you receive stock
or other property that has certain restrictions
that affect its value, you do not include the
value of the property in your income until it
has been substantially vested. (You can
Selling price ($30 × 100 shares) ............... $ 3,000
Purchase price (option price)
($20 × 100 shares) ....................................−2,000
Gain ........................................................... $ 1,000
Amount reported as wages
[($22 × 100 shares) − $2,000] ...................− 200
Amount reported as capital gain $ 800
Selling price ($15 × 100 shares) ............... $ 1,500
Purchase price ($10 × 100 shares) ...........−1,000
Gain ........................................................... $ 500
Amount reported as wages
[($12 × 100 shares) − $1,000] ...................− 200
Amount reported as capital gain $ 300
Selling price ($30 × 100 shares) ............... $3,000
Purchase price (option price)
($20 × 100 shares) ....................................−2,000
Gain ........................................................... $1,000
Amount reported as wages
[($23 × 100 shares) − $2,000] ...................− 300
Amount reported as capital gain [$3,000
– ($2,000 + $300)] $700
Page 8

choose to include the value of the property in
your income in the year it is transferred to
you, as discussed later, rather than the year
it is substantially vested.)
Until the property becomes substantially
vested, it is owned by the person who makes
the transfer to you, usually your employer.
However, any income from the property, or
the right to use the property, is included in
your income as wages in the year you receive
the income or have the right to use the prop-
erty.
When the property becomes substantially
vested, you must include its fair market value,
minus any amount you paid for it, in your in-
come for that year.
Example. Your employer, the RST Cor-
poration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at
$10 a share. At the time of the sale the fair
market value of the stock is $100 a share.
Under the terms of the sale, the stock is under
a substantial risk of forfeiture (you have a
good chance of losing it) for a 5-year period.
Because your stock is not substantially vested
when it is transferred, you do not include any
amount in your income in the year you buy it.
At the end of the 5-year period, the fair market
value of the stock is $200 a share. You must
include $19,000 in your income [100 shares
× ($200 fair market value − $10 you paid)].
Dividends paid by the RST Corporation on
your 100 shares of stock are taxable to you
as wages during the period the stock can be
forfeited.
Substantially vested.Property is substan-
tially vested when:
1) It is transferable, or 
2) It is not subject to a substantial risk of
forfeiture (you do not have a good
chance of losing it).
Transferable property. Property is
transferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge
your interest in the property to any person
(other than the transferor), and if the person
receiving your interest in the property is not
required to give up the property, or its value,
if the substantial risk of forfeiture occurs.
Substantial risk of forfeiture.A sub-
stantial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in
the property transferred depend on the future
performance (or refraining from performance)
of substantial services by any person, or the
occurrence of a certain condition related to
the transfer.
Example. The Spin Corporation transfers
to you as compensation for services 100
shares of its corporate stock for $100 a share.
Under the terms of the transfer, you must re-
sell the stock to the corporation at $100 a
share if you leave your job for any reason
within 3 years from the date of transfer. Be-
cause you must perform substantial services
over a period of time and you must resell the
stock to the corporation at $100 a share (re-
gardless of its value) if you do not perform the
services, your rights to the stock are subject
to a substantial risk of forfeiture.
Choosing to include in income for year of
transfer. You can choose to include the
value of the property at the time of transfer
(minus any amount you paid for the property)
in your income for the year it is transferred.
If you make this choice, the substantial vest-
ing rules do not apply and, generally, any later
appreciation in value is not included in your
compensation when the property becomes
substantially vested. Your basis for figuring
gain or loss when you sell the property is the
amount you paid for it, plus the amount you
included in income as compensation.
If you forfeit the property after you have
included its value in income, your loss is the
amount you paid for the property minus any
amount you realized on the forfeiture.
CAUTION
!
If you make this choice, you cannot
revoke it without the consent of the
Internal Revenue Service. Consent
will be given only if you were under a mistake
of fact as to the underlying transaction.
How to make the choice.You make the
choice by filing a written statement with the
Internal Revenue Service Center where you
file your return. You must file this statement
no later than 30 days after the date the
property was transferred. A copy of the
statement must be attached to your tax return
for the year the property was transferred. You
also must give a copy of this statement to the
person for whom you performed the services
and, if someone other than you received the
property, to that person.
You must sign the statement and indicate
on it that you are making the choice under
section 83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
The statement must contain all of the follow-
ing information.
1) Your name, address, and taxpayer
identification number.
2) A description of each property for which
you are making the choice.
3) The date or dates on which the property
was transferred and the tax year for
which you are making the choice.
4) The nature of any restrictions on the
property.
5) The fair market value at the time of
transfer (ignoring restrictions except
those that will never lapse) of each
property for which you are making the
choice.
6) Any amount that you paid for the prop-
erty.
7) A statement that you have provided
copies to the appropriate persons.
Dividends received on restricted stock.
Dividends you receive on restricted stock are
extra compensation to you. Your employer
should include these payments on your Form
W–2. If they are also reported on a Form
1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, you
should list them on Schedule B (Form 1040),
Interest and Ordinary Dividends, with a
statement that you have included them as
wages. Do not include them in the total divi-
dends received.
Stock you chose to include in your in-
come. Dividends you receive on restricted
stock you chose to include in your income in
the year transferred are treated the same as
any other dividends. You should receive a
Form 1099–DIV showing these dividends. Do
not include the dividends in your wages on
your return. Report them as dividends.
Sale of property not substantially vested.
These rules apply to the sale or other dispo-
sition of property that is not substantially
vested and not included in your income in the
year transferred.
If you sell or otherwise dispose of the
property in an arm's-length transaction, in-
clude in your income as compensation for the
year of sale the amount realized minus the
amount you paid for the property. If you ex-
change the property in an arm's-length
transaction for other property that is not sub-
stantially vested, treat the new property as if
it were substituted for the exchanged prop-
erty.
If you sell the property in a transaction that
is not at arm's length, include in your income
as compensation for the year of sale the total
of any money you received and the fair mar-
ket value of any substantially vested property
you received on the sale. In addition, you will
have to report income when the original
property becomes substantially vested, as if
you still held it. Report as compensation its
fair market value minus the total of the
amount you paid for the property and the
amount included in your income from the
earlier sale.
Example. In 1997, you paid your em-
ployer $50 for a share of stock that had a fair
market value of $100 and was subject to
forfeiture until 2000. In 1999, you sold the
stock to your spouse for $10 in a transaction
not at arm's length. You had wage income of
$10 from this transaction. In 2000, when the
stock had a fair market value of $120, it be-
came substantially vested. For 2000, you
must report additional wage income of $60,
figured as follows:
Inherited property not substantially
vested. If you inherit property not substan-
tially vested at the time of the decedent's
death, any income you receive from the
property is considered income in respect of
a decedent and is taxed according to the rules
for restricted property received for services.
For information about income in respect of a
decedent, get Publication 559, Survivors, Ex-
ecutors, and Administrators.
Special Rules for
Certain Employees
This part of the publication deals with special
rules for people in certain types of employ-
ment: members of the clergy, members of
religious orders, people working for foreign
employers, military personnel, veterans, and
Peace Corps volunteers.
Clergy
If you are a member of the clergy, you must
include in your income offerings and fees you
receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,
masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the
offering is made to the religious institution, it
is not taxable to you.
If you are a member of a religious organ-
ization and you give your outside earnings to
the organization, you still must include the
earnings in your income. However, you may
be entitled to a charitable contribution de-
duction for the amount paid to the organiza-
tion. Get Publication 526, Charitable Contri-
Fair market value of stock at time of
substantial vesting ................................... $120
Minus: Amount paid for stock ................. $50
Minus: Compensation previously included
in income from sale to spouse ................ 10
−60
Additional income $60
Page 9

butions. Also, see Members of Religious
Orders, later.
Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a
member of the clergy is usually treated as any
other pension or annuity. It must be reported
on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or on
lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
Housing
Special rules for housing apply to members
of the clergy. Under these rules, you do not
include in your income the rental value of a
home (including utilities) or a housing allow-
ance provided to you as part of your pay. The
home or allowance must be provided as
compensation for your duties as an ordained,
licensed, or commissioned minister. However,
you must include the rental value of the home
or the housing allowance as earnings from
self-employment on Schedule SE (Form
1040), Self-Employment Tax, if you are sub-
ject to the self-employment tax. For more in-
formation, see Publication 517, Social Secu-
rity and Other Information for Members of the
Clergy and Religious Workers.
Housing allowance. The amount of a
housing allowance you can exclude from your
income cannot be more than either:
 The reasonable compensation for your
services as a minister, or
 Your expenses, in the year the allowance
is received, to provide a home or to pay
utilities for a home you are provided.
Expenses of providing a home include
rent, house payments, furniture payments,
costs for a garage, and utilities. They do not
include the cost of food or servants.
Designation requirement. The church or
organization that employs you must officially
designate the payment as a housing allow-
ance before the payment is made. A definite
amount must be designated. The amount of
the housing allowance cannot be determined
at a later date.
If you are employed and paid by a local
congregation, a resolution by a national
church agency of your denomination does not
effectively designate a housing allowance for
you. The local congregation must officially
designate the part of your salary that is to be
a housing allowance. However, a resolution
of a national church agency can designate
your housing allowance if you are directly
employed by the agency. If no part has been
officially designated, you must include your
total salary in your income.
Homeowner. If you own your home or
are buying it, you can exclude your housing
allowance from your income if you spend it for
the down payment on the home, for mortgage
payments, or for interest, taxes, utilities, re-
pairs, etc. However, you cannot exclude more
than the fair rental value of the home plus the
cost of utilities, even if a larger amount is
designated as a housing allowance. The fair
rental value of a home includes the fair rental
value of the furnishings in it.
You can deduct on Schedule A (Form
1040) the qualified mortgage interest and real
estate taxes you pay on your home even if
you use nontaxable housing allowance funds
to make the payments.
Teachers or administrators. If you are a
minister employed as a teacher or adminis-
trator by a church school, college, or univer-
sity, you are performing ministerial services
for purposes of the housing exclusion. How-
ever, if you perform services as a teacher or
administrator on the faculty of a nonchurch
college, you cannot exclude from your income
a housing allowance or the value of a home
that is provided to you.
TIP
If you live in faculty lodging as an
employee of an educational institution
or academic health center, all or part
of the value of that lodging may be nontaxable
under a different rule. See Faculty lodging
under Fringe Benefits, earlier.
If you serve as a minister of music or
minister of education, or serve in an admin-
istrative or other function of your religious or-
ganization, but are not authorized to perform
substantially all of the religious duties of an
ordained minister in your church (even if you
are commissioned as a “minister of the
gospel”), the housing exclusion does not ap-
ply to you.
Cantors. If you are a cantor, the housing
exclusion applies to you even if you are not
ordained, provided you have a bona fide
commission and are employed by a congre-
gation on a full-time basis to perform sub-
stantially all religious functions.
Theological students.The housing exclu-
sion does not apply if you are a theological
student serving a required internship as an
assistant pastor unless you are ordained,
commissioned, or licensed as a minister.
Traveling evangelists.If you are an or-
dained minister and are providing evangelistic
services, you can exclude amounts received
from out-of-town churches that are desig-
nated as a housing allowance, provided you
actually use them to maintain your permanent
home.
Retired members of the clergy. The rental
value of a home provided rent free by your
church for your past services is not income if
you are a retired minister. In addition, a
housing allowance paid to you is not income
to the extent you spend it for utilities, main-
tenance, repairs, and similar expenses di-
rectly related to providing a home. These
amounts are also not included in net earnings
from self-employment.
The general convention of a national reli-
gious denomination can designate a housing
allowance for retired ministers that can be
excluded from income. This applies if the lo-
cal congregations authorize the general con-
vention to establish and maintain a unified
pension system for all retired clergy members
of the denomination for their past services to
the local churches.
A surviving spouse of a retired minister
cannot exclude a housing allowance from in-
come. If these payments were reported to you
on Form 1099–R, include them on lines 16a
and 16b of Form 1040, or on lines 12a and
12b of Form 1040A. Otherwise, include them
on line 21 of Form 1040.
Members of Religious
Orders
If you are a member of a religious order who
has taken a vow of poverty, how you treat
earnings that you renounce and turn over to
the order depends on whether your services
are performed for the order.
Services performed for the order.If you
are performing the services as an agent of the
order in the exercise of duties required by the
order, do not include in your income the
amounts turned over to the order.
If your order directs you to perform ser-
vices for another agency of the supervising
church or an associated institution, you are
considered to be performing the services as
an agent of the order. Any wages you earn
as an agent of an order that you turn over to
the order are not included in your income.
Example. You are a member of a church
order and have taken a vow of poverty. You
renounce any claims to your earnings and
turn over to the order any salaries or wages
you earn. You are a registered nurse, so your
order assigns you to work in a hospital that
is an associated institution of the church.
However, you remain under the general di-
rection and control of the order. You are
considered to be an agent of the order and
any wages you earn at the hospital that you
turn over to your order are not included in
your gross income.
Services performed outside the order.If
you are directed to work outside the order,
your services are not an exercise of duties
required by the order unless they meet both
of the following requirements.
1) They are the kind of services that are
ordinarily the duties of members of the
order.
2) They are part of the duties that must be
exercised for, or on behalf of, the reli-
gious order as its agent. 
If you are an employee of a third party, the
services you perform for the third party will
not be considered directed or required of you
by the order. Amounts you receive for these
services are included in your income, even if
you have taken a vow of poverty.
Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of
a religious order and has taken a vow of
poverty. He renounces all claims to his
earnings and turns over his earnings to the
order.
Mark is a schoolteacher. He was in-
structed by the superiors of the order to get
a job with a private tax-exempt school. Mark
became an employee of the school, and, at
his request, the school made the salary pay-
ments directly to the order.
Because Mark is an employee of the
school, he is performing services for the
school rather than as an agent of the order.
The wages Mark earns working for the school
are included in his income.
Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member
of a religious order who, as a condition of
membership, has taken vows of poverty and
obedience. All claims to his earnings are re-
nounced. Gene received permission from the
order to establish a private practice as a
psychologist and counsels members of reli-
gious orders as well as nonmembers. Al-
though the order reviews Gene's budget an-
nually, Gene controls not only the details of
his practice but also the means by which his
work as a psychologist is accomplished.
Gene's private practice as a psychologist
does not make him an agent of the religious
order. The psychology services provided by
Gene are not the type of services that are
provided by the order. The income Gene
Page 10

earns as a psychologist is earned in his indi-
vidual capacity. Gene must include in his in-
come the earnings from his private practice.
Foreign Employer
Special rules apply if you work for a foreign
employer.
U.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen who
works in the United States for a foreign gov-
ernment, an international organization, a for-
eign embassy, or any foreign employer, you
must include your salary in your income.
Social security and Medicare taxes.
You are exempt from social security and
Medicare employee taxes if you are employed
in the United States by an international or-
ganization or a foreign government. However,
you must pay self-employment tax on your
earnings from services performed in the
United States, even though you are not self-
employed. This rule also applies if you are
an employee of a qualifying wholly-owned in-
strumentality of a foreign government.
Non-U.S. citizen.If you are not a U.S. citi-
zen, or if you are a U.S. citizen but also a
citizen of the Philippines, and you work for
an international organization in the United
States, your salary from that source is exempt
from tax. If you work for a foreign government
in the United States, your salary from that
source is exempt from tax if your work is like
the work done by employees of the United
States in that foreign country and the foreign
government gives an equal exemption to
employees of the United States in that coun-
try.
Waiver of alien status.If you are an al-
ien who works for a foreign government or
international organization and you file a
waiver under section 247(b) of the Immi-
gration and Nationality Act to keep your im-
migrant status, any salary you receive after
the date you file the waiver is not exempt
under this rule. However, it may be exempt it
under a treaty or agreement. See Publication
519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more in-
formation about treaties.
Nonwage income. This exemption ap-
plies only to employees' wages, salaries, and
fees. Pensions and other income do not
qualify for this exemption.
Employment abroad. For information on the
tax treatment of income earned abroad, get
Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens
and Resident Aliens Abroad.
Military
Payments you receive as a member of a mil-
itary service generally are taxed as wages
except for retirement pay, which is taxed as
a pension. Allowances generally are not
taxed. For more information on the tax treat-
ment of military allowances and benefits, get
Publication 3, Armed Forces' Tax Guide. 
Military retirement pay.If your retirement
pay is based on age or length of service, it is
taxable and must be included in your gross
income as a pension on lines 16a and 16b
of Form 1040, or on lines 12a and 12b of
Form 1040A. Do not include in your income
the amount of reduction in retirement or
retainer pay to provide a survivor annuity for
your spouse or children under the Retired
Serviceman's Family Protection Plan or the
Survivor Benefit Plan.
For a more detailed discussion of survivor
annuities, get Publication 575.
Disability.If you are retired on disability,
see Military and Government Disability Pen-
sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits,
later.
Veterans' benefits.  Veterans' benefits paid
under any law, regulation, or administrative
practice administered by the Department of
Veterans Affairs are not included in gross in-
come. The following amounts paid to veterans
or their families are not taxable.
1) Education, training, and subsistence al-
lowances. 
2) Disability compensation and pension
payments for disabilities paid either to
veterans or their families. 
3) Grants for homes designed for wheel-
chair living. 
4) Grants for motor vehicles for veterans
who lost their sight or the use of their
limbs. 
5) Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-
dends paid either to veterans or their
beneficiaries, including the proceeds of
a veteran's endowment policy paid be-
fore death.
6) Interest on insurance dividends you
leave on deposit with the VA.
Rehabilitative program payments.VA
payments to hospital patients and resident
veterans for their services under the VA's
therapeutic or rehabilitative programs are in-
cluded as income other than wages. These
payments are reported on line 21 of Form
1040.
Volunteers
The tax treatment of amounts you receive as
a volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or
similar agency is covered in the following
discussions.
Peace Corps. Living allowances you receive
as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer
leader for housing, utilities, household sup-
plies, food, and clothing are exempt from tax.
Taxable allowances. The following al-
lowances must be included in your income
and reported as wages.
1) Allowances paid to your spouse and mi-
nor children while you are a volunteer
leader training in the United States.
2) Living allowances designated by the Di-
rector of the Peace Corps as basic
compensation. These are allowances for
personal items such as domestic help,
laundry and clothing maintenance,
entertainment and recreation, transpor-
tation, and other miscellaneous ex-
penses. 
 3) Leave allowances.
4) Readjustment allowances or “termination
payments.” These are considered re-
ceived by you when credited to your ac-
count.
Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace
Corps volunteer, gets $175 a month as a re-
adjustment allowance during his period of
service, to be paid to him in a lump sum at the
end of his tour of duty. Although the allow-
ance is not available to him until the end of
his service, Gary must include it in his income
on a monthly basis as it is credited to his ac-
count.
Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA).
If you are a VISTA volunteer, you must in-
clude meal and lodging allowances paid to
you in your income as wages.
National Senior Service Corps programs.
Do not include in your income amounts you
receive for supportive services or reimburse-
ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the
following programs.
 Retired Senior Volunteer Program
(RSVP). 
 Foster Grandparent Program.
 Senior Companion Program.
Service Corps of Retired Executives
(SCORE). If you receive amounts for sup-
portive services or reimbursements for out-
of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not in-
clude these amounts in gross income.
Volunteer tax counseling.You do not in-
clude in your income any reimbursements you
receive for transportation, meals, and other
expenses you have in training for, or actually
providing, volunteer federal income tax coun-
seling for the elderly (TCE).
You can deduct as a charitable contribu-
tion your unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex-
penses in taking part in the volunteer income
tax assistance (VITA) program.
Business and
Investment Income
This section provides information on the
treatment of income from certain rents and
royalties, and from interests in partnerships
and S corporations. For additional information
about business and investment income, you
may want to see the following publications.
 Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small
Business.
 Publication 541, Partnerships.
 Publication 544, Sales and Other Dispo-
sitions of Assets.
 Publication 550, Investment Income and
Expenses.
Rents From Personal
Property
If you rent out personal property, such as
equipment or vehicles, how you report your
income and expenses is generally determined
by:
1) Whether or not the rental activity is a
business, and 
2) Whether or not the rental activity is con-
ducted for profit.
Generally, if your primary purpose is income
or profit and you are involved in the rental
activity with continuity and regularity, your
rental activity is a business. See Publication
535 for details on deducting expenses for
both business and not-for-profit activities.
Page 11

Reporting business income and expenses.
If you are in the business of renting personal
property, report your income and expenses
on Schedule C or C–EZ. The form in-
structions have information on how to com-
plete them.
Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are
not in the business of renting personal prop-
erty, report your rental income on line 21 of
Form 1040. List the type and amount of the
income on the dotted line to the left of the
amount you report on line 21.
Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you
rent personal property for a profit, report your
rental expenses on line 32 of Form 1040.
Enter the amount and “PPR” on the dotted
line to the left and include the amount of your
deductible expenses in the total amount you
enter on line 32.
If you do not rent personal property for a
profit, your deductions are limited and you
cannot report a loss to offset other income.
In the discussion Miscellaneous Income,
later, see Activity not for profit, under Other
Income.
Royalties
Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil,
gas, and mineral properties are taxable as
ordinary income.
You generally report royalties in Part I of
Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental In-
come and Loss. However, if you hold an op-
erating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are in
business as a self-employed writer, inventor,
artist, etc., report your gross income and ex-
penses on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ
(Form 1040).
Copyrights and patents. Royalties from
copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic
works, and similar property, or from patents
on inventions, are amounts paid to you for the
right to use your work over a specified period
of time. Royalties are generally based on the
number of units sold, such as the number of
books, tickets to a performance, or machines
sold.
Oil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income from
oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount
you receive when natural resources are ex-
tracted from your property. The royalties are
based on units, such as barrels, tons, etc.,
and are paid to you by a person or company
who leases the property from you.
Depletion. If you are the owner of an
economic interest in mineral deposits or oil
and gas wells, you can recover your invest-
ment through the depletion allowance. For
information on this subject, see chapter 10
of Publication 535.
Coal and iron ore. Under certain cir-
cumstances, you can treat amounts you re-
ceive from the disposal of coal and iron ore
as payments from the sale of a capital asset,
rather than as royalty income. For informa-
tion about gain or loss from the sale of coal
and iron ore, get Publication 544.
Interest in the property sold.If you sell
your complete interest in the oil, gas, or min-
eral rights, the amount you receive is consid-
ered payment for the sale of your property,
not royalty income. Under certain circum-
stances, the sale is subject to capital gain or
loss treatment on Schedule D (Form 1040).
Part of future production sold.If you
own mineral property but sell part of the future
production, you generally treat the money you
receive from the buyer at the time of the sale
as a loan from the buyer. Do not include it in
your income or take depletion based on it.
When production begins, you include all
the proceeds in your income, deduct all the
production expenses, and deduct depletion
from that amount to arrive at your taxable in-
come from the property.
Retained interest.If you retain a royalty,
an overriding royalty, or a net profit interest
in a mineral property for the life of the prop-
erty, you have made a lease or a sublease,
and any cash you receive for the assignment
is ordinary income subject to a depletion al-
lowance.
Partnership Income
A partnership is not a taxable entity. The in-
come, gains, losses, deductions, and credits
of a partnership are “passed through” to the
partners based on each partner's distributive
share of these items.
Partner's distributive share.Your distribu-
tive share of partnership income, gains,
losses, deductions, or credits is generally
based on the partnership agreement. You
must report your distributive share of these
items on your return whether or not they are
actually distributed to you. However, your
distributive share of the partnership losses is
limited to the adjusted basis of your partner-
ship interest at the end of the partnership year
in which the losses took place.
Partnership agreement.The partnership
agreement usually covers the distribution of
profits, losses, and other items. However, if
the agreement does not state how a specific
item of gain or loss will be shared, or the al-
location stated in the agreement does not
have substantial economic effect, your dis-
tributive share is figured according to your
interest in the partnership.
Partnership return.Although a partnership
generally pays no tax, it must file an infor-
mation return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of
Partnership Income. This shows the result of
the partnership's operations for its tax year
and the items that must be “passed through”
to the partners.
Schedule K–1 (Form 1065).You should
receive from each partnership in which you
are a member a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form
1065), Partner's Share of Income, Credits,
Deductions, etc., showing your share of in-
come, deductions, credits, and tax preference
items of the partnership for the tax year.
Partner's return.You must generally treat
partnership items on your individual return the
same as they are reported on the partnership
return. That is, if the partnership had a capital
gain, you report your share on Schedule D
(Form 1040). You report your share of part-
nership ordinary income on Schedule E (Form
1040).
TIP
Generally, Schedule K–1 will tell you
where to report each item of income
on your individual return. Retain
Schedule K–1 for your records. Do not attach
it to your Form 1040.
S Corporation Income
In general, an S corporation does not pay tax
on its income. Instead, the income, losses,
deductions, and credits of the corporation are
“passed through” to the shareholders based
on each shareholder's pro rata share. You
must report your share of these items on your
return. Generally, the items passed through
to you will increase or decrease the basis of
your S corporation stock as appropriate.
S corporation return.An S corporation must
file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Tax
Return for an S Corporation. This shows the
results of the corporation's operations for its
tax year and the items of income, losses,
deductions, or credits that affect the share-
holders' individual income tax returns.
Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S). You
should receive from the S corporation in
which you are a shareholder a copy of
Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S), Shareholder's
Share of Income, Credits, Deductions, etc.,
showing your share of income, losses, de-
ductions, and credits, of the S corporation for
the tax year. 
Shareholder's return. Your distributive
share of the items of income, losses, de-
ductions, or credits of the S corporation must
be shown separately on your Form 1040. The
character of these items generally is the same
as if you had realized or incurred them per-
sonally.
TIP
Generally, Schedule K–1 will tell you
where to report each item of income
on your individual return. Retain
Schedule K–1 for your records. Do not attach
it to your Form 1040.
Distributions.Generally, S corporation
distributions are a nontaxable return of your
basis in the corporation stock. However, in
certain cases, part of the distributions may
be taxable as a dividend, or as a long-term
or short-term capital gain, or as both. The
corporation's distributions may be in the form
of cash or property.
More information. For more information,
see the instructions for Form 1120S.
Sickness and
Injury Benefits
Generally, you must report as income any
amount you receive for personal injury or
sickness through an accident or health plan
that is paid for by your employer. If both you
and your employer pay for the plan, only the
amount you receive that is due to your em-
ployer's payments is reported as income.
However, certain payments may not be taxa-
ble to you. For information on nontaxable
payments, see Military and Government Dis-
ability Pensions and Other Sickness and In-
jury Benefits, later, in this discussion.
Cost paid by you.If you pay the entire cost
of an accident or health plan, do not include
any amounts you receive from the plan for
personal injury or sickness as income on your
tax return. If your plan reimbursed you for
medical expenses you deducted in an earlier
year, you may have to include some, or all,
Page 12

of the reimbursement in your income. See
Recoveries, later.
Cafeteria plans.Generally, if you are cov-
ered by an accident or health insurance plan
through a cafeteria plan, and the amount of
the insurance premiums was not included in
your income, you are not considered to have
paid the premiums and you must include any
benefits you receive in your income. If the
amount of the premiums was included in your
income, you are considered to have paid the
premiums and any benefits you receive are
not taxable.
Disability Pensions
If you retired on disability, you must include
in income any disability pension you receive
under a plan that is paid for by your employer.
You must report your taxable disability pay-
ments as wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or
Form 1040A until you reach minimum retire-
ment age. Minimum retirement age generally
is the age at which you can first receive a
pension or annuity if you are not disabled.
TIP
You may be entitled to a tax credit if
you were permanently and totally
disabled when you retired. For infor-
mation on this credit, see Publication 524,
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled.
Beginning on the day after you reach
minimum retirement age, payments you re-
ceive are taxable as a pension or annuity.
Report the payments on lines 16a and 16b
of Form 1040, or on lines 12a and 12b of
Form 1040A. For more information on pen-
sions and annuities, get Publication 575.
Retirement and profit-sharing plans.If you
receive payments from a retirement or profit-
sharing plan that does not provide for disa-
bility retirement, do not treat the payments as
a disability pension. The payments must be
reported as a pension or annuity.
Accrued leave payment. If you retire on
disability, any lump-sum payment you receive
for accrued annual leave is a salary payment.
The payment is not a disability payment. In-
clude it in your income in the tax year you
receive it.
Military and Government
Disability Pensions
Certain military and government disability
pensions are not taxable.
Service-connected disability. You may be
able to exclude from income amounts you
receive as a pension, annuity, or similar al-
lowance for personal injury or sickness re-
sulting from active service in one of the fol-
lowing government services.
1) The armed forces of any country. 
2) The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. 
3) The Public Health Service.
4) The Foreign Service. 
Conditions for exclusion.Do not in-
clude the disability payments in your income
if any of the following conditions apply.
1) You were entitled to receive a disability
payment before September 25, 1975. 
2) You were a member of a listed govern-
ment service or its reserve component,
or were under a binding written commit-
ment to become a member, on Septem-
ber 24, 1975.
3) You receive the disability payments for
a combat-related injury. This is a per-
sonal injury or sickness that:
a) Results directly from armed conflict,
b) Takes place while you are engaged
in extra-hazardous service, 
c) Takes place under conditions sim-
ulating war, including training exer-
cises such as maneuvers, or 
d) Is caused by an instrumentality of
war.
4) You would be entitled to receive disabil-
ity compensation from the Department
of Veterans Affairs (VA) if you filed an
application for it. Your exclusion under
this condition is equal to the amount you
would be entitled to receive from the VA.
Pension based on years of service.If
you receive a disability pension based on
years of service, you generally must include
it in your income. But if it is a result of active
service in one of the listed government ser-
vices and one of the listed conditions applies,
do not include in income the part of your
pension that you would have received if the
pension had been based on a percentage of
disability. You must include the rest of your
pension in your income.
Retroactive VA determination.If you
retire from the armed services based on years
of service and are later given a retroactive
service-connected disability rating by the VA,
your retirement pay for the retroactive period
is excluded from income up to the amount of
VA disability benefits you would have been
entitled to receive. You can claim a refund of
any tax paid on the excludable amount (sub-
ject to the statute of limitations) by filing an
amended return on Form 1040X for each
previous year during the retroactive period.
If you receive a lump-sum disability
severance payment and are later awarded
VA disability benefits, do not include in your
income the portion of the severance payment
equal to the VA benefit you would have been
entitled to receive in that same year. How-
ever, you must include in your income any
lump-sum readjustment or other nondisability
severance payment you received on release
from active duty, even if you are later given
a retroactive disability rating by the VA.
Terrorist attack. Do not include in your in-
come disability payments you receive for in-
juries resulting directly from a violent attack
that occurs while you are a U.S. government
employee performing official duties outside
the United States. For your disability pay-
ments to be tax exempt, the Secretary of
State must determine the attack was a ter-
rorist attack.
Long-Term Care
Insurance Contracts
Long-term care insurance contracts are gen-
erally treated as accident and health insur-
ance contracts. Amounts you receive from
them (other than policyholder dividends or
premium refunds) generally are excludable
from income as amounts received for per-
sonal injury or sickness. To claim an exclu-
sion for payments made on a per diem or
other periodic basis under a long-term care
insurance contract, you must file Form 8853
with your return.
A long-term care insurance contract is any
insurance contract that only provides cover-
age for qualified long-term care services. The
contract:
1) Must be guaranteed renewable,
2) Must not provide for a cash surrender
value or other money that can be paid,
assigned, pledged, or borrowed,
3) Must provide that refunds, other than
refunds on the death of the insured or
complete surrender or cancellation of the
contract, and dividends under the con-
tract may be used only to reduce future
premiums or increase future benefits,
and
4) Generally must not pay or reimburse
expenses incurred for services or items
that would be reimbursed under Medi-
care, except where Medicare is a sec-
ondary payer or the contract makes per
diem or other periodic payments without
regard to expenses.
Qualified long-term care services. Qualified
long-term care services are:
1) Necessary diagnostic, preventive,
therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating,
and rehabilitative services, and
2) Maintenance or personal care services
required by a chronically ill individual as
prescribed by a licensed health care
practitioner.
Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill
individual is one who has been certified as
one of the following.
1) An individual who, for at least 90 days,
is unable to perform at least two activ-
ities of daily living without substantial
assistance due to loss of functional ca-
pacity. Activities of daily living are eating,
toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing,
and continence.
2) An individual who requires substantial
supervision to be protected from threats
to health and safety due to severe cog-
nitive impairment. 
The certification must have been made by
a licensed health care practitioner within the
previous 12 months.
Limit on exclusion.The exclusion for pay-
ments made on a per diem or other periodic
basis under a long-term care insurance con-
tract is subject to a limit. The limit applies to
the total of these payments and any acceler-
ated death benefits made on a per diem or
other periodic basis under a life insurance
contract because the insured is chronically ill.
(For more information on accelerated death
benefits, see Life Insurance Proceeds under
Miscellaneous Income, later.) 
Under this limit, the excludable amount for
any period is figured by subtracting any re-
imbursement received (through insurance or
otherwise) for the cost of qualified long-term
care services during the period from the
larger of the following amounts.
Page 13

 The cost of qualified long-term care ser-
vices during the period.
 The dollar amount for the period ($190
per day for any period in 2000). 
See section C of Form 8853 and its in-
structions for more information. 
Workers' Compensation
Amounts you receive as workers' compen-
sation for an occupational sickness or injury
are fully exempt from tax if they are paid un-
der a workers' compensation act or a statute
in the nature of a workers' compensation act.
The exemption also applies to your survivors.
The exemption, however, does not apply to
retirement plan benefits you receive based
on your age, length of service, or prior con-
tributions to the plan, even if you retired be-
cause of an occupational sickness or injury.
CAUTION
!
If part of your workers' compensation
reduces your social security or equiv-
alent railroad retirement benefits re-
ceived, that part is considered social security
(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits
and may be taxable. For a discussion of the
taxability of these benefits, see Other Income
under Miscellaneous Income, later.
Return to work.If you return to work after
qualifying for workers' compensation, pay-
ments you continue to receive while assigned
to light duties are taxable. Report these pay-
ments as wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or
Form 1040A, or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.
Disability pension.If your disability pension
is paid under a statute that provides benefits
only to employees with service-connected
disabilities, part of it may be workers' com-
pensation. That part is exempt from tax. The
rest of your pension, based on years of ser-
vice, is taxable as pension or annuity income.
If you die, the part of your survivors' benefit
that is a continuation of the workers' com-
pensation is exempt from tax.
Other Sickness
and Injury Benefits
In addition to disability pensions and annui-
ties, you may receive other payments for
sickness or injury.
Railroad sick pay.Payments you receive
as sick pay under the Railroad Unemploy-
ment Insurance Act are taxable and you must
include them in your income. However, do not
include them in your income if they are for an
on-the-job injury.
Black lung benefit payments.These pay-
ments are similar to workers' compensation
and generally are not taxable.
Federal Employees' Compensation Act
(FECA). Payments received under this Act
for personal injury or sickness, including
payments to beneficiaries in case of death,
are not taxable. However, you are taxed on
amounts you receive under this Act as “con-
tinuation of pay” for up to 45 days while a
claim is being decided. Report this income
on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or on
line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sick
leave while a claim is being processed is
taxable and must be included in your income
as wages.
You can deduct the amount you spend to
“buy back” sick leave for an earlier year to be
eligible for nontaxable FECA benefits for that
period. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject
to the 2% limit on Schedule A (Form 1040).
If you buy back sick leave in the same year
you used it, the amount reduces your taxable
sick leave pay. Do not deduct it separately.
Other compensation. Many other amounts
you receive as compensation for sickness or
injury are not taxable. These include the fol-
lowing amounts.
 Compensatory damages you receive for
physical injury or physical sickness,
whether paid in a lump sum or in periodic
payments. In the discussion Miscella-
neous Income, later, see Court awards
and damages under Other Income.
 Benefits you receive under an accident
or health insurance policy on which either
you paid the premiums or your employer
paid the premiums but you had to include
them in your gross income.
 Disability benefits you receive for loss of
income or earning capacity as a result of
injuries under a “no-fault” car insurance
policy.
 Compensation you receive for permanent
loss or loss of use of a part or function
of your body, or for your permanent
disfigurement. This compensation must
be based only on the injury and not on the
period of your absence from work. These
benefits are not taxable even if your em-
ployer pays for the accident and health
plan that provides these benefits.
Reimbursement for medical care. A re-
imbursement for medical care is generally not
taxable. However, it may reduce your med-
ical expense deduction.
If you receive reimbursement for an ex-
pense you deducted in an earlier year, see
Recoveries, later. 
Miscellaneous Income
This section discusses various types of in-
come. You may have to include income from
certain transactions even if no money
changes hands. For example, if you lend
money at a below-market interest rate or have
a debt you owe cancelled, you may have to
include an amount in income.
Bartering
Bartering is an exchange of property or ser-
vices. You must include in your income, at the
time received, the fair market value of prop-
erty or services you receive in bartering. If
you exchange services with another person
and you both have agreed ahead of time as
to the value of the services, that value will be
accepted as fair market value unless the
value can be shown to be otherwise.
Generally, you report this income on
Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
But if the barter involves an exchange of
something other than services, such as in
Example 4 below, you may have to use an-
other form or schedule instead.
Example 1. You are a self-employed at-
torney who performs legal services for a cli-
ent, a small corporation. The corporation
gives you shares of its stock as payment for
your services. You must include the fair mar-
ket value of the shares in your income on
Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040)
in the year you receive them.
Example 2. You are a self-employed ac-
countant. You and a house painter are mem-
bers of a barter club. Members get in touch
with each other directly and bargain for the
value of the services to be performed. In re-
turn for accounting services you provided, the
house painter painted your home. You must
report as your income on Schedule C or
Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) the fair market
value of the house painting services you re-
ceived. The house painter must include in in-
come the fair market value of the accounting
services you provided.
Example 3. You are self-employed and
a member of a barter club. The club uses
“credit units” as a means of exchange. It adds
credit units to your account for goods or ser-
vices you provide to members, which you can
use to purchase goods or services offered by
other members of the barter club. The club
subtracts credit units from your account when
you receive goods or services from other
members. You must include in your income
the value of the credit units that are added to
your account, even though you may not ac-
tually receive goods or services from other
members until a later tax year.
Example 4. You own a small apartment
building. In return for 6 months' rent-free use
of an apartment, an artist gives you a work
of art she created. You must report as rental
income on Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair
market value of the artwork, and the artist
must report as income on Schedule C or
Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) the fair rental
value of the apartment.
Form 1099–B from barter exchange.If you
exchanged property or services through a
barter exchange, you should receive Form
1099–B, Proceeds from Broker and Barter
Exchange Transactions, or a similar state-
ment from the barter exchange by January
31, 2001. It should show the value of cash,
property, services, credits, or scrip you re-
ceived from exchanges during the year. The
IRS will also receive a copy of Form 1099–B.
Backup withholding. The income you re-
ceive from bartering is generally not subject
to regular income tax withholding. However,
backup withholding will apply in certain cir-
cumstances to ensure that income tax is col-
lected on this income.
Under backup withholding, the barter ex-
change must withhold, as income tax, 31%
of the income if:
1) You do not give the barter exchange
your taxpayer identification number
(generally a social security number or
an employer identification number), or
2) The IRS notifies the barter exchange
that you gave it an incorrect identification
number.
If you join a barter exchange, you must certify
under penalties of perjury that your taxpayer
identification number is correct and that you
are not subject to backup withholding. If you
do not make this certification, backup with-
holding may begin immediately. The barter
exchange will give you a Form W–9, Request
for Taxpayer Identification Number and Cer-
Page 14

tification, or a similar form, for you to make
this certification.
The barter exchange will withhold tax only
to the extent of any cash paid to you or de-
posited in your account or any scrip or credit
issued to you (and converted to cash).
TIP
If tax is withheld from your barter in-
come, the barter exchange will report
the amount of tax withheld on Form
1099–B, or similar statement.
Canceled Debts
Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled or
forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you
must include the canceled amount in your in-
come. You have no income from the canceled
debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt
includes any indebtedness for which you are
liable or which attaches to property you hold.
If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report
the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
If it is a business debt, report the amount on
Schedule C or C–EZ (Form 1040) (or on
Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From
Farming, if you are a farmer).
Form 1099–C. If a federal government
agency, financial institution, or credit union
cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600
or more, you will receive a Form 1099–C,
Cancellation of Debt. The amount of the
canceled debt is shown in box 2.
Interest included in canceled debt.If
any interest is forgiven and included in the
amount of canceled debt in box 2, the amount
of interest will also be shown in box 3.
Whether or not you must include the interest
portion of the canceled debt in your income
depends on whether the interest would be
deductible if you paid it. See Deductible debt
under Exceptions, later.
If the interest would not be deductible
(such as interest on a personal loan), include
in your income the amount from box 2 of
Form 1099–C. If the interest would be
deductible (such as on a business loan), in-
clude in your income the net amount of the
canceled debt (the amount shown in box 2
less the interest amount shown in box 3).
Discounted mortgage loan.If your financial
institution offers a discount for the early pay-
ment of your mortgage loan, the amount of
the discount is canceled debt. You must in-
clude the canceled amount in your income.
Stockholder debt.If you are a stockholder
in a corporation and the corporation cancels
or forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt
is dividend income to you.
If you are a stockholder in a corporation
and you cancel a debt owed to you by the
corporation, you generally do not realize in-
come. This is because the canceled debt is
considered as a contribution to the capital of
the corporation equal to the amount of debt
principal that you canceled.
Exceptions
There are several exceptions to the inclusion
of canceled debt in income. These are ex-
plained next.
Nonrecourse debt. If you are not personally
liable for the debt (nonrecourse debt), differ-
ent rules apply. You may have a gain or loss
if a nonrecourse debt is canceled or forgiven
in conjunction with the foreclosure or repos-
session of property to which the debt at-
taches. See Publication 544, for more infor-
mation.
Student loans.Certain student loans contain
a provision that all or part of the debt incurred
to attend the qualified educational institution
will be canceled if you work for a certain pe-
riod of time in certain professions for any of
a broad class of employers.
You do not have income if your student
loan is canceled after you agreed to this pro-
vision and then performed the services re-
quired. To qualify, the loan must have been
made by:
1) The government — federal, state, or lo-
cal, or an instrumentality, agency, or
subdivision thereof, 
2) A tax-exempt public benefit corporation
that has assumed control of a state,
county, or municipal hospital, and whose
employees are considered public em-
ployees under state law, or 
3) An educational institution: 
a) Under an agreement with an entity
described in (1) or (2) that provided
the funds to the institution to make
the loan, or
b) As part of a program of the institu-
tion designed to encourage stu-
dents to serve in occupations or
areas with unmet needs and under
which the services provided are for
or under the direction of a govern-
mental unit or a tax-exempt section
501(c)(3) organization.
A loan to refinance a qualified student loan
will also qualify if it was made by an educa-
tional institution or a tax-exempt section
501(a) organization under its program de-
signed as described in (3)(b) above.
An educational institution is an organiza-
tion with a regular faculty and curriculum and
a regularly enrolled body of students in at-
tendance at the place where the educational
activities are carried on.
A section 501(c)(3) organization is any
corporation, community chest, fund, or foun-
dation organized and operated exclusively for
one or more of the following purposes.
 Charitable.
 Religious.
 Educational.
 Scientific.
 Literary.
 Testing for public safety.
 Fostering national or international ama-
teur sports competition (but only if none
of the organization's activities involve
providing athletic facilities or equipment).
 Preventing cruelty to children or animals.
Exception. You do have income if your
student loan was made by an educational in-
stitution and is canceled because of services
you performed for the institution or other or-
ganization that provided the funds.
Deductible debt.You do not have income
from the cancellation of a debt if your pay-
ment of the debt would be deductible. This
exception applies only if you use the cash
method of accounting. For more information,
see chapter 5 of Publication 334.
Price reduced after purchase.Generally,
if the seller reduces the amount of debt you
owe for property you purchased, you do not
have income from the reduction. The re-
duction of the debt is treated as a purchase
price adjustment and reduces your basis in
the property.
Excluded debt. Do not include a canceled
debt in your gross income in the following
situations.
1) The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy
case under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See
Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.
2) The debt is canceled when you are in-
solvent. However, this does not apply to
the extent the debt exceeds the amount
by which you are insolvent. See Publi-
cation 908.
3) The debt is qualified farm debt and is
canceled by a qualified person. See
chapter 4 of Publication 225, Farmer's
Tax Guide.
4) The debt is qualified real property busi-
ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publication
334.
Life Insurance Proceeds
Life insurance proceeds paid to you because
of the death of the insured person are not
taxable unless the policy was turned over to
you for a price. This is true even if the pro-
ceeds were paid under an accident or health
insurance policy or an endowment contract.
Proceeds not received in installments.If
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum
or other than at regular intervals, include in
your income only the benefits that are more
than the amount payable to you at the time
of the insured person's death. If the benefit
payable at death is not specified, you include
in your income the benefit payments that are
more than the present value of the payments
at the time of death.
Proceeds received in installments.If you
receive life insurance proceeds in install-
ments, you can exclude part of each install-
ment from your income.
To determine the excluded part, divide the
amount held by the insurance company
(generally the total lump sum payable at the
death of the insured person) by the number
of installments to be paid. Include anything
over this excluded part in your income as in-
terest.
Example. The face amount of the policy
is $75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to
receive 120 monthly installments of $1,000
each. The excluded part of each installment
is $625 ($75,000 ÷ 120), or $7,500 for an
entire year. The rest of each payment, $375
a month (or $4,500 for an entire year), is in-
terest income to you.
Installments for life.If, as the benefi-
ciary under an insurance contract, you are
entitled to receive the proceeds in install-
ments for the rest of your life without a refund
or period-certain guarantee, you figure the
excluded part of each installment by dividing
the amount held by the insurance company
by your life expectancy. If there is a refund
or period-certain guarantee, the amount held
by the insurance company for this purpose is
Page 15

reduced by the actuarial value of the guaran-
tee.
Surviving spouse. If your spouse died
before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-
ceeds paid to you because of the death of
your spouse are received in installments, you
can exclude up to $1,000 a year of the inter-
est included in the installments. If you re-
marry, you can continue to take the exclusion.
Interest option on insurance.If an insur-
ance company pays you interest only on
proceeds from life insurance left on deposit,
the interest you are paid is taxable.
If you chose to receive only the interest
from your insurance proceeds, the $1,000 in-
terest exclusion for a surviving spouse does
not apply. If you later decide to receive the
proceeds from the policy in installments, you
can take the interest exclusion from the time
you begin to receive the installments.
Surrender of policy for cash.If you sur-
render a life insurance policy for cash, you
must include in income any proceeds that are
more than the cost of the life insurance policy.
In general, your cost (or investment in the
contract) is the total of premiums that you
paid for the life insurance policy, less any re-
funded premiums, rebates, dividends or
unrepaid loans that were not included in your
income.
You should receive a Form 1099–R
showing the total proceeds and the taxable
part. Report these amounts on lines 16a and
16b of Form 1040, or on lines 12a and 12b
of Form 1040A.
Endowment proceeds. Endowment pro-
ceeds paid in a lump sum to you at maturity
are taxable only if the proceeds are more than
the cost of the policy. To determine your cost,
add the aggregate amount of premiums (or
other consideration) paid for the contract and
subtract any amount that you previously re-
ceived under the contract and excluded from
your income. Include any amount of the lump
sum payment over your cost in your income.
Endowment proceeds that you choose to
receive in installments instead of a lump-sum
payment at the maturity of the policy are
taxed as an annuity. This is explained in
Publication 575. For this treatment to apply,
you must choose to receive the proceeds in
installments before receiving any part of the
lump sum. This election must be made within
60 days after the lump-sum payment first be-
comes payable to you.
Accelerated Death Benefits
Certain amounts paid as accelerated death
benefits under a life insurance contract or
viatical settlement before the insured's death
are excluded from income if the insured is
terminally or chronically ill.
Viatical settlement.This is the sale or as-
signment of any part of the death benefit un-
der a life insurance contract to a viatical
settlement provider. A viatical settlement
provider is a person who regularly engages
in the business of buying or taking assign-
ment of life insurance contracts on the lives
of insured individuals who are terminally or
chronically ill and who meets the require-
ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
Exclusion for terminal illness.Accelerated
death benefits are fully excludable if the in-
sured is a terminally ill individual. This is a
person who has been certified by a physician
as having an illness or physical condition that
can reasonably be expected to result in death
within 24 months from the date of the certif-
ication.
Exclusion for chronic illness.If the insured
is a chronically ill individual who is not
terminally ill, accelerated death benefits paid
on the basis of costs incurred for qualified
long-term care services are fully excludable.
Accelerated death benefits paid on a per diem
or other periodic basis are excludable up to
a limit. This limit applies to the total of the
accelerated death benefits and any periodic
payments received from long-term care in-
surance contracts. For information on the limit
and the definitions of “chronically ill
individual,” “qualified long-term care
services,” and “long-term care insurance
contracts,” see Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits,
earlier.
Exception. The exclusion does not apply to
any amount paid to a person (other than the
insured) who has an insurable interest in the
life of the insured because the insured:
 Is a director, officer, or employee of the
person, or
 Has a financial interest in the person's
business.
Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for accel-
erated death benefits made on a per diem or
other periodic basis, you must file Form 8853
with your return. You do not have to file Form
8853 to exclude accelerated death benefits
paid on the basis of actual expenses incurred.
Recoveries
A recovery is a return of an amount you de-
ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year.
The most common recoveries are refunds,
reimbursements, and rebates of deductions
itemized on Schedule A (Form 1040). You
may also have recoveries of non-itemized
deductions (such as payments on previously
deducted bad debts) and recoveries of items
for which you previously claimed a tax credit.
Tax benefit rule. You must include a recov-
ery in your income in the year you receive it
to the extent that the deduction or credit you
took for the recovered amount reduced your
tax in the earlier year. For this purpose, any
increase to an amount carried over to the
current year that resulted from the deduction
or credit is considered to have reduced your
tax in the earlier year.
Federal income tax refund. Refunds of
federal income taxes are not included in your
income because they are never allowed as a
deduction from income.
State income tax refund.If you received a
state or local income tax refund (or credit or
offset) in 2000, you must include it in income
if you deducted the tax in an earlier year. You
should receive Form 1099–G, Certain Gov-
ernment and Qualified State Tuition Program
Payments, from the payer by January 31,
2001. The IRS will also receive a copy of the
Form 1099–G.
Mortgage interest refund.If you received
a refund or credit in 2000 of mortgage interest
paid in an earlier year, the amount should be
shown in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage
Interest Statement. Do not subtract the refund
amount from the interest you paid in 2000.
You may have to include it in your income
under the rules explained in the following
discussions.
Interest on recovery. Interest on any of the
amounts you recover must be reported as
interest income in the year received. For ex-
ample, report any interest you received on
state or local income tax refunds on line 8a
of Form 1040.
Recovery and expense in same year.If the
refund or other recovery and the expense
occur in the same year, the recovery reduces
the deduction or credit and is not reported as
income.
Recovery for 2 or more years.If you re-
ceive a refund or other recovery that is for
amounts you paid in 2 or more separate
years, you must allocate, on a pro rata basis,
the recovered amount between the years in
which you paid it.
This allocation is necessary to determine
the amount of recovery from any earlier years
and to determine the amount, if any, of your
allowable deduction for this item for the cur-
rent year.
Example. You paid 1999 estimated state
income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments.
You made your fourth payment in January
2000. You had no state income tax withheld
during 1999. In 2000, you received a $400
tax refund based on your 1999 state income
tax return. You claimed itemized deductions
each year on your federal income tax return.
You must allocate the $400 refund be-
tween 1999 and 2000, the years in which you
paid the tax on which the refund is based.
Since you paid 75% ($3,000 ÷ $4,000) of the
estimated tax in 1999, 75% of the $400 re-
fund, or $300, is for amounts you paid in 1999
and is a recovery item. If all of the $300 is a
taxable recovery item, you will include $300
on line 10, Form 1040, for 2000, and attach
a copy of your computation showing why that
amount is less than the amount shown on the
Form 1099–G you received from the state.
The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is
for your January 2000 estimated tax payment.
When you figure your deduction for state and
local income taxes paid during 2000, you will
reduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100.
Your deduction for state and local income
taxes paid during 2000 will include the Janu-
ary net amount of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus
any estimated state income taxes paid in
2000 for 2000, and any state income tax
withheld during 2000.
Deductions not itemized. If you did not
itemize deductions for the year for which you
received the recovery of an expense that was
deductible only if you itemized, do not include
any of the recovery amount in your income.
Example. You filed your 1999 federal in-
come tax return on Form 1040A. In 2000 you
received a refund of your 1999 state income
tax. Do not report any of the refund as income
because you did not itemize deductions for
1999.
Page 16

Table 1. Worksheet for Recoveries of Itemized Deductions—Deducted After 1986
If you received refunds, rebates, or reimbursements for any expense you deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) after 1986, complete  this
worksheet to figure the amount to include in income on your 2000 Form 1040. If you recovered amounts from more than one year, s uch as
a state income tax refund from 1999 and a casualty loss reimbursement from 1998, complete a separate worksheet for each year. U se
information from Schedule A (Form 1040) for the year the expense was deducted.
The amount you may have to include in income is limited to the lesser of the amount deducted for an expense or the amount recov ered for
that expense. For example, the recovery amount included in income for medical expenses cannot be more than the amount taken on
Schedule A (Form 1040) as a medical expense reduction for the year of deduction, or the amount of the medical expense recovery,
whichever is less.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year (year of th e deduction).
If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to zero, see “Unused tax credits” and “Subj ect to
alternative minimum tax” under “Itemized Deduction Recoveries,” later in this publication. If your recovery was for an itemized dedu ction
that was limited, you should read “Itemized deductions limited” under “Itemized Deduction Recoveries.”
State/local income tax refund or credit.
1
Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements (excluding the amount you entered on line 1).
1
Add lines 1 and 2.
Itemized deductions for prior year (for example, line 28, Sch. A for 1999).
Enter any amount previously refunded to you (do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2).
Subtract line 5 from line 4.
Standard deduction for prior year.
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here. The amounts on lines 1
and 2 are not taxable.
Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8.
Taxable income for prior year
2 
(for example, line 39, Form 1040 for 1999).
Enter the following amount to include in income—
If line 10 is:
● -0- or more, enter the amount from line 9.
● A negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter net amount (but not less than zero).
3
Where To Include In Income For 2000
If line 11 equals line 3—
Enter the amount from line 1 on line 10, Form 1040.
Enter the amount from line 2 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and either line 1 or line 2 is zero—
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 as your
state/local income tax refund on line 10, Form 1040.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 as other
income on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete this worksheet.
Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the percentage.
Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A.
This is your state/local income tax refund that you enter on line 10,
Form 1040.
Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11.
This is your other itemized deduction recovery that you enter on line
21, Form 1040.
1.
11.
10.
9.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
A.
B.
C.
1
Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year.
2
If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. Taxable income will have
to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Publication 536, Net Operating Losses.
3
For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
1)
2)
3)
8)
9)
11)
4)
5)
6)
7)
10)
B)
C)
A)
Page 17

Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF Your Filing Status is . . .
Your Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,300
7,200
3,600
6,350
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status
is . . .
THEN your
Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,350
6,400
8,050
8,900
9,750
10,600
4,450
5,300
6,150
7,000
7,400
8,450
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box Above
is . . .
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,300
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,600
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,200
● Head of household, enter $6,350
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,050 ($850 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 1999.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$700
Table 2. 1999 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 3.
$250
Itemized Deduction Recoveries
The following discussion explains how to de-
termine the amount to include in your income
from a recovery of an amount deducted in an
earlier year as an itemized deduction. How-
ever, you generally do not need to use this
discussion if the recovery is for state or local
income taxes paid in 1999. Instead, use the
worksheet in the 2000 Form 1040 instructions
for line 10 to figure the amount (if any) to in-
clude in your income.
You cannot use the Form 1040 worksheet
and must use this discussion if any of the
following statements is true.
 The recovery is for a tax year other than
1999.
 The recovery is for a deducted item other
than state or local income taxes, such as
real property taxes.
 Your 1999 taxable income was zero.
 You made your last payment of 1999
state or local estimated tax in 2000.
 You owed alternative minimum tax for
1999.
 You could not deduct all your tax credits
for 1999 because their total was more
than the tax shown on line 40 of your
1999 Form 1040.
CAUTION
!
If you also recovered an amount de-
ducted as a non-itemized deduction,
figure the amount of that recovery to
include in your income and add it to your ad-
justed gross income before applying the rules
explained here. See Non-Itemized Deduction
Recoveries, later.
Total recovery included in income.If you
recover any amount that you deducted in an
earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you
must generally include the full amount of the
recovery in your income in the year you re-
ceive it. This rule applies if, for the earlier
year, all of the following statements are true.
1) Your itemized deductions exceeded the
standard deduction by at least the
amount of the recovery. (If your itemized
deductions did not exceed the standard
deduction by at least the amount of the
recovery, see Standard deduction limit,
later.) 
2) You had taxable income. (If you had no
taxable income, see Negative taxable
income, later.) 
3) Your deduction for the item recovered
equals or exceeds the amount recov-
ered. (If your deduction was less than
the amount recovered, see Recovery
limited to deduction, later.) 
4) Your itemized deductions were not sub-
ject to the limit on itemized deductions.
(If your deductions were limited, see
Itemized deductions limited, later.) 
Page 18

Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
If Your Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,250
7,100
3,550
6,250
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
If Your
Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,300
6,350
7,950
8,800
9,650
10,500
4,400
5,250
6,100
6,950
7,300
8,350
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
And the Number
in the Box
Above is:
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,250
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,550
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,100
● Head of household, enter $6,250
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,050 ($850 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 1998.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$700
Table 3. 1998 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 3.
$250
5) You had no unused tax credits. (If you
had unused tax credits, see Unused tax
credits, later.)
6) You were not subject to alternative min-
imum tax. (If you were subject to alter-
native minimum tax, see Subject to al-
ternative minimum tax, later.) 
If any of the above statements is not true,
see Total recovery not included in income,
later.
Where to report.Enter your state or local
income tax refund on line 10 of Form 1040,
and the total of all other recoveries as other
income on line 21 of Form 1040. You cannot
use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
Example. For 1999, you filed a joint re-
turn. Your taxable income was $20,000 and
you were not entitled to any tax credits. Your
standard deduction was $7,200, and you had
itemized deductions of $9,000. In 2000, you
received the following recoveries for amounts
deducted on your 1999 return:
None of the recoveries were more than the
deductions taken for 1999.
Because your total recoveries are less
than the amount by which your itemized de-
ductions exceeded the standard deduction
($9,000 − $7,200 = $1,800), you must include
your total recoveries in your income for 2000.
Report the state and local income tax refund
of $400 on line 10 of Form 1040, and the
balance of your recoveries, $525, on line 21
of Form 1040.
Total recovery not included in income.If
one or more of the six statements listed in the
preceding discussion is not true, you may be
able to exclude at least part of the recovery
from your income. If statements (4), (5), and
(6) are true (your itemized deductions were
not limited, you had no unused tax credits,
Medical expenses ........................................... $200and you were not subject to the alternative
minimum tax), you can use Table 1 to deter-
mine the amount of your recovery of amounts
deducted after 1986 to include in your in-
come.
Allocation of recoveries to be included.
If you are not required to include all of your
recoveries in your income, and you have both
a state income tax refund and other itemized
deduction recoveries, you must allocate part
of the taxable recoveries to report as a state
tax refund on line 10 of Form 1040. The bal-
ance of your taxable recoveries is reported
as other income on line 21 of Form 1040.
You can use Table 1 to figure the part to re-
port as a state tax refund, or you can figure
that part as follows.
1) Divide your state income tax refund by
the total of all your itemized deduction
recoveries. The result is the percentage
of the total recoveries that the state in-
come tax refund represents. 
State and local income tax refund .................. 400
Refund of mortgage interest ........................... 325
Total recoveries .............................................. $925
Page 19

Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
If Your Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,150
6,900
3,450
6,050
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
If Your
Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,150
6,150
7,700
8,500
9,300
10,100
4,250
5,050
5,850
6,650
7,050
8,050
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
And the Number
in the Box
Above is:
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
2. Minimum amount 2.
3. Enter the larger of line 1 or line 2. 3.
4. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
4.
● Single, enter $4,150
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,450
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $6,900
● Head of household, enter $6,050
5. Standard deduction.
5a.Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 5b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,000 ($800 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 5a and 5b. This is your
standard deduction for 1997.
c. 5c.
5b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$650
Table 4. 1997 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2) Multiply the amount of taxable recoveries
by the percentage in (1). 
Example. In 2000 you recovered $2,500
of your 1999 itemized deductions, but the re-
coveries you must include in your 2000 in-
come are only $1,500. Of the $2,500 you re-
covered, $500 was due to your state income
tax refund. The amount you report as a tax
refund on line 10 of Form 1040 is $300 [($500
÷ $2,500) × $1,500]. The balance of the tax-
able recoveries, $1,200, is reported as other
income on line 21 of Form 1040.
Standard deduction limit.You are generally
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you
do not itemize your deductions. Only your
itemized deductions that are more than your
standard deduction are subject to the recov-
ery rule (unless you are required to itemize
your deductions). If your total deductions on
the earlier year return were not more than
your income for that year, include in your in-
come this year the smaller of:
1) Your recoveries, or 
2) The amount by which your itemized de-
ductions exceeded the standard de-
duction. 
Standard deduction for earlier years.
To determine if amounts recovered in 2000
must be included in your income, you must
know the standard deduction for your filing
status for the year the deduction was claimed.
The standard deduction tables for 1999,
1998, and 1997 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and
4. If you need the standard deduction
amounts for years before 1997, see the copy
of your return for that year.
Example. You filed a joint return for 1999
with a taxable income of $25,000. Your item-
ized deductions were $8,700. The standard
deduction that you could have claimed was
$7,200. In 2000, you recover $2,400 of your
1999 itemized deductions. None of the re-
coveries were more than the actual de-
ductions for 1999. Include $1,500 of the re-
coveries in your 2000 income. This is the
smaller of your recoveries ($2,400) or the
amount by which your itemized deductions
were more than the standard deduction
($8,700 − $7,200 = $1,500).
Negative taxable income.If your taxable
income was a negative amount, reduce the
recovery you must otherwise include in your
income by the negative amount.
Example. The facts are the same as in
the previous example except you had a neg-
ative taxable income of $200 in 1999. You
would include $1,300 in your 2000 income,
rather than $1,500.
Recovery limited to deduction.You do not
include in your income any amount of your
recovery that is more than the amount you
deducted in the earlier year. The amount you
include in your income is limited to the smaller
of:
1) The amount deducted on Schedule A
(Form 1040), or 
2) The amount recovered. 
Example. During 1999, you paid $1,700
for medical expenses. From this amount you
subtracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your
adjusted gross income. Your actual medical
expense deduction was $200. In 2000, you
Page 20

received a $500 reimbursement from your
medical insurance for your 1999 expenses.
The only amount of the $500 reimbursement
that must be included in your income for 2000
is $200 — the amount actually deducted.
Itemized deductions limited.You were
subject to the limit on itemized deductions in
the earlier year if your adjusted gross income
(AGI) was more than a base amount. For
example, this amount was:
 For 1999, $126,600 ($63,300 if married
filing separately),
 For 1998, $124,500 ($62,250 if married
filing separately),
 For 1997, $121,200 ($60,600 if married
filing separately), and
If the limit applied, your itemized deductions
were reduced by the smaller of the following
amounts.
1) 3% of the amount by which your AGI
exceeded the base amount.
2) 80% of your otherwise allowable de-
ductions other than medical and dental
expenses, investment interest expense,
nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,
and gambling losses.
If the amount you recovered was deducted
in a year in which your itemized deductions
were limited, you must include it in income
up to the difference between the amount of
itemized deductions actually allowed that year
and the amount you would have been allowed
(the greater of your itemized deductions or
your standard deduction) if you had figured
your deductions using only the net amount
of the recovery item. 
To determine the portion of the recovery
you must include in income, follow the four
steps below. If your earlier tax year does not
involve negative taxable income or an unused
tax credit, skip steps 1 and 2 and start with
step 3.
1) If your taxable income for the earlier year
was a negative amount, reduce your re-
covery by the negative amount. 
2) If your tax for the earlier year was re-
duced to zero by a tax credit that was
not fully used in that year, and if reducing
your deduction for that year by the re-
covery would result in tax for that year,
reduce your recovery to an amount
equal to your recovery multiplied by the
following fraction: 
a) Your tax for the earlier year, deter-
mined after reducing your de-
ductions by the recovery and ap-
plying the credit, over 
b) The total increase in your tax for the
earlier year, determined by sub-
tracting your actual tax before ap-
plying the credit from the tax in (a)
before applying the credit. 
3) Figure the greater of: 
a) The standard deduction for the
earlier year, or 
b) The amount of itemized deductions
you would have been allowed for
the earlier year (after taking into
account the limit on itemized de-
ductions) if you had figured them
using only the net amount of the
recovery item. The net amount is
the amount you actually paid re-
duced by the recovery amount (as
reduced in steps 1 and 2, if they
apply). 
Note. If you were required to itemize
your deductions in the earlier year, use
step 3(b) and not step 3(a).
4) Subtract the amount in step 3 from the
amount of itemized deductions actually
allowed in the earlier year after applying
the limit on itemized deductions.
The result of step 4 is the amount of the re-
covery to include in your income for the year
you receive the recovery. 
For more information on this computation,
see Revenue Ruling 93–75. This ruling is in
Cumulative Bulletin 1993–2.
Example. Eileen Martin is single. She
had an AGI of $1,126,600 and itemized her
deductions on her federal income tax return
for 1999. She was not subject to alternative
minimum tax and was not entitled to any
credit against income tax. Her only allowable
deduction was $40,000 of state income taxes.
However, Eileen deducted only $10,000 in
1999 because her otherwise allowable de-
ductions of $40,000 were reduced by
$30,000. In 2000, she received a $5,000 re-
fund of her state income taxes for 1999.
The following table shows how Eileen fig-
ured the $30,000 reduction and other
amounts from the  Itemized Deduction Work-
sheet in the 1999 Schedule A (Form 1040)
instructions. These amounts are needed to
figure the portion of the $5,000 refund that
Eileen must include in her income for 2000.
If Eileen had used the $35,000 net amount
of state income tax to figure her itemized de-
ductions for 1999, the deduction allowed
would have been $7,000. This is her other-
wise allowable deduction of $35,000 reduced
by $28,000 ($35,000 × 80%). By deducting
the full $10,000 paid in 1999, she derived a
tax benefit of $3,000 ($10,000 − $7,000).
Therefore, only $3,000 of the $5,000 refund
is included in her income for 2000.
Unused tax credits.If you recover an item
deducted in an earlier year in which you had
unused tax credits, you must refigure the
earlier year's tax to determine if you must in-
clude the recovery in your income. To do this,
add the amount of the recovery to your earlier
year's taxable income and refigure the tax
and the credits on the recomputed amount.
If the recomputed tax, after application of the
credits, is more than the actual tax in the
earlier year, include the recovery in your in-
come to the extent it reduced the tax in the
earlier year. For this purpose, any increase
to an amount carried over to the current year
that resulted from deducting the recovered
amount in the earlier year is considered to
have reduced your tax in the earlier year. If
the recovery is for an itemized deduction
claimed in a year in which the deductions
were limited, see Itemized deductions limited,
earlier.
If your tax, after application of the credits,
does not change, you did not have a tax
benefit from the deduction. Do not include the
recovery in your income.
Example. In 1999, Jean Black filed as
head of household and itemized her de-
ductions. Her taxable income was $5,260 and
her tax was $791. She claimed a child care
credit of $1,200. The credit reduced her tax
to zero and she had an unused tax credit of
$409 ($1,200 − $791). In 2000, Jean recov-
ered $1,000 of her itemized deductions. She
reduces her 1999 itemized deductions by
$1,000 and recomputes that year's tax on
taxable income of $6,260. However, the child
care credit exceeds the recomputed tax of
$941. Jean's tax liability for 1999 is not
changed by reducing her deductions by the
recovery. She did not have a tax benefit from
the recovered deduction and does not include
any of the recovery in her income for 2000.
Subject to alternative minimum tax.If you
were subject to the alternative minimum tax
in the year of the deduction, you will have to
recompute your tax for the earlier year to de-
termine if the recovery must be included in
your income. This will require a recomputation
of your regular tax, as shown in the preceding
example, and a recomputation of your alter-
native minimum tax. If inclusion of the recov-
ery does not change your total tax, you do
not include the recovery in your income.
However, if your total tax increases by any
amount, you received a tax benefit from the
deduction and you must include the recovery
in your income to the extent the deduction
reduced your tax in the earlier year.
Non-Itemized Deduction
Recoveries
This section discusses recovery of deductions
other than those deducted on Schedule A
(Form 1040).
Total recovery included in income.If you
recover an amount that you deducted in an
earlier year in figuring your adjusted gross
income, you must generally include the full
amount of the recovery in your income in the
year received.
Total recovery not included in income.If
any part of the deduction you took for the re-
covered amount did not reduce your tax, you
may be able to exclude at least part of the
recovery from your income. You must include
the recovery in your income only to the extent
the deduction reduced your tax in the year of
the deduction. (See Tax benefit rule, earlier.)
Negative taxable income.If your taxable
income was a negative amount, reduce the
recovery by that negative amount. Include this
reduced recovery in your income.
Amounts Recovered for Credits
If you received a recovery in 2000 for an item
for which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier
year, you must increase your 2000 tax to the
extent the credit reduced your tax in the ear-
lier year. You have a recovery if there is a
downward price adjustment or similar adjust-
AGI for 1999 ......................................... $1,126,600
State income taxes paid in 1999 .......... $40,000
3% reduction (amount on line 8 of
1999 Itemized Deduction Worksheet)
 [($1,126,600 − $126,600) × 3%] ....... $30,000
80% reduction not applied (amount
on line 4 of 1999 Itemized Deduction
Worksheet) ($40,000 × 80%) ............. $32,000
1999 deduction (amount on line 10 of
1999 Itemized Deduction Worksheet)
($40,000 − $30,000) ........................... $10,000
Refund received in 2000 of 1999 state
income tax .......................................... $5,000
Net amount of 1999 state income
tax ($40,000 − $5,000) ....................... $35,000
Page 21

ment on the item for which you claimed a
credit.
This rule does not apply to the investment
credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries of
these credits are covered by other provisions
of the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax
Credit for Individuals, or Form 4255, Recap-
ture of Investment Credit, for details.
Survivor Benefits 
Generally, payments made by or for an em-
ployer because of an employee's death must
be included in income. The following dis-
cussions explain the tax treatment of certain
payments made to survivors. For additional
information, see Publication 559, Survivors,
Executors, and Administrators.
Lump-sum payments. Lump-sum payments
you receive from a decedent's employer as
the surviving spouse or beneficiary may be
accrued salary payments; distributions from
employee profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or
stock bonus plans; or other items that should
be treated separately for tax purposes. The
tax treatment of these lump-sum payments
depends on the type of payment.
Salary or wages. Salary or wages re-
ceived after the death of the employee are
usually ordinary income to you.
Qualified employee retirement plans.
Lump-sum distributions from qualified em-
ployee retirement plans are subject to special
tax treatment. For information on these dis-
tributions, get Publication 575 (or Publication
721 if you are the survivor of a federal em-
ployee or retiree).
Deceased public safety officers.If you are
a survivor of a public safety officer who died
in the line of duty, you may be able to exclude
from income certain amounts you receive.
Bureau of Justice Assistance pay-
ments. If you are a surviving dependent of a
public safety officer (law enforcement officer
or firefighter) who died in the line of duty, do
not include in your income the death benefit
paid to you by the Bureau of Justice Assist-
ance.
Governmental plan annuity. If you re-
ceive a survivor annuity as the child or spouse
(or former spouse) of a public safety officer
who was killed in the line of duty after 1996,
you generally do not have to include it in in-
come. The annuity is excluded to the extent
it is based on the officer's service as a public
safety officer.
For this purpose, the term “public safety
officer” includes police and law enforcement
officers, firefighters and rescue squad and
ambulance crew members.
The exclusion does not apply in situations
involving intentional misconduct, intent to
commit suicide, voluntary intoxication, or
gross negligence. Nor does it apply to pay-
ments made to anyone who substantially
contributed to the death of the officer.
Unemployment Benefits
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits
you receive depends on the type of program
paying the benefits.
Unemployment compensation. You must
include in your income all unemployment
compensation you receive. You should re-
ceive a Form 1099–G, Certain Government
and Qualified State Tuition Program Pay-
ments, showing the amount paid to you.
Generally, you enter unemployment compen-
sation on line 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of
Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.
Types of unemployment compen-
sation. Unemployment compensation gen-
erally includes any amount received under an
unemployment compensation law of the
United States or of a state. It includes the
following benefits.
1) Benefits paid by a state or the District
of Columbia from the Federal Unem-
ployment Trust Fund. 
2) State unemployment insurance benefits.
3) Railroad unemployment compensation
benefits. 
4) Disability payments from a government
program paid as a substitute for unem-
ployment compensation. (Amounts re-
ceived as workers' compensation for in-
juries or illness are not unemployment
compensation. See Workers' Compen-
sation under Sickness and Injury Bene-
fits, earlier.)
5) Trade readjustment allowances under
the Trade Act of 1974. 
6) Benefits under the Airline Deregulation
Act of 1978.
7) Unemployment assistance under the
Disaster Relief Act Amendments of
1974.
Governmental program. If you contrib-
ute to a governmental unemployment com-
pensation program and your contributions are
not deductible, amounts you receive under
the program are not included as unemploy-
ment compensation until you recover your
contributions.
Repayment of unemployment compen-
sation.If you repaid in 2000 unemployment
compensation you received in 2000, subtract
the amount you repaid from the total amount
you received and enter the difference on line
19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or
line 3 of Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line
next to your entry, write “Repaid” and the
amount you repaid. If you repaid unemploy-
ment compensation in 2000 that you included
in your income in an earlier year, you can
deduct the amount repaid on Schedule A
(Form 1040) if you itemize deductions. See
Repayments, later.
Tax withholding. You can choose to
have federal income tax withheld from your
unemployment compensation. To make this
choice, complete Form W–4V, Voluntary
Withholding Request, and give it to the paying
office. Tax will be withheld at 15% of your
payment.
CAUTION
!
If you do not choose to have tax
withheld from your unemployment
compensation, you may be liable for
estimated tax. For more information on esti-
mated tax, get Publication 505, Tax With-
holding and Estimated Tax.
Supplemental unemployment benefits.
Benefits received from an employer-financed
fund (to which the employees did not con-
tribute) are not unemployment compensation.
They are taxable as wages and are subject
to withholding for income tax and social se-
curity and Medicare taxes. Report these pay-
ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A
or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.
Repayment of benefits.You may have
to repay some of your supplemental unem-
ployment benefits to qualify for trade read-
justment allowances under the Trade Act of
1974. If you repay supplemental unemploy-
ment benefits in the same year you receive
them, reduce the total benefits by the amount
you repay. If you repay the benefits in a later
year, you must include the full amount of the
benefits in your income for the year you re-
ceived them.
Deduct the repayment in the later year as
an adjustment to gross income on Form 1040.
(You cannot use Form 1040A or Form
1040EZ.) Include the repayment on line 32
of Form 1040, and write “Sub-Pay TRA” and
the amount on the dotted line next to line 32.
If the amount you repay in a later year is more
than $3,000, you may be able to take a credit
against your tax for the later year instead of
deducting the amount repaid. For information
on this, see Repayments, later.
Private unemployment fund. Unemploy-
ment benefit payments from a private fund to
which you voluntarily contribute are taxable
only if the amounts you receive are more than
your total payments into the fund. Report the
taxable amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
Payments by a union.Benefits paid to you
as an unemployed member of a union from
regular union dues are included in your gross
income on line 21 of Form 1040.
Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you
receive from your employer during periods of
unemployment, under a union agreement that
guarantees you full pay during the year, are
taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 of
Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of
Form 1040EZ.
State employees. Payments similar to a
state's unemployment compensation may be
made by the state to its employees who are
not covered by the state's unemployment
compensation law. Although the payments
are fully taxable, do not report them as un-
employment compensation. Report these
payments on line 21 of Form 1040.
Welfare and Other
Public Assistance Benefits
Do not include in your income benefit pay-
ments from a public welfare fund, such as
payments due to blindness. Payments from
a state fund for the victims of crime should
not be included in the victims' incomes if they
are in the nature of welfare payments. Do not
deduct medical expenses that are reimbursed
by such a fund. You must include in your in-
come any welfare payments obtained
fraudulently.
Alaska residents. Payments the state of
Alaska makes to its citizens who meet certain
age and residency tests that are not based
on need are not welfare benefits. Include
them in gross income on line 21 of Form
1040.
Work-training program.Payments you re-
ceive from a state welfare agency for taking
part in a work-training program are not in-
cluded in your income, as long as the pay-
ments (exclusive of extra allowances for
transportation, etc.) do not total more than the
public welfare benefits you would have re-
Page 22

ceived otherwise. If the amount you receive
(minus the extra allowances) is more than the
welfare benefits you would have received, the
entire amount must be included in your in-
come as wages.
Persons with disabilities.If you have a
disability, you must include in income com-
pensation you receive for services you per-
form unless the compensation is otherwise
excluded. However, you do not include in in-
come the value of goods, services, and cash
that you receive, not in return for your ser-
vices, but for your training and rehabilitation
because you have a disability. Excludable
amounts include payments for transportation
and attendant care, such as interpreter ser-
vices for the deaf, reader services for the
blind, and services to help mentally retarded
persons do their work.
Disaster relief grants.Grants made under
the Disaster Relief Act of 1974 to help victims
of natural disasters are not included in in-
come. Do not deduct casualty losses or
medical expenses that are specifically reim-
bursed by these disaster relief grants. Un-
employment assistance payments under the
Act are taxable unemployment compensation.
See Unemployment compensation under Un-
employment Benefits, earlier.
Mortgage assistance payments.Payments
made under section 235 of the National
Housing Act for mortgage assistance are not
included in the homeowner's income. Interest
paid for the homeowner under the mortgage
assistance program cannot be deducted.
Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.
Payments made by a state to qualified people
to reduce their cost of winter energy use are
not taxable.
Nutrition Program for the Elderly.Food
benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-
gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you
prepare and serve free meals for the pro-
gram, include in your income as wages the
cash pay you receive, even if you are also
eligible for food benefits.
Other Income
The following brief discussions are arranged
in alphabetical order. Income items that are
discussed in greater detail in another publi-
cation include a reference to that publication.
Activity not for profit.You must include on
your return income from an activity from
which you do not expect to make a profit. An
example of this type of activity is a hobby or
a farm you operate mostly for recreation and
pleasure. Enter this income on line 21 of Form
1040. Deductions for expenses related to the
activity are limited. They cannot total more
than the income you report, and can be taken
only if you itemize deductions on Schedule A
(Form 1040). See Not-for-Profit Activities in
chapter 1 of Publication 535, Business Ex-
penses, for information on whether an activity
is considered carried on for a profit.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend income.
If you received a payment from Alaska's
mineral income fund (Alaska Permanent Fund
dividend), report it as income on line 21 of
Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3
of Form 1040EZ. The state of Alaska sends
each recipient a document that shows the
amount of the payment with the check. The
amount is also reported to IRS.
Alimony. Include in your income on line 11
of Form 1040 any alimony payments you re-
ceive. Amounts you receive for child support
are not income to you. For complete infor-
mation, get Publication 504, Divorced or
Separated Individuals.
Below-market loans. A below-market loan
is a loan on which no interest is charged or
on which the interest is charged at a rate be-
low the applicable federal rate. If you make
a below-market gift or demand loan, you must
include the forgone interest (at the federal
rate) from the loan as interest income on your
return. These loans are considered a trans-
action in which you, the lender, are treated
as having made:
1) A loan to the borrower in exchange for
a note that requires the payment of in-
terest at the applicable federal rate, and
2) An additional payment to the borrower,
which the borrower transfers back to you
as interest. 
Depending on the transaction, the additional
payment to the borrower is treated as a:
 1) Gift,
 2) Dividend,
3) Contribution to capital, 
4) Payment of compensation, or 
5) Another type of payment. 
The borrower may have to report this pay-
ment as income, depending on its classifica-
tion.
For more information on below-market
loans, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Campaign contributions. These contribu-
tions are not income to a candidate unless
they are diverted to his or her personal use.
To be exempt from tax, the contributions must
be spent for campaign purposes or kept in a
fund for use in future campaigns. However,
interest earned on bank deposits, dividends
received on contributed securities, and net
gains realized on sales of contributed securi-
ties are taxable and must be reported on
Form 1120–POL, U.S. Income Tax Return for
Certain Political Organizations. Excess cam-
paign funds transferred to an office account
must be included in the officeholder's income
on line 21 of Form 1040 in the year trans-
ferred.
Canceled sales contract.If you sell prop-
erty (such as land or a residence) under a
contract, but the contract is canceled and you
return the buyer's money in the same tax year
as the original sale, you have no income from
the sale. If the contract is canceled and you
return the buyer's money in a later tax year,
you must include your gain in your income for
the year of the sale. When you return the
money and take back the property in the later
year, you treat the transaction as a purchase
that gives you a new basis in the property
equal to the funds you return to the buyer.
Special rules apply to the reacquisition of
real property where a secured indebtedness
(mortgage) to the original seller is involved.
For further information, see Repossession in
Publication 537, Installment Sales.
Car pools. Do not include in your income
amounts you receive from the passengers for
driving a car in a car pool to and from work.
These amounts are considered reimburse-
ment for your expenses. However, this rule
does not apply if you have developed car pool
arrangements into a profit-making business
of transporting workers for hire.
Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive
from a dealer or manufacturer of an item you
buy is not income.
Example. You buy a new car for $9,000
cash and receive a $400 rebate check from
the manufacturer. The $400 is not income to
you. Your cost is $8,600. This is your basis
on which you figure gain or loss if you sell the
car, and depreciation if you use it for busi-
ness.
Casualty insurance and other reimburse-
ments. You generally should not report these
reimbursements on your return. Get Publica-
tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
(Business and Nonbusiness), for more infor-
mation.
Charitable gift annuities.  If you are the
beneficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you are
required to report the yearly annuity or fixed
percentage payment in gross income.
The payer will report the types of income
you received on Form 1099–R. Report the
gross distribution from box 1 on Form 1040,
line 16a, and the portion taxed as ordinary
income (box 2a minus box 3) on Form 1040,
line 16b. Report the portion taxed as capital
gain on Schedule D, line 8, in column (f), and
identify it in column (a).
Child support payments. You should not
report these payments on your return. Get
Publication 504 for more information.
Court awards and damages. To determine
if settlement amounts you receive by com-
promise or judgment must be included in your
income, you must consider the item that the
settlement replaces. Include the following as
ordinary income.
1) Interest on any award. 
2) Compensation for lost wages or lost
profits in most cases. 
3) Punitive damages. See Punitive dam-
ages, later in this discussion.
4) Amounts received in settlement of pen-
sion rights (if you did not contribute to
the plan). 
5) Damages for: 
a) Patent or copyright infringement, 
b) Breach of contract, or 
c) Interference with business oper-
ations.
6) Back pay and damages for emotional
distress received to satisfy a claim under
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Do not include in your income compensatory
damages for personal physical injury or
physical sickness (whether received in a lump
sum or installments).
Emotional distress.Damages you re-
ceive for emotional distress due to a physical
injury or sickness are treated as received for
the physical injury or sickness. Do not include
Page 23

them in your income. If the emotional distress
is due to a personal injury that is unrelated to
a physical injury or sickness (for example,
employment discrimination or injury to repu-
tation), you must include the damages in your
income, except for any damages you receive
for medical care due to that emotional dis-
tress. Emotional distress includes physical
symptoms that result from emotional distress,
such as headaches, insomnia, and stomach
disorders.
Punitive damages. Punitive damages
generally are taxable. It does not matter if
they relate to a physical injury or physical
sickness.
Pre-existing agreement. If you receive
damages under a written binding agreement,
court decree, or mediation award that was in
effect (or issued on or before) September 13,
1995, you do not have to include in income
any of those damages received on account
of personal injuries or sickness.
Credit card insurance.Generally, if you re-
ceive benefits under a credit card disability
or unemployment insurance plan, the benefits
are taxable to you. These plans make the
minimum monthly payment on your credit
card account if you cannot make the payment
due to injury, illness, disability, or unemploy-
ment. Report on line 21 of Form 1040 the
amount of benefits you receive during the
year that is more than the amount of the
premiums you paid during the year.
Energy conservation subsidies.You can
exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-
vided, either directly or indirectly, by public
utilities for the purchase or installation of an
energy conservation measure for a dwelling
unit. If the property is not a dwelling unit
(nonresidential property), you can exclude
50% of the subsidy, but only for amounts re-
ceived under a written contract in effect on
September 13, 1995, and at all times there-
after.
Energy conservation measure.This in-
cludes installations or modifications that are
primarily designed to reduce consumption of
electricity or natural gas, or improve the
management of energy demand.
Dwelling unit. This includes a house,
apartment, condominium, mobile home, boat,
or similar property. If a building or structure
contains both dwelling and other units, any
subsidy must be properly allocated.
Estate and trust income.An estate or trust,
unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal
income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an es-
tate or trust, you may be taxed on your share
of its income distributed or required to be
distributed to you. However, there is never a
double tax. Estates and trusts file their returns
on Form 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for
Estates and Trusts, and your share of the in-
come is reported to you on Schedule K–1
(Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share of Income,
Deductions, Credits, etc.
Current income required to be distrib-
uted. If you are the beneficiary of a trust that
must distribute all of its current income, you
must report your share of the distributable net
income whether or not you actually received
it.
Current income not required to be dis-
tributed.If you are the beneficiary of an es-
tate or trust and the fiduciary has the choice
of whether to distribute all or part of the cur-
rent income, you must report:
1) All income that is required to be distrib-
uted to you, whether or not it is actually
distributed, plus 
2) All other amounts actually paid or cred-
ited to you,
up to the amount of your share of distributable
net income.
How to report. Treat each item of income
the same way that the estate or trust would
treat it. For example, if a trust's dividend in-
come is distributed to you, you report the
distribution as dividend income on your re-
turn. The same rule applies to distributions
of tax-exempt interest and capital gains.
The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell
you the type of items making up your share
of the estate or trust income and any credits
you are allowed on your individual income tax
return.
Losses. Losses of estates and trusts
generally are not deductible by the beneficia-
ries.
Grantor trust. Income earned by a
grantor trust is taxable to the grantor, not the
beneficiary, if the grantor keeps certain con-
trol over the trust. This rule applies if the
property (or income from the property) put
into the trust will or may revert (be returned)
to the grantor or the grantor's spouse. The
grantor is the one who transferred property to
the trust.
Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the
grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at
the date of transfer) at more than 5% of the
value of the transferred property.
Fees for services.Include all fees for your
services in your income. Examples of these
fees are amounts you receive for services you
perform as:
1) A corporate director,
2) An executor or administrator of an es-
tate,
3) A notary public, or
4) An election precinct official. 
TIP
If you are not an employee and the
fees for your services from the same
payer total $600 or more for the year,
you may receive a Form 1099–MISC. 
Corporate director.Corporate director
fees are self-employment income. Report
these payments on Schedule C (Form 1040)
or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
Executor or administrator of an estate.
If you are not in the trade or business of being
an executor (for instance, you are the execu-
tor of a friend's or relative's estate), report
these fees on line 21 of Form 1040. If you
provide the services as a trade or business,
report them as self-employment income on
Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule C–EZ
(Form 1040).
Notary public. Report payments for
these services on Schedule C (Form 1040)
or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040). These pay-
ments are not subject to self-employment tax.
Election precinct official.You should
receive a Form W–2 showing payments for
services performed as an election official or
election worker. Report these payments on
line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or on line
1 of Form 1040EZ.
Food program payments to day care pro-
viders.If you operate a day care service and
receive payments under the Child Care Food
Program administered by the Department of
Agriculture that are not for your services, do
not include the payments in your gross in-
come to the extent you use them to provide
food to children eligible for help under the
program.
Foster-care providers.Payments you re-
ceive from a state, political subdivision, or
tax-exempt child-placement agency for pro-
viding care to qualified foster individuals in
your home generally are not included in your
income. You must include in your income
payments received for the care of more than
5 individuals age 19 or older and certain
difficulty-of-care payments.
A qualified foster individual is a person
who:
1) Is living in a foster family home, and 
2) Was placed there by: 
a) An agency of a state or one of its
political subdivisions, or 
b) If the individual is under age 19, a
tax-exempt placement agency li-
censed by a state or one of its pol-
itical subdivisions.
Difficulty-of-care payments.These are
additional payments that are designated by
the payer as compensation for providing the
additional care that is required for physically,
mentally, or emotionally handicapped qual-
ified foster individuals. A state must determine
that the additional compensation is needed,
and the care for which the payments are
made must be provided in your home.
You must include in your income
difficulty-of-care payments received for more
than:
1) 10 qualified foster individuals under age
19, or 
2) 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or
older.
Maintaining space in home.If you are
paid to maintain space in your home for
emergency foster-care, you must include the
payment in your income.
Reporting taxable payments. If you re-
ceive payments that you must include in your
income, you are in business as a foster-care
provider and you are self-employed. Report
the payments on Schedule C or Schedule
C–EZ (Form 1040). Get Publication 587,
Business Use of Your Home (Including Use
by Day-Care Providers), to help you deter-
mine the amount you can deduct for the use
of your home.
Free tour.If you received a free tour from a
travel agency for organizing a group of tour-
ists, you must include its value in your in-
come. Report the fair market value of the tour
on line 21 of Form 1040 if you are not in the
trade or business of organizing tours. You
cannot deduct your expenses in serving as
the voluntary leader of the group at the
group's request. If you organize tours as a
trade or business, report the tour's value on
Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule C–EZ
(Form 1040).
Gambling winnings. You must include your
gambling winnings in your income on line 21
of Form 1040. If you itemize your deductions
Page 24

on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct
gambling losses you had during the year, but
only up to the amount of your winnings.
Lotteries and raffles.Winnings from
lotteries and raffles are gambling winnings.
In addition to cash winnings, you must include
in your income the fair market value of bonds,
cars, houses, and other noncash prizes.
Installment payments.Generally, if you
win a state lottery prize payable in install-
ments, you must include in your gross income
the annual payments and any amounts you
receive designated as “interest” on the unpaid
installments. If you sell future lottery pay-
ments for a lump sum, you must report the
amount you receive from the sale as ordinary
income (line 21, Form 1040) in the year you
receive it.
Form W –2G. You may have received a
Form W–2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,
showing the amount of your gambling win-
nings and any tax taken out of them. Include
the amount from box 1 on line 21 of Form
1040. Be sure to include any amount from box
2 on line 58 of Form 1040.
Gifts and inheritances.Generally, property
you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance
is not included in your income. However, if
property you receive this way later produces
income such as interest, dividends, or rents,
that income is taxable to you. If property is
given to a trust and the income from it is paid,
credited, or distributed to you, that income is
also taxable to you. If the gift, bequest, or
inheritance is the income from the property,
that income is taxable to you.
Inherited pension or IRA.If you inher-
ited a pension or an individual retirement ar-
rangement (IRA), you may have to include
part of the inherited amount in your income.
See Survivors and Beneficiaries in Publica-
tion 575 if you inherited a pension. See In-
herited IRAs in Publication 590, Individual
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) (Including
Roth IRAs and Education IRAs), if you inher-
ited an IRA.
Expected inheritance.If you sell an in-
terest in an expected inheritance from a living
person, include the entire amount you receive
in gross income on line 21 of Form 1040.
Bequest for services. If you receive
cash or other property as a bequest for ser-
vices you performed while the decedent was
alive, the value is taxable compensation.
Historic preservation grants.Do not in-
clude in your income any payment you re-
ceive under the National Historic Preservation
Act to preserve a historically significant prop-
erty.
Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are not
deductible from other income. A hobby is an
activity from which you do not expect to make
a profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier, in
this discussion.
CAUTION
!
If you collect stamps, coins, or other
items as a hobby for recreation and
pleasure, and you sell any of the
items, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.
However, if you sell items from your collection
at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss.
Illegal income.Illegal income, such as sto-
len or embezzled funds, must be included in
your gross income on line 21 of Form 1040,
or on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form
1040) if from your self-employment activity.
Indian fishing rights.If you are a member
of a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing
rights secured by treaty, executive order, or
an Act of Congress as of March 17, 1988, do
not include in your income amounts you re-
ceive from activities related to those fishing
rights. The income is not subject to income
tax, self-employment tax, or employment
taxes.
Interest on frozen deposits.In general, you
exclude from your income the amount of in-
terest earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit
is frozen if, at the end of the calendar year,
you cannot withdraw any part of the deposit
because:
1) The financial institution is bankrupt or
insolvent, or 
2) The state where the institution is located
has placed limits on withdrawals be-
cause other financial institutions in the
state are bankrupt or insolvent. 
Excludable amount. The amount of in-
terest you exclude from gross income for the
year is the interest that was credited on the
frozen deposit for that tax year minus the sum
of:
1) The net amount withdrawn from the de-
posit during that year, and 
2) The amount that could have been with-
drawn at the end of that tax year (not
reduced by any penalty for premature
withdrawals of a time deposit). 
The excluded part of the interest is included
in your gross income in the tax year it be-
comes withdrawable.
Interest on qualified savings bonds.You
may be able to exclude from income the in-
terest from qualified U.S. savings bonds you
redeem if you pay qualified higher educational
expenses in the same year. “Qualified higher
educational expenses” are those you pay for
tuition and required fees at an eligible edu-
cational institution for you, your spouse, or
your dependent. A “qualified U.S. savings
bond” is a series EE bond issued after 1989
or a series I bond. The bond must have been
issued to you when you were 24 years of age
or older. For more information on this exclu-
sion, see Education Savings Bond Program
in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Interest on state and local government
obligations.This interest is usually exempt
from federal tax. However, you must show the
amount of any tax-exempt interest on your
federal income tax return. For more informa-
tion, see State or Local Government Obli-
gations in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Job interview expenses. If a prospective
employer asks you to appear for an interview
and either pays you an allowance or reim-
burses you for your transportation and other
travel expenses, the amount you receive is
generally not taxable. You include in income
only the amount you receive that is more than
your actual expenses.
Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must
be included in your income on line 21 of Form
1040. If you must give the pay to your em-
ployer because your employer continues to
pay your salary while you serve on the jury,
you can deduct the amount turned over to
your employer as an adjustment to income.
Include the amount you repay your employer
on line 32 of Form 1040. Write “Jury pay” and
the amount on the dotted line next to line 32.
Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks,
side commissions, push money, or similar
payments you receive in your income on line
21 of Form 1040, or on Schedule C or
Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) if from your
self-employment activity.
Example. You sell cars and help arrange
car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers
pay back part of their commissions to you for
referring customers to them. You must in-
clude the kickbacks in your income.
Manufacturer incentive payments. You
must include as other income on Form 1040,
line 21 (or Schedule C or C–EZ if you are
self-employed) incentive payments from a
manufacturer that you receive as a
salesperson. This is true whether you receive
the payment directly from the manufacturer
or through your employer. 
Example. You sell cars for an automobile
dealership and receive incentive payments
from the automobile manufacturer every time
you sell a particular model of car. You report
the incentive payments on line 21 of Form
1040.
Medical savings accounts (MSAs).You do
not generally include in income amounts you
withdraw from your MSA or Medicare+Choice
MSA if you use the money to pay for qualified
medical expenses. Generally, qualified med-
ical expenses are those you can deduct on
Schedule A (Form 1040). For more informa-
tion about MSAs or Medicare+Choice MSAs,
see Publication 969, Medical Savings Ac-
counts (MSAs).
Moving expense reimbursements. You
generally should not report these benefits on
your return. Get Publication 521 for more in-
formation.
Prizes and awards.If you win a prize in a
lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz
program, beauty contest, or other event, you
must include it in your income. For example,
if you win a $50 prize in a photography con-
test, you must report this income on line 21
of Form 1040. If you refuse to accept a prize,
do not include its value in your income.
Prizes and awards in goods or services
must be included in your income at their fair
market value.
Employee awards or bonuses. Cash
awards or bonuses given to you by your em-
ployer for good work or suggestions generally
must be included in your income as wages.
However, certain noncash employee
achievement awards can be excluded from
income. See Bonuses and awards under
Miscellaneous Compensation, earlier.
Prize points.If you are a salesperson
and receive “prize points” redeemable for
merchandise, which are awarded by a dis-
tributor to employees of dealers, you must
include their fair market value in your income.
The “prize points” are taxable in the year they
are paid or made available to you, rather than
in the year you redeem them for merchan-
dise.
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If
you were awarded a prize in recognition of
past accomplishments in religious, charitable,
scientific, artistic, educational, literary, or civic
Page 25

fields, you generally must include the value
of the prize in your income. However, you do
not include this prize in your income if you
meet all of the following requirements.
1) You were selected without any action on
your part to enter the contest or pro-
ceeding. 
2) You are not required to perform sub-
stantial future services as a condition for
receiving the prize or award. 
3) The prize or award is transferred by the
payer directly to a governmental unit or
tax-exempt charitable organization as
designated by you. The following condi-
tions apply to the transfer. 
a) You cannot use the prize or award
before it is transferred. 
b) You should provide the designation
before the prize or award is pre-
sented to prevent a disqualifying
use. The designation should con-
tain: 
i) The purpose of the designation
by making a reference to sec-
tion 74(b)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, 
ii) A description of the prize or
award, 
iii) The name and address of the
organization to receive the
prize or award, 
iv) Your name, address, and tax-
payer identification number,
and
v) Your signature and the date
signed. 
c) In the case of an unexpected pres-
entation, you must return the prize
or award before using it (or spend-
ing, depositing, investing it, etc., in
the case of money) and then pre-
pare the statement as described in
(b). 
d) After the transfer, you should re-
ceive from the payer a written re-
sponse stating when and to whom
the designated amounts were
transferred.
These rules do not apply to scholarship
or fellowship awards. See Scholarships and
Fellowships, later. 
Railroad retirement annuities.The follow-
ing types of payments are treated as pension
or annuity income and are taxable under the
rules explained in Publication 575.
1) Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that
are more than the “social security
equivalent benefit.”
2) Tier 2 benefits. 
3) Vested dual benefits.
Sale of home. You may be able to exclude
from income all or part of any gain from the
sale or exchange of a personal residence.
Get Publication 523, Selling Your Home.
Sale of personal items.If you sold an item
you owned for personal use, such as a car,
refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or
silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital
gain. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040).
You cannot deduct a loss.
However, if you sold an item you held for
investment, such as gold or silver bullion,
coins, or gems, any gain is taxable as a cap-
ital gain and any loss is deductible as a cap-
ital loss.
Scholarships and fellowships.A candidate
for a degree can exclude amounts received
as a qualified scholarship or fellowship. A
qualified scholarship or fellowship is any
amount you receive that is for:
1) Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend an
educational organization, or 
2) Fees, books, supplies, and equipment
required for courses at the educational
institution. 
Amounts used for room and board do not
qualify. Get Publication 520 for more infor-
mation on qualified scholarships and fellow-
ship grants.
Payments for services.Payments you
receive for services required as a condition
of receiving a scholarship or fellowship grant
must be included in your income, even if the
services are required of all candidates for the
degree. This includes amounts received for
teaching and research. Include these pay-
ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A,
or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.
For information about the exclusion for a
qualified tuition reduction provided to em-
ployees and their families by an educational
institution, see Publication 520.
VA payments. Allowances paid by the
Department of Veterans Affairs are not in-
cluded in your gross income. These allow-
ances are not considered scholarship or fel-
lowship grants.
Prizes.Scholarship prizes won in a con-
test are not scholarships or fellowships if you
do not have to use the prizes for educational
purposes. You must include these amounts
in your gross income on line 21 of Form 1040,
whether or not you use the amounts for edu-
cational purposes.
Social security and equivalent railroad re-
tirement benefits.Social security or equiv-
alent railroad retirement benefits, if taxable,
must be included in the income of the person
who has the legal right to receive the benefits.
Whether any of your benefits are taxable, and
the amount that is taxable, depends on the
amount of the benefits and your other income.
Social security benefits include any
monthly benefit under Title II of the Social
Security Act and any part of a tier I railroad
retirement benefit treated as a social security
benefit. Social security benefits do not in-
clude any supplemental security income (SSI)
payments.
Form SSA –1099. If you received social
security benefits during the year, you will re-
ceive Form SSA–1099, Social Security Ben-
efit Statement. An IRS Notice 703 will be en-
closed with your Form SSA–1099. This notice
includes a worksheet you can use to figure
whether any of your benefits are taxable.
For an explanation of the information
found on your Form SSA–1099, get Publica-
tion 915, Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits.
Form RRB –1099. If you received equiv-
alent railroad retirement or special guaranty
benefits during the year, you will receive Form
RRB–1099, Payments by the Railroad Re-
tirement Board. 
For an explanation of the information
found on your Form RRB–1099, get Publica-
tion 915.
If you received other railroad retirement
benefits, see Railroad retirement annuities,
earlier.
Joint return.If you are married and file
a joint return, you and your spouse must
combine your incomes and your social secu-
rity and equivalent railroad retirement benefits
when figuring if any of your combined benefits
are taxable. Even if your spouse did not re-
ceive any benefits, you must add your
spouse's income to yours when figuring if any
of your benefits are taxable.
Taxable amount. Use the worksheet in
the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruction
package to determine the amount of your
benefits to include in your income. Publication
915 also has worksheets you can use. How-
ever, you must use the worksheets in Publi-
cation 915 if any of the following situations
applies.
 You received a lump-sum benefit pay-
ment during the year that is for one or
more earlier years.
 You exclude qualified adoption expenses,
interest from qualified U.S. savings
bonds, or interest paid on a student loan.
 You take the foreign earned income ex-
clusion, the foreign housing exclusion or
deduction, the exclusion of income from
U.S. possessions, or the exclusion of in-
come from Puerto Rico by bona fide res-
idents of Puerto Rico.
Benefits may affect your IRA de-
duction. You must use the special work-
sheets in Appendix B of Publication 590 to
figure your taxable benefits and your IRA de-
duction if all of the following conditions apply.
1) You receive social security or equivalent
railroad retirement benefits. 
2) You have taxable compensation. 
3) You contribute to your IRA. 
4) You or your spouse is covered by a re-
tirement plan at work. 
How to report.If any of your benefits are
taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or
Form 1040A to report the taxable part. You
cannot use Form 1040EZ. Report your net
benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Forms
SSA–1099 and RRB–1099) on line 20a of
Form 1040, or line 14a of Form 1040A. Re-
port the taxable part (from the last line of the
worksheet) on line 20b of Form 1040, or on
line 14b of Form 1040A.
State tuition programs.If you receive dis-
tributions from a qualified state tuition pro-
gram, only the amount that is more than the
amount contributed to the program is taxable.
A qualified state tuition program is one
that is established and maintained by a state
or agency and that:
1) Allows a person to: 
a) Buy tuition credits or certificates for
a designated beneficiary who would
then be entitled to a waiver or pay-
ment of qualified higher educational
expenses, or 
b) Make contributions to an account
that is set up to meet the qualified
higher educational expenses of a
Page 26

designated beneficiary of the ac-
count,
2) Requires all purchases or contributions
to be made only in cash,
3) Prohibits the contributor and the benefi-
ciary from directing the amount invested,
4) Allows a rollover or a change of benefi-
ciary to be made only between members
of the same family, and
5) Imposes a penalty on any refund of
earnings that does not meet at least one
of the following conditions.
a) It is used for qualified higher edu-
cational expenses of the benefi-
ciary.
b) It is made because of the death or
disability of the beneficiary.
c) It is made because of (and it is not
more than) a scholarship, veteran's
educational assistance allowance,
or another nontaxable payment
(other than a gift, bequest, or in-
heritance) received by the benefi-
ciary for educational expenses.
For information on a specific program,
contact the state or agency that established
and maintains it.
Transporting school children.Do not in-
clude in your income a school board mileage
allowance for taking children to and from
school if you are not in the business of taking
children to school. You cannot deduct ex-
penses for providing this transportation.
Union benefits and dues. Amounts de-
ducted from your pay for union dues, as-
sessments, contributions, or other payments
to a union cannot be excluded from your in-
come.
You may be able to deduct some of these
payments as a miscellaneous deduction sub-
ject to the 2% limit if they are related to your
job and if you itemize deductions on Schedule
A (Form 1040). For more information, get
Publication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.
Strike and lockout benefits.Benefits
paid to you by a union as strike or lockout
benefits, including both cash and the fair
market value of other property, are usually
included in your income as compensation.
You can exclude these benefits from your in-
come only when the facts clearly show that
the union intended them as gifts to you.
Reimbursed union convention ex-
penses. If you are a delegate of your local
union chapter and you attend the annual
convention of the international union, do not
include in your income amounts you receive
from the international union to reimburse you
for expenses of traveling away from home to
attend the convention. You cannot deduct the
reimbursed expenses, even if you are reim-
bursed in a later year. If you are reimbursed
for lost salary, you must include that re-
imbursement in your income.
Utility rebates.If you are a customer of an
electric utility company and you participate in
the utility's energy conservation program, you
may receive on your monthly electric bill ei-
ther:
1) A reduction in the purchase price of
electricity furnished to you (rate re-
duction), or 
2) A nonrefundable credit against the pur-
chase price of the electricity. 
The amount of the rate reduction or
nonrefundable credit is not included in your
income.
Repayments
If you had to repay an amount that you in-
cluded in your income in an earlier year, you
may be able to deduct the amount repaid from
your income for the year in which you repaid
it. Or, if the amount you repaid is more than
$3,000, you may be able to take a credit
against your tax for the year in which you re-
paid it. Generally, you can claim a deduction
or credit only if the repayment qualifies as an
expense or loss incurred in your trade or
business or in a for-profit transaction.
Type of deduction.The type of deduction
you are allowed in the year of repayment de-
pends on the type of income you included in
the earlier year. For instance, if you repay an
amount that you previously reported as a
capital gain, deduct the repayment as a cap-
ital loss.
If you repaid social security or equivalent
railroad retirement benefits, get Publication
915.
Repayment—$3,000 or less. If the amount
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from
your income in the year you repaid it. If you
repaid an amount that you reported as wages,
unemployment compensation, or other non-
business ordinary income, enter it on line 22
of Schedule A (Form 1040). If you repaid an
amount that you reported as a capital gain,
deduct it on Schedule D (Form 1040).
Repayment—over $3,000. If the amount you
repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct
the repayment, as described earlier. How-
ever, you can instead choose to take a tax
credit for the year of repayment if you in-
cluded the income under a claim of right.
This means that at the time you included the
income, it appeared that you had an unre-
stricted right to it. If you qualify for this choice,
figure your tax under both methods and
compare the results. Use the method (de-
duction or credit) that results in less tax.
Method 1. Figure your tax for 2000
claiming a deduction for the repaid amount.
Method 2. Figure your tax for 2000
claiming a credit for the prepaid amount. Fol-
low these steps.
1) Figure your tax for 2000 without de-
ducting the repaid amount.
2) Refigure your tax from the earlier year
without including in income the amount
you repaid in 2000. 
3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown
on your return for the earlier year. This
is the credit.
4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax
for 2000 figured without the deduction
(step 1).
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the
amount repaid on the same form or schedule
on which you previously reported it. For ex-
ample, if you reported it as self-employment
income, deduct it as a business deduction on
Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
If you reported it as wages, deduct it as an
itemized deduction on line 27 of Schedule A
(Form 1040).
If method 2 results in less tax, claim the
credit on line 64 of Form 1040, and write
“I.R.C. 1341” next to line 64.
Example. For 1999 you filed a return and
reported your income on the cash method. In
2000 you repaid $5,000 included in your 1999
income under a claim of right. Your filing sta-
tus in 2000 and 1999 is single. Your income
and tax for both years are as follows:
Your tax under method 1 is $9,181. Your tax
under method 2 is $9,831, figured as follows:
Because you pay less tax using method 1,
you should take a deduction for the repay-
ment in 2000.
Repayment rules do not apply. This dis-
cussion does not apply to:
1) Deductions for bad debts,
2) Deductions from sales to customers,
such as returns and allowances, and
similar items, or
3) Deductions for legal and other expenses
of contesting the repayment. 
Year payment deducted. If you use the
cash method, you can take the deduction for
the tax year in which you actually make the
repayment. If you use any other accounting
method, you can deduct the repayment only
for the tax year in which it is a proper de-
duction under your accounting method. For
example, if you use an accrual method, you
are entitled to the deduction in the tax year in
which the obligation for the repayment ac-
crues.
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
order free publications and forms, ask tax
questions, and get more information from the
IRS in several ways. By selecting the method
that is best for you, you will have quick and
easy access to tax help.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-
payer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your
interests and concerns within the IRS by
protecting your rights and resolving problems
that have not been fixed through normal
channels. While Taxpayer Advocates cannot
change the tax law or make a technical tax
decision, they can clear up problems that re-
sulted from previous contacts and ensure that
1999
With Income
1999
Without Income
Taxable
Income $15,000 $10,000
Tax $ 2,254 $ 1,504
2000
Without Deduction
2000
With Deduction
Taxable
Income $49,950 $44,950
Tax $10,581 $ 9,181
Tax previously determined for 1999 ........ $2,254
Less: Tax as refigured .............................− 1,504
Decrease in 1999 tax $750
Regular tax liability for 2000 .................... $10,581
Less: Decrease in 1999 tax .....................− 750
Refigured tax for 2000 $9,831
Page 27

your case is given a complete and impartial
review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
 Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
1–877–777–4778.
 Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.
 Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate
office in your area.
 Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a
TTY/TDD user.
For more information, see Publication
1546, The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS.
Free tax services.To find out what services
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to
Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax
publications and an index of tax topics. It also
describes other free tax information services,
including tax education and assistance pro-
grams and a list of TeleTax topics.
Personal computer. With your per-
sonal computer and modem, you can
access the IRS on the Internet at
www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, you
can select:
 Frequently Asked Tax Questions (located
under Taxpayer Help & Ed) to find an-
swers to questions you may have.
 Forms & Pubs to download forms and
publications or search for forms and
publications by topic or keyword.
 Fill-in Forms (located under Forms &
Pubs) to enter information while the form
is displayed and then print the completed
form.
 Tax Info For You to view Internal Reve-
nue Bulletins published in the last few
years.
 Tax Regs in English to search regulations
and the Internal Revenue Code (under
United States Code (USC)).
 Digital Dispatch and IRS Local News Net
(both located under Tax Info For Busi-
ness) to receive our electronic newslet-
ters on hot tax issues and news.
 Small Business Corner (located under
Tax Info For Business) to get information
on starting and operating a small busi-
ness.
You can also reach us with your computer
using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone
attached to your fax machine, you can
receive forms and instructions by
calling 703–368–9694. Follow the directions
from the prompts. When you order forms,
enter the catalog number for the form you
need. The items you request will be faxed to
you.
Phone. Many services are available
by phone.
 Ordering forms, instructions, and publi-
cations. Call  1–800–829–3676 to order
current and prior year forms, instructions,
and publications.
 Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.
 TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–
4059 to ask tax questions or to order
forms and publications.
 TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to
listen to pre-recorded messages covering
various tax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone
services. To ensure that IRS representatives
give accurate, courteous, and professional
answers, we evaluate the quality of our tele-
phone services in several ways.
 A second IRS representative sometimes
monitors live telephone calls. That person
only evaluates the IRS assistor and does
not keep a record of any taxpayer's name
or tax identification number.
 We sometimes record telephone calls to
evaluate IRS assistors objectively. We
hold these recordings no longer than one
week and use them only to measure the
quality of assistance.
 We value our customers' opinions.
Throughout this year, we will be survey-
ing our customers for their opinions on
our service.
Walk-in. You can walk in to many
post offices, libraries, and IRS offices
to pick up certain forms, instructions,
and publications. Also, some libraries and IRS
offices have:
 An extensive collection of products avail-
able to print from a CD-ROM or photo-
copy from reproducible proofs.
 The Internal Revenue Code, regulations,
Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-
tive Bulletins available for research pur-
poses.
Mail. You can send your order for
forms, instructions, and publications
to the Distribution Center nearest to
you and receive a response within 10 work-
days after your request is received. Find the
address that applies to your part of the
country.
 Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
 Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
 Eastern part of U.S. and foreign ad-
dresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publi-
cation 1796, Federal Tax Products on
CD-ROM, and obtain:
 Current tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications.
 Prior-year tax forms, instructions, and
publications.
 Popular tax forms which may be filled in
electronically, printed out for submission,
and saved for recordkeeping.
 Internal Revenue Bulletins.
The CD-ROM can be purchased from
National Technical Information Service (NTIS)
by calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet
at www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release
is available in mid-December and the final
release is available in late January.
IRS Publication 3207, The Business Re-
source Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that
contains information important to small busi-
nesses. It is available in mid-February. You
can get one free copy by calling
1–800–829–3676.
Page 28

Index
A
Accelerated death benefits ........ 16
Accident or health plan benefits .. 4
Activity not for profit .................. 23
 Adoption assistance .................... 4
 Advance commissions ................. 2
Alaska Permanent Fund
dividend ................................ 23
 Alimony ...................................... 23
Allowances and reimbursements 2
Assistance (See Tax help)               
 Awards ................................... 2, 25
B
 Babysitting ................................... 2
Back pay awards ......................... 2
 Bartering:
 Backup withholding .............. 14
 Income from ......................... 14
 Below-market loans ................... 23
Bonuses and awards ................... 2
C
 Campaign contributions ............. 23
 Canceled debts ......................... 15
Canceled sales contract ............ 23
 Car pools ................................... 23
 Cash rebate ............................... 23
Casualty insurance and other re-
imbursements ....................... 23
Charitable gift annuities ............. 23
Child support payments ............ 23
 Child-care provider ...................... 2
 Clergy:
 Housing allowance ............... 10
Members of religious orders 10
Retired members of ............. 10
Teachers or administrators .. 10
 Comments ................................... 2
 Commissions ............................... 2
Constructive receipt of income .... 2
Contributions to retirement plan .. 6
Cost-of-living allowances, govern-
ment ....................................... 3
 Court awards ............................. 23
Credit card insurance ................ 24
Credits, recoveries for ............... 21
D
 Damages ................................... 23
Death benefit exclusion ............. 22
Death benefits for public safety
officers .................................. 22
Deceased employees, beneficia-
ries of ................................... 22
Dependent care benefits ............. 4
Disability pensions, including mili-
tary and government ............ 13
Disaster relief grants ................. 23
Dividends, restricted stock .......... 9
E
 Educational assistance ................ 4
 Elective deferrals ......................... 6
 Employee compensation ............. 2
 Endowment proceeds ................ 16
Energy conservation subsidies . 24
Estate and trust income ............ 24
Executive health programs .......... 4
F
 Faculty lodging ............................ 5
Fees, receipt of ......................... 24
Financial counseling fees ............ 4
Food program payments ........... 24
 Foreign employer ...................... 11
 Forms:
 RRB–1099 ............................ 26
 SSA–1099 ............................ 26
 W–2 .................................... 2, 3
 W–2G ................................... 25
Foster parents and providers .... 24
Free tax services ....................... 27
 Fringe benefits:
 Accounting period .................. 3
Executive health programs .... 4
 Faculty lodging ....................... 5
Financial counseling fees ....... 4
 Life insurance ......................... 4
Meals and lodging .................. 5
Provider of benefit .................. 3
Recipient of fringe benefit ...... 3
 Taxation of ............................. 5
 Transportation ........................ 5
 Valuation of ........................ 5, 6
G
 Gambling winnings .................... 24
Gifts and inheritances ............... 25
Gifts from employer ..................... 3
Group-term life insurance ............ 4
H
Help (See Tax help)                         
Historic preservation grants ...... 25
Hobby income and losses ......... 25
Housing allowance, clergy ........ 10
I
 Illegal income ............................ 25
Indian fishing rights ................... 25
 Inheritances ............................... 25
Insurance proceeds from long-
term care contract ................ 13
Interest, not taxable ................... 25
 Interview expenses .................... 25
Itemized deduction recoveries .. 18
J
Jury duty pay ............................. 25
K
 Kickbacks .................................. 25
L
 Life insurance:
Death benefit exclusion ........ 22
 Interest option ...................... 16
 Lump-sum payments ............ 22
Paid before death ................. 16
 Permanent benefits ................ 4
 Premiums ............................... 4
 Proceeds .............................. 15
 Lodging ........................................ 5
Long-term care coverage benefits 4
 Lottery winnings ........................ 25
M
 Manufacturer incentive
payments .............................. 25
Meals and lodging ....................... 5
Medical savings account contribu-
tions ........................................ 4
Medical savings accounts
(MSAs) ................................. 25
Military retirement pay ......... 11, 13
More information (See Tax help)     
Mortgage assistance payments 23
 Moving expense
reimbursements .................... 25
MSAs (See Medical savings accounts
( MSAs ))                                    
N
Nonstatutory stock options .......... 7
Note received for services .......... 3
Nutrition Program for Elderly ..... 23
O
 Overseas employment .............. 11
P
Parsonage, rental value of ........ 10
 Partnership income ................... 12
 Peace Corps .............................. 11
 Prepaid income ........................... 2
Prizes and awards ..................... 25
Public assistance payments ...... 22
Publications (See Tax help)             
R
Railroad retirement benefits, tier
1 ........................................... 26
Rebate, new car purchase ........ 23
 Recoveries:
 Credits .................................. 21
Included in income ............... 16
 Itemized deductions ............. 18
 Non-itemized deductions ...... 21
 Religious orders ........................ 10
Rental of personal property ....... 11
 Repayments .............................. 27
 Restricted property:
Dividends, restricted stock ..... 9
Income, year of transfer ......... 9
 Sale of .................................... 9
 Substantially vested ............... 9
Retirement plan contributions ..... 6
 Royalties .................................... 12
S
S corporation income ................ 12
Sale of home ............................. 26
Sale of personal items .............. 26
 Scholarships .............................. 26
School children, transporting ..... 27
 Severance pay ............................ 3
 Sick pay ....................................... 3
Sickness and injury benefits:
 Compensatory damages ...... 14
Railroad sick pay .................. 14
 Workers' compensation ........ 14
 Social security:
 Benefits ................................ 26
Payments by employer .......... 3
State income tax refunds (see
Recoveries) .......................... 16
State tuition programs ............... 26
State welfare payments ............. 22
Stock appreciation rights ............. 3
 Stock options:
Employee stock purchase
plans .................................. 8
 Nonstatutory ........................... 7
 Statutory ................................. 8
Strike and lockout benefits ........ 27
Student loan, canceled .............. 15
 Suggestions ................................. 2
 Supplemental unemployment
benefits ................................. 22
T
 Tax help ..................................... 27
 Taxpayer Advocate ................... 27
 Tours, free ................................. 24
 Transportation ....................... 5, 27
Trust and estate income ........... 24
 TTY/TDD information ................ 27
 Tuition reduction .......................... 5
U
 Unemployment compensation ... 22
 Union benefits ........................... 27
 Utility rebates ............................. 27
V
 Veterans' benefits ...................... 11
 Volunteers ................................. 11
Volunteers in Service to America
(VISTA) ................................. 11
W
 Welfare payments ..................... 22
 Work-training programs ......... 3, 22
 Workers' compensation ............. 14
/H18549
Page 29