Userid: SD_885NB schema tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/XML Fileid: ..._CONVERSION\revised\01-17-2012_right\11p550_01172012_#43.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
What's New .................... . 2Department
of the Reminders ..................... . 2Treasury Investment
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue Chapter 1. Investment Income ....... . 3Income andService General Information ............. . 3
Interest Income ................ . 5
Discount on Debt Instruments ..... . 14Expenses When To Report Interest Income ... . 17
How To Report Interest Income .... . 17
Dividends and Other Distributions ... . 20
How To Report Dividend Income ... . 24(Including Capital
Stripped Preferred Stock ......... . 26
Gains and Losses) REMICs, FASITs, and Other
CDOs ................... . 26
S Corporations ............... . 27
For use in preparing Investment Clubs .............. . 28
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other
2011 Returns Reportable Transactions ........ . 29
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses ..... . 32
Limits on Deductions ........... . 32
Interest Expenses ............. . 33
Bond Premium Amortization ....... . 35
Expenses of Producing Income .... . 36
Nondeductible Expenses ......... . 37
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................ . 38
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................ . 38
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property ........... . 39
What Is a Sale or Trade? ......... . 39
Basis of Investment Property ...... . 42
How To Figure Gain or Loss ...... . 47
Nontaxable Trades ............. . 49
Transfers Between Spouses ...... . 51
Related Party Transactions ....... . 51
Capital Gains and Losses ........ . 52
Capital or Ordinary Gain or
Loss ................. . 52
Holding Period ............. . 56
Nonbusiness Bad Debts ...... . 58
Short Sales ............... . 59
Wash Sales ............... . 60
Options ................. . 61
Straddles ................ . 62
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives ...... . 66
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded
Securities ............. . 66
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock ......... . 67
Rollover of Gain From Sale
of Empowerment Zone
Assets ............... . 68
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses .................. . 68
Comprehensive Example ......... . 71
Special Rules for Traders in
Get forms and other information Securities ................ . 80
faster and easier by: Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help ..... . 81
Glossary ...................... . 83Internet IRS.gov
Index ......................... . 85
Jan 17, 2012

Page 2 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Short sales. If you enter into a short sale on or you reside inside or outside the United States
after January 1, 2011, your short sale will be and whether or not you receive a Form 1099What's New reported on a Form 1099-B for the year in which from the foreign payer.
you deliver the security to satisfy the short saleFuture developments. The IRS has created Employee stock options. If you received anobligation. See Short-Term or Long-Term Capi-a page on IRS.gov for information about Publi- option to buy or sell stock or other property astal Gain or Loss under Short Sales in chapter 4.cation 550, at www.irs.gov/pub550. Information payment for your services, see Publication 525,
about any future developments affecting Publi- Foreign financial assets. If you had foreign Taxable and Nontaxable Income, for the special
cation 550 (such as legislation enacted after we financial assets in 2011, you may have to file tax rules that apply.
release it) will be posted on that page. new Form 8938, Statement of Foreign Financial
Sale of DC Zone assets. Investments in Dis-Assets, with your tax return. Check www.irs.gov/
Form 8949. Form 8949 is new. Many transac- trict of Columbia Enterprise Zone (DC Zone)form8938 for details.
assets acquired after 1997 and before 2012 andtions that, in previous years, would have been
Fund of funds. A mutual fund or other regu- held more than 5 years will qualify for a specialreported on Schedule D (Form 1040) or D-1
lated investment company that is a qualified tax benefit. If you sell or trade a DC Zone assetmust be reported on Form 8949 if they occur in
fund of funds, in any of its taxable years begin- at a gain, you may be able to exclude the quali-2011. Complete all necessary pages of Form
ning after December 22, 2010, may distribute fied capital gain from your gross income. This8949 before completing line 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, or 10 of
exempt-interest dividends to its shareholders. exclusion applies to an interest in, or property of,Schedule D (Form 1040). Instructions for how to
See Exempt-interest dividends under Dividends certain businesses operating in the District ofcomplete Form 8949 are included in the 2011
and Other Distributions in chapter 1. Columbia. For more information about the exclu-Instructions for Schedule D, Capital Gains and
sion, see the Schedule D instructions. For moreLosses.
information about DC Zone assets, see section
Adjustments to gain or loss on Form 8949. 1400B of the Internal Revenue Code.
In certain situations, you must put a code in Reminders Photographs of missing children. The Inter-column (b) of Form 8949 and make an adjust-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with thement to your gain or loss in column (g). See the Mutual fund distributions. Publication 564, National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-2011 Instructions for Schedule D. Mutual Fund Distributions, has been incorpo- dren. Photographs of missing children selectedrated into this publication.Schedule D-1. For 2011 transactions, Sched- by the Center may appear in this publication on
ule D-1 is no longer in use. Form 8949 replaces pages that would otherwise be blank. You canNew penalties for certain abusive tax shel-it. help bring these children home by looking at theters. Underpayments of tax due to an undis- photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOSTclosed foreign financial asset are now subject to100% exclusion of gain on qualified small (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.a 40% penalty. Underpayments due to a trans-business stock. You may be able to exclude action lacking economic substance are nowfrom income up to 100% of your gain from the subject to a 20% penalty but may be subject to asale or trade of qualified small business stock 40% penalty in some cases. See Accu-acquired, in 2011, if you hold the stock for more Introductionracy-related penalties in chapter 2.than 5 years. This up to 100% exclusion also
This publication provides information on the taxcontinues to apply for qualified small business Nontaxable trades of life insurance con- treatment of investment income and expenses.stock acquired, in 2011, and held for more than tracts. You will no longer be taxed for certain It includes information on the tax treatment of5 years. See Section 1202 Exclusion  under trades involving life insurance contracts. See investment income and expenses for individualGains on Qualified Small Business Stock  in Insurance Policies and Annuities under Nontax- shareholders of mutual funds or other regulatedchapter 4. able Trades in chapter 4. investment companies, such as money market
Form 1099-B. Form 1099-B, Proceeds From funds. It explains what investment income is1256 contracts. A section 1256 contract no
Broker and Barter Exchange Transactions, for taxable and what investment expenses are de-longer includes certain swaps. See Exceptions
2011 and later, has been expanded. As a gen- ductible. It explains when and how to showunder Section 1256 Contract  in chapter 4 for
eral rule, it will include your cost or other basis, these items on your tax return. It also explainsmore information.
the date of acquisition, the amount of loss disal- how to determine and report gains and losses on
Changes in penalty for failure to disclose alowed due to a wash sale, and whether the gain the disposition of investment property and pro-
reportable transaction. Penalties for failureor loss is short-term or long-term, unless the vides information on property trades and tax
to disclose a reportable transaction on a taxproperty sold is a noncovered security. See the shelters.
return changed in 2010. See Penalty for failuresample 2011 Form 1099-B  in the Comprehen- The glossary at the end of this publica-to disclose a reportable transaction in chapter 2.sive Example in chapter 4. tion defines many of the terms used. A
comprehensive example, with filled-inU.S. property acquired from a foreign per-
TIPSpecified private activity bonds. A portion
forms, appears at the end of this publication.son. If you acquire a U.S. real property inter-of the interest on specified private activity bonds
est from a foreign person or firm, you may have Investment income. This generally includesissued after December 31, 2010, may be a tax
to withhold income tax on the amount you pay interest, dividends, capital gains, and otherpreference item subject to the alternative mini-
for the property (including cash, the fair market types of distributions including mutual fund dis-mum tax. See Qualified bonds issued after De-
value of other property, and any assumed liabil- tributions.cember 31, 2010 , under Interest Income  in
ity). Domestic or foreign corporations, partner-chapter 1.
Investment expenses. These include interestships, trusts, and estates may also have to
Federal home loan banks. A bond issued on paid or incurred to acquire investment propertywithhold on certain distributions and other trans-
or after January 1, 2011 (not counting renewals and expenses to manage or collect income fromactions involving U.S. real property interests. If
or extensions) and guaranteed by a Federal investment property.you fail to withhold, you may be held liable for
home loan bank will not be eligible to pay ex- the tax, penalties that apply, and interest. For
Qualified retirement plans and IRAs. Theempt interest even if the bank meets safety and more information, see Publication 515, With-
rules in this publication do not apply to mutualsoundness criteria. The bond will be treated as holding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and For-
fund shares held in individual retirement ar-federally guaranteed. See Federally guaranteed eign Entities.
rangements (IRAs), section 401(k) plans, andbonds, under Interest Income in chapter 1.
Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. other qualified retirement plans. The value of the
Build America bonds. Bonds issued after citizen with investment income from sources mutual fund shares and earnings allocated to
December 31, 2010, cannot be classified as outside the United States (foreign income), you you are included in your retirement plan assets
build America bonds. See Build America bonds, must report that income on your tax return un- and stay tax free generally until the plan distrib-
under Interest Income in chapter 1. less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether utes them to you. The tax rules that apply to
Page 2 Publication 550 (2011)

Page 3 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
retirement plan distributions are explained in the ❏ 8949 Sales and Other Dispositions of
following publications. Capital Assets
• Publication 560, Retirement Plans for 1. See Ordering forms and publications  earlierSmall Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Quali- for information about getting these publicationsfied Plans). and forms.
• Publication 571, Tax-Sheltered Annuity
InvestmentPlans (403(b) Plans).
• Publication 575, Pension and Annuity In- General InformationIncomecome.
• Publication 590, Individual Retirement Ar- A few items of general interest are covered here.
rangements (IRAs). Recordkeeping. You should keep aTopics• Publication 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil list showing sources and investmentThis chapter discusses:Service Retirement Benefits. income amounts you receive during
RECORDS
the year. Also keep the forms you receive show-• Interest income, ing your investment income (Forms 1099-INT,
• Dividends and other distributions, Interest Income, and 1099-DIV, Dividends and
Comments and suggestions. We welcome Distributions, for example) as an important part• Real estate mortgage investment conduitsyour comments about this publication and your of your records.(REMICs), financial asset securitization in-suggestions for future editions. Tax on investment income of certain chil-vestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat-You can write to us at the following address: dren. Part of a child's 2011 investment incomeeralized debt obligations (CDOs),
may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. This mayInternal Revenue Service • S corporations, and happen if all of the following are true.Individual and Specialty Forms and
Publications Branch • Investment clubs. 1. The child had more than $1,900 of invest-SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
ment income.1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Useful ItemsWashington, DC 20224 2. The child is required to file a tax return.You may want to see:
3. The child was:We respond to many letters by telephone.
PublicationTherefore, it would be helpful if you would in- a. Under age 18 at the end of 2011,clude your daytime phone number, including the ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income b. Age 18 at the end of 2011 and did notarea code, in your correspondence.
have earned income that was moreYou can email us at taxforms@irs.gov . ❏ 537 Installment Sales
than half of the child's support, orPlease put ªPublications Commentº on the sub- ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangementsject line. You can also send us comments from c. A full-time student over age 18 and(IRAs)www.irs.gov/formspubs/. Select ªComment on under age 24 at the end of 2011 andTax Forms and Publicationsº under ªInformation ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules did not have earned income that wasabout.º more than half of the child's support.❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue DiscountAlthough we cannot respond individually to (OID) Instrumentseach comment received, we do appreciate your 4. At least one of the child's parents wasfeedback and will consider your comments as alive at the end of 2011.Form (and Instructions)we revise our tax products.
5. The child does not file a joint return for❏ Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040)Ordering forms and publications. Visit 2011.Interest and Ordinary Dividendswww.irs.gov/formspubs/ to download forms and
A child born on January 1, 1994, is consideredpublications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains to be age 18 at the end of 2011; a child bornaddress below and receive a response within 10 and Losses on January 1, 1993, is considered to be age 19days after your request is received.
❏ 1099 General Instructions for Certain at the end of 2011; a child born on January 1,Internal Revenue Service Information Returns 1988, is considered to be age 24 at the end of1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway 2011.❏ 2439 Notice to Shareholder ofBloomington, IL 61705-6613 If all of these statements are true, Form 8615Undistributed Long-Term Capital must be completed and attached to the child'sGains tax return. If any of these statements is not true,Tax questions. If you have a tax question,
❏ 3115 Application for Change in Form 8615 is not required and the child's incomecheck the information available on IRS.gov or
Accounting Method is taxed at his or her own tax rate.call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax
However, the parent can choose to includequestions sent to either of the above addresses. ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax Ð the child's interest and dividends on the parent'sIndividuals return if certain requirements are met. Use Form
❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations 8814 for this purpose.
For more information about the tax on invest-❏ 8615 Tax for Certain Children Who Have ment income of children and the parents' elec-Investment Income of More Than tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for Children$1,900 and Dependents.
❏ 8814 Parents' Election To Report Child's
Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest,Interest and Dividends
dividends, and other investment income you re-❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust isEE and I U.S. Savings Bonds generally taxable income. You should receive aIssued After 1989 Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share
❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the
Redemption of Series EE and I fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its
U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After instructions will tell you where to report the in-
1989 come on your Form 1040.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Social security number (SSN). You mustTable 1-1. Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income give your name and SSN to any person required
by federal tax law to make a return, statement,
(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this publication, especially How To or other document that relates to you. This in-Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend Income in chapter 1.) cludes payers of interest and dividends.
SSN for joint account. If the funds in a jointType of Income If you file Form 1040, If you can file Form If you can file Form
report on ... 1040A, report on ... 1040EZ, report on ... account belong to one person, list that person's
name first on the account and give that person's
Tax-exempt interest Line 8b Line 8b Space to the left of line SSN to the payer. (For information on who owns
dividends (Form 1099-INT, 2 (enter ªTEIº and the the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,box 8) amount) later.) If the joint account contains combined
funds, give the SSN of the person whose nameTaxable interest that totals Line 8a (You may need to Line 8a (You may need to Line 2
is listed first on the account. This is because only$1,500 or less file Schedule B as well.) file Schedule B as well.)
one name and SSN can be shown on Form
Taxable interest that totals Line 8a; also use Line 8a; also use 1099.
more than $1,500 Schedule B, line 1 Schedule B, line 1 These rules apply both to joint ownership by
a married couple and to joint ownership by otherSavings bond interest you Schedule B; also use Schedule B; also use individuals. For example, if you open a jointwill exclude because of Form 8815 Form 8815
savings account with your child using funds be-higher education expenses
longing to the child, list the child's name first on
the account and give the child's SSN.Ordinary dividends that total Line 9a (You may need to Line 9a (You may need to
$1,500 or less file Schedule B as well.) file Schedule B as well.) Custodian account for your child. If your
child is the actual owner of an account that isOrdinary dividends that total Line 9a; also use Line 9a; also use
recorded in your name as custodian for the child,more than $1,500 Schedule B, line 5 Schedule B, line 5
give the child's SSN to the payer. For example,
you must give your child's SSN to the payer ofQualified dividends (if you do Line 9b; also use the Line 9b; also use the
not have to file Schedule D) Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and dividends on stock owned by your child, even
Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax though the dividends are paid to you as custo-Worksheet, line 2 Worksheet, line 2 dian.
Qualified dividends (if you Line 9b; also use the You cannot use Form Penalty for failure to supply SSN. You will
have to file Schedule D) Qualified Dividends and 1040A. be subject to a penalty if, when required, you failCapital Gain Tax to:Worksheet or the You cannot use Form
Schedule D Tax 1040EZ • Include your SSN on any return, state-
Worksheet, line 2 ment, or other document,
• Give your SSN to another person whoCapital gain distributions (if Line 13; also use the Line 10; also use the
you do not have to file Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and must include it on any return, statement,
Schedule D) Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax or other document, orWorksheet, line 3 Worksheet, line 3
• Include the SSN of another person on any
Capital gain distributions (if Schedule D, line 13; also return, statement, or other document.
you have to file Schedule D) use the Qualified
The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-Dividends and Capital
Gain Tax Worksheet or mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.
the Schedule D Tax
You will not be subject to this penalty if youWorksheet
can show that your failure to provide the SSN
Section 1250, 1202, or Form 8949 and Schedule was due to reasonable cause and not to willful
collectibles gain (Form D (Form 1040) neglect.
1099-DIV, box 2b, 2c, or 2d) If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also be
subject to backup withholding.Nondividend distributions generally not reported*
(Form 1099-DIV, box 3)
Backup withholding. Your investment in-
Undistributed capital gains Schedule D (Form 1040) come is generally not subject to regular with-
(Form 2439, boxes 1a - 1d) holding. However, it may be subject to backup
withholding to ensure that income tax is col-
Gain or loss from sales of Line 13; also use Form lected on the income. Under backup withhold-stocks or bonds 8949, Schedule D, and the ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,Qualified Dividends and You cannot use Form original issue discount (OID), dividends, cashCapital Gain Tax 1040A patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,Worksheet or the
Schedule D Tax as income tax, on the amount you are paid,
Worksheet applying the appropriate withholding rate.
Backup withholding applies if:Gain or loss from exchanges Line 13; also use
of like-kind investment Schedule D, Form 8824, 1. You do not give the payer your identifica-property and the Qualified
tion number (either a social security num-Dividends and Capital
ber or an employer identification number)Gain Tax Worksheet or
the Schedule D Tax in the required manner,
Worksheet
2. The IRS notifies the payer that you gave
*Report any amounts in excess of your basis in your mutual fund shares on Form 8949. Use Part II, line 3, if you held the an incorrect identification number,
shares more than 1 year. Use Part I, line 1, if you held your mutual funds shares 1 year or less. For details on Form 8949, see
Reporting Capital Gains and Losses in chapter 4, and the Instructions for Schedule D. 3. The IRS notifies the payer that you are
subject to backup withholding on interest
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or dividends because you have underre- Nonresident aliens. Generally, payments underpayments of tax due to negligence or dis-
made to nonresident aliens are not subject to regard of rules or regulations or substantial un-ported interest or dividends on your in-
backup withholding. You can use Form derstatement of tax. For information on thecome tax return, or
W-8BEN, Certificate of Foreign Status of Benefi- penalty and any interest that applies, see Penal-4. You are required, but fail, to certify that cial Owner for United States Tax Withholding, to ties in chapter 2.you are not subject to backup withholding certify exempt status. However, this does notfor the reason described in (3). exempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with-
holding rate that may apply to your investmentCertification. For new accounts paying in- income. For information on the 30% rate, see Interest Incometerest or dividends, you must certify under pen- Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.alties of perjury that your SSN is correct and that Terms you may need to knowPenalties. There are civil and criminal pen-you are not subject to backup withholding. Your (see Glossary):alties for giving false information to avoidpayer will give you a Form W-9, Request for
backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500.Taxpayer Identification Number and Certifica- Accrual method
The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine oftion, or similar form, to make this certification. If Below-market loanup to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, oryou fail to make this certification, backup with- both. Cash methodholding may begin immediately on your new
account or investment. Where to report investment income. Table Demand loan
1-1 gives an overview of the forms and sched-Underreported interest and dividends. Forgone interestules to use to report some common types ofYou will be considered to have underreported
investment income. But see the rest of this publi- Gift loanyour interest and dividends if the IRS has deter-
cation for detailed information about reportingmined for a tax year that: Interestinvestment income.
• You failed to include any part of a reporta- Mutual fundJoint accounts. If two or more persons holdble interest or dividend payment required
Nomineeproperty (such as a savings account, bond, orto be shown on your return, or
stock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or Original issue discount• You were required to file a return and to tenants in common, each person's share of anyinclude a reportable interest or dividend Private activity bondinterest or dividends from the property is deter-payment on that return, but you failed to mined by local law. Term loanfile the return.
Community property states. If you are mar-
How to stop backup withholding due to ried and receive a distribution that is community This section discusses the tax treatment of dif-underreporting. If you have been notified that income, one-half of the distribution is generally ferent types of interest income.you underreported interest or dividends, you can considered to be received by each spouse. If In general, any interest that you receive orrequest a determination from the IRS to prevent you file separate returns, you must each report that is credited to your account and can bebackup withholding from starting or to stop one-half of any taxable distribution. See Publica- withdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have totion 555, Community Property, for more informa-backup withholding once it has begun. You must be entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to thistion on community income.show that at least one of the following situations rule are discussed later.If the distribution is not considered commu-applies.
nity property under state law and you and your Form 1099-INT. Interest income is generally• No underreporting occurred. spouse file separate returns, each of you must reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar
report your separate taxable distributions.• You have a bona fide dispute with the IRS statement, by banks, savings and loans, and
about whether underreporting occurred. other payers of interest. This form shows you the
Example. You and your husband have a interest you received during the year. Keep this• Backup withholding will cause or is caus- joint money market account. Under state law, form for your records. You do not have to attaching an undue hardship, and it is unlikely half the income from the account belongs to you, it to your tax return.that you will underreport interest and divi- and half belongs to your husband. If you file Report on your tax return the total interestdends in the future. separate returns, you each report half the in- income you receive for the tax year.
come.• You have corrected the underreporting by Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT.filing a return if you did not previously file Income from property given to a child. Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, youone and by paying all taxes, penalties, and Property you give as a parent to your child under must still report all of your taxable interest in-interest due for any underreported interest the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the come. For example, you may receive distributiveor dividend payments. Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law shares of interest from partnerships or S corpo-
becomes the child's property. rations. This interest is reported to you onIf the IRS determines that backup withholding Income from the property is taxable to the Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-1should stop, it will provide you with a certification child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal (Form 1120S).and will notify the payers who were sent notices obligation to support the child is taxable to the Nominees. Generally, if someone receivesearlier. parent or guardian having that legal obligation. interest as a nominee for you, that person willHow to stop backup withholding due to an Savings account with parent as trustee. give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interestincorrect identification number. If you have Interest income from a savings account opened received on your behalf.been notified by a payer that you are subject to for a minor child, but placed in the name and If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includesbackup withholding because you have provided subject to the order of the parents as trustees, is amounts belonging to another person, see thean incorrect SSN or employer identification taxable to the child if, under the law of the state discussion on Nominee distributions , later,number, you can stop it by following the instruc- in which the child resides, both of the following under How To Report Interest Income.tions the payer gives you. are true. Incorrect amount. If you receive a FormReporting backup withholding. If backup • The savings account legally belongs to the 1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (orwithholding is deducted from your interest or child. other incorrect information), you should ask the
dividend income or other reportable payment, issuer for a corrected form. The new Form• The parents are not legally permitted tothe bank or other business must give you an 1099-INT you receive will be marked ªCor-use any of the funds to support the child.information return for the year (for example, a rected.º
Form 1099-INT) indicating the amount withheld.
The information return will show any backup Accuracy-related penalty. An accu- Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest income
withholding as ªFederal income tax withheld.º racy-related penalty of 20% can be charged for also may be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Issue Discount. For more information about such as mutual funds and stock brokerage Interest on insurance dividends. Interest on
amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue houses, and pay dividends. Generally, amounts insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-
Discount (OID), later in this chapter. you receive from money market funds should be surance company that can be withdrawn annu-
reported as dividends, not as interest. ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited toExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest your account. However, if you can withdraw itdividends you receive from a mutual fund or Certificates of deposit and other deferred only on the anniversary date of the policy (orother regulated investment company, including interest accounts. If you open any of these other specified date), the interest is taxable inthose received from a qualified fund of funds in accounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervals the year that date occurs.any tax years beginning after December 22, of 1 year or less during the term of the account.
2010, are not included in your taxable income. Prepaid insurance premiums. Any increaseYou generally must include this interest in your
(However, see Information-reporting require- in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,income when you actually receive it or are enti-
ment, next.) Exempt-interest dividends should advance premiums, or premium deposit funds istled to receive it without paying a substantial
be shown in box 8 of Form 1099-INT. You do not interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-
reduce your basis for distributions that are ex- ums due on insurance policies or made avail-ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single
empt-interest dividends. able for you to withdraw.payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for
more than 1 year, see Original Issue DiscountInformation-reporting requirement. Al- U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations,(OID), later.though exempt-interest dividends are not tax- such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,
able, you must show them on your tax return if Interest subject to penalty for early with- issued by any agency or instrumentality of the
you have to file. This is an information-reporting drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferred United States is taxable for federal income tax
requirement and does not change the ex- interest account before maturity, you may have purposes.
empt-interest dividends into taxable income. to pay a penalty. You must report the total
Interest on tax refunds. Interest you receiveSee How To Report Interest Income, later. amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-
on tax refunds is taxable income.count during the year, without subtracting the
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav- Interest on condemnation award. If the con-specified private activity bonds may be subject ings under How To Report Interest Income , demning authority pays you interest to compen-to the alternative minimum tax. The ex- later, for more information on how to report the sate you for a delay in payment of an award, theempt-interest dividends subject to the alterna- interest and deduct the penalty. interest is taxable.tive minimum tax are shown in box 9 of Form Money borrowed to invest in certificate of Installment sale payments. If a contract for1099-INT. See Form 6251 and its instructions deposit. The interest you pay on money bor- the sale or exchange of property provides forfor more information about this tax. Private activ- rowed from a bank or savings institution to meet deferred payments, it also usually provides fority bonds  are discussed later under State or the minimum deposit required for a certificate of interest payable with the deferred payments.Local Government Obligations. deposit from the institution and the interest you That interest is taxable when you receive it. Ifearn on the certificate are two separate items.Interest on VA dividends. Interest on insur- little or no interest is provided for in a deferredYou must report the total interest you earn onance dividends left on deposit with the Depart- payment contract, part of each payment may bethe certificate in your income. If you itemizement of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not taxable. This treated as interest. See Unstated Interest anddeductions, you can deduct the interest you payincludes interest paid on dividends on converted Original Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537.as investment interest, up to the amount of yourUnited States Government Life Insurance poli-
Interest on annuity contract. Accumulatednet investment income. See Interest Expensescies and on National Service Life Insurance poli-
interest on an annuity contract you sell before itsin chapter 3.cies.
maturity date is taxable.Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). Example. You deposited $5,000 with a Usurious interest. Usurious interest is inter-Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable. bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable asInterest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You make up the $10,000 minimum deposit required interest unless state law automatically changesgenerally do not include it in your income until to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer- it to a payment on the principal.you make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi- tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2011, but youcation 590 for more information. received only $265, which represented the $575 Interest income on frozen deposits. Ex-
you earned minus $310 interest charged on your clude from your gross income interest on frozen
Taxable Interest Ð General $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the
1099-INT for 2011 showing the $575 interest year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-Taxable interest includes interest you receive you earned. The bank also gives you a state- posit because:from bank accounts, loans you make to others, ment showing that you paid $310 interest for • The financial institution is bankrupt or in-and other sources. The following are some 2011. You must include the $575 in your in- solvent, orsources of taxable interest. come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject • The state in which the institution is locatedDividends that are actually interest. Certain
to the net investment income limit. has placed limits on withdrawals becausedistributions commonly called dividends are ac-
other financial institutions in the state aretually interest. You must report as interest Gift for opening account. If you receive non- bankrupt or insolvent.so-called ªdividendsº on deposits or on share cash gifts or services for making deposits or foraccounts in: opening an account in a savings institution, you The amount of interest you must exclude ismay have to report the value as interest.• Cooperative banks, the interest that was credited on the frozen de-For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or posits minus the sum of:• Credit unions, services valued at more than $10 must be re-
• The net amount you withdrew from theseported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or• Domestic building and loan associations,
deposits during the year, andmore, gifts or services valued at more than $20• Domestic savings and loan associations, must be reported as interest. The value is deter- • The amount you could have withdrawn asmined by the cost to the financial institution.• Federal savings and loan associations, of the end of the year (not reduced by anyand penalty for premature withdrawals of aExample. You open a savings account at time deposit).• Mutual savings banks. your local bank and deposit $800. The account
earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal- If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in-
culator. If no other interest is credited to your come on deposits that were frozen at the end ofThe ªdividendsº will be shown as interest income
account during the year, the Form 1099-INT you 2011, see Frozen deposits under How To Re-on Form 1099-INT.
receive will show $35 interest for the year. You port Interest Income  for information about re-
Money market funds. Money market funds must report $35 interest income on your tax porting this interest income exclusion on your
are offered by nonbank financial institutions return. tax return.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The interest you exclude is treated as credited have these bulletins available for research. See This exception does not apply to a term loan
to your account in the following year. You must chapter 5 for other ways to get this information. described in (2) earlier that previously has been
include it in income in the year you can withdraw subject to the below-market loan rules. Those
Rules for below-market loans. The rules thatit. rules will continue to apply even if the outstand-
apply to a below-market loan depend on ing balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.
whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, orExample. $100 of interest was credited on Exception for loans to continuing care fa-term loan.your frozen deposit during the year. You with- cilities. Loans to qualified continuing care fa-drew $80 but could not withdraw any more as of Gift and demand loans. A gift loan is any cilities under continuing care contracts are notthe end of the year. You must include $80 in below-market loan where the forgone interest is subject to the rules for below-market loans foryour income and exclude $20 from your income in the nature of a gift. the calendar year if the lender or the lender'sfor the year. You must include the $20 in your A demand loan is a loan payable in full at any spouse is age 62 or older at the end of the year.income for the year you can withdraw it. time upon demand by the lender. A demand loan For the definitions of qualified continuing care
is a below-market loan if no interest is charged facility and continuing care contract, see InternalBonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at a or if interest is charged at a rate below the Revenue Code section 7872(h).discount when interest has been defaulted or applicable federal rate.when the interest has accrued but has not been Exception for loans without significant taxA demand loan or gift loan that is a be-paid, the transaction is described as trading a effect. Loans are excluded from the be-low-market loan is generally treated as anbond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is not low-market loan rules if their interest arrange-arm's-length transaction in which the lender isincome and is not taxable as interest if paid later. ments do not have a significant effect on thetreated as having made:When you receive a payment of that interest, it is federal tax liability of the borrower or the lender.
• A loan to the borrower in exchange for aa return of capital that reduces the remaining These loans include:
note that requires the payment of interestcost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues
1. Loans made available by the lender to theat the applicable federal rate, andafter the date of purchase, however, is taxable
general public on the same terms and con-interest income for the year received or accrued. • An additional payment to the borrower in ditions that are consistent with the lender'sSee Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later in an amount equal to the forgone interest. customary business practice;this chapter.
The borrower is generally treated as transferring 2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, orthe additional payment back to the lender asBelow-Market Loans municipal government that are made avail-interest. The lender must report that amount as able under a program of general applica-interest income.If you make a below-market gift or demand loan, tion to the public;
you must report as interest income any forgone The lender's additional payment to the bor- 3. Certain employee-relocation loans;interest (defined later) from that loan. The be- rower is treated as a gift, dividend, contribution
low-market loan rules and exceptions are de- 4. Certain loans from a foreign person, un-to capital, pay for services, or other payment,
scribed in this section. For more information, less the interest income would be effec-depending on the substance of the transaction.
see section 7872 of the Internal Revenue Code tively connected with the conduct of a U.S.The borrower may have to report this payment
and its regulations. trade or business and would not be ex-as taxable income, depending on its classifica-
If you receive a below-market loan, you may empt from U.S. tax under an income taxtion.
be able to deduct the forgone interest as well as treaty;These transfers are considered to occur an-
any interest you actually paid, but not if it is nually, generally on December 31. 5. Gift loans to a charitable organization, con-personal interest.
tributions to which are deductible, if theTerm loans. A term loan is any loan that is
total outstanding amount of loans betweennot a demand loan. A term loan is a be-Loans subject to the rules. The rules for be-
the organization and lender is $250,000 orlow-market loan if the amount of the loan is morelow-market loans apply to:
less at all times during the tax year; andthan the present value of all payments due• Gift loans, under the loan. 6. Other loans on which the interest arrange-A lender who makes a below-market term• Pay-related loans, ment can be shown to have no significantloan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer- effect on the federal tax liability of the• Corporation-shareholder loans, ring an additional lump-sum cash payment to lender or the borrower.the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi-• Tax avoidance loans, and
For a loan described in (6) above, all thetal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. The• Certain loans made to qualified continuing facts and circumstances are used to determine ifamount of this payment is the amount of the loancare facilities under a continuing care con- the interest arrangement has a significant effectminus the present value, at the applicable fed-tract. on the federal tax liability of the lender or bor-eral rate, of all payments due under the loan. An
rower. Some factors to be considered are:equal amount is treated as original issue dis-A pay-related loan is any below-market loan count (OID). The lender must report the annual • Whether items of income and deductionbetween an employer and an employee or be- part of the OID as interest income. The borrower generated by the loan offset each other;tween an independent contractor and a person may be able to deduct the OID as interest ex-for whom the contractor provides services. • The amount of these items;pense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later.A tax avoidance loan is any below-market
• The cost to you of complying with the be-loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one of Exceptions to the below-market loan rules.
low-market loan rules, if they were to ap-the main purposes of the interest arrangement. Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are
ply; anddiscussed here.
Forgone interest. For any period, forgone in- • Any reasons other than taxes for structur-Exception for loans of $10,000 or less.terest is: ing the transaction as a below-marketThe rules for below-market loans do not apply to
• The amount of interest that would be pay- loan.any day on which the total outstanding amount
able for that period if interest accrued on of loans between the borrower and lender is
the loan at the applicable federal rate and If you structure a transaction to meet this$10,000 or less. This exception applies only to:
was payable annually on December 31, exception and one of the principal purposes of
1. Gift loans between individuals if the giftminus that structure is the avoidance of federal tax, the
loan is not directly used to buy or carry loan will be considered a tax-avoidance loan,• Any interest actually payable on the loan income-producing assets, and and this exception will not apply.for the period.
2. Pay-related loans or corpora- Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of
Applicable federal rate. Applicable federal tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of $100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi-
rates are published by the IRS each month in the federal tax is not a principal purpose of the viduals, if the outstanding loans between the
Internal Revenue Bulletin. Some IRS offices interest arrangement. lender and borrower total $100,000 or less, the
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
forgone interest to be included in income by the Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30 without permission from the IRS. In the year of
lender and deducted by the borrower is limited to years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years. The change, you must report all interest accrued to
the amount of the borrower's net investment last series H bonds matured in 2009. The last date and not previously reported for all your
income for the year. If the borrower's net invest- series HH bonds will mature in 2024. bonds.
ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated as Once you choose to report the interest eachSeries EE and series I bonds. Interest onzero. This limit does not apply to a loan if the year, you must continue to do so for all seriesthese bonds is payable when you redeem theavoidance of federal tax is one of the main EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and forbonds. The difference between the purchasepurposes of the interest arrangement. any you get later, unless you request permissionprice and the redemption value is taxable inter- to change, as explained next.est.Effective dates.  These rules apply to term
Change from method 2. To change fromloans made after June 6, 1984, and to demand Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds were method 2 to method 1, you must request permis-loans outstanding after that date. first offered in January 1980 and have a maturity sion from the IRS. Permission for the change isperiod of 30 years. Before July 1980, series E automatically granted if you send the IRS aU.S. Savings Bonds bonds were issued. The original 10-year matur- statement that meets all the following require-ity period of series E bonds has been extended ments. This section provides tax information on U.S. to 40 years for bonds issued before December
savings bonds. It explains how to report the 1965 and 30 years for bonds issued after No- 1. You have typed or printed the followinginterest income on these bonds and how to treat vember 1965. Paper series EE and series E number at the top: ª131.ºtransfers of these bonds. bonds are issued at a discount. The face value is
U.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi- 2. It includes your name and social securitypayable to you at maturity. Electronic series EE
viduals include Series EE bonds and Series I number under ª131.ºbonds are issued at their face value. The face
bonds. value plus accrued interest is payable to you at 3. It includes the year of change (both thematurity. As of January 1, 2012, paper savingsFor other information on U.S. savings beginning and ending dates).bonds will no longer be sold at financial institu-bonds, write to: 4. It identifies the savings bonds for whichtions.
you are requesting this change. Owners of paper series EE bonds can con-For Series HH/H:
vert them to electronic bonds. These convertedBureau of the Public Debt 5. It includes your agreement to:bonds do not retain the denomination listed onDivision of Customer Assistance
the paper certificate but are posted at their a. Report all interest on any bonds ac-P.O. Box 2186
purchase price (with accrued interest). quired during or after the year ofParkersburg, WV 26106-2186.
change when the interest is realizedSeries I bonds. Series I bonds were first upon disposition, redemption, or finaloffered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed maturity, whichever is earliest, andbonds issued at their face amount with a matur-For Series EE and I paper savings bonds:
ity period of 30 years. The face value plus all b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-Bureau of the Public Debt accrued interest is payable to you at maturity. quired before the year of change whenDivision of Customer Assistance the interest is realized upon disposition,Reporting options for cash method tax-P.O. Box 7012 redemption, or final maturity, whicheverpayers. If you use the cash method of report-Parkersburg, WV 26106-7012. is earliest, with the exception of the in-ing income, you can report the interest on series
terest reported in prior tax years.EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of the
following ways.For Series EE and I electronic bonds: You must attach this statement to your tax
1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest return for the year of change, which you must fileBureau of the Public Debt 
until the earlier of the year you cash or by the due date (including extensions).Division of Customer Assistance
dispose of the bonds or the year in which You can have an automatic extension of 6P.O. Box 7015
they mature. (However, see Savings months from the due date of your return for theParkersburg, WV 26106-7015.
bonds traded, later.) year of change (excluding extensions) to file the
Note. Series EE bonds issued in 1981 ma-Or, on the Internet, visit: www. statement with an amended return. On the state-
tured in 2011. If you have used method 1,treasurydirect.gov/indiv/products/ ment, type or print ªFiled pursuant to section
you generally must report the interest onproducts.htm. 301.9100-2(b).º To get this extension, you must
these bonds on your 2011 return. The last have filed your original return for the year of theAccrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac- series E bonds were issued in 1980 and change by the due date (including extensions).crual method of accounting, you must report matured in 2010. If you used method 1,interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it By the date you file the original state-you generally should have reported the in-accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interest ment with your return, you must alsoterest on these bonds on your 2010 return.until you receive it or until the bonds mature. send a signed copy to the address be-
2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase low.
Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash in redemption value as interest each year. Internal Revenue Servicemethod of accounting, as most individual tax- Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulingspayers do, you generally report the interest on Branch)You must use the same method for all series EE,U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But see P.O. Box 7604series E, and series I bonds you own. If you doReporting options for cash method taxpayers, Benjamin Franklin Stationnot choose method 2 by reporting the increaselater. Washington, DC 20044in redemption value as interest each year, you
must use method 1. If you use a private delivery service, send theSeries HH bonds. These bonds were issued
signed copy to the address below.at face value. Interest is paid twice a year by If you plan to cash your bonds in the
direct deposit to your bank account. If you are a same year you will pay for higher edu- Internal Revenue Servicecash method taxpayer, you must report interest cational expenses, you may want to Attention: CC:IT&A 
TIPon these bonds as income in the year you re- use method 1 because you may be able to (Automatic Rulings Branch) Room 5336ceive it. exclude the interest from your income. To learn 1111 Constitution Avenue, NWSeries HH bonds were first offered in 1980 how, see Education Savings Bond Program , Washington, DC 20224and last offered in August 2004. Before 1980, later.
series H bonds were issued. Series H bonds are
Instead of filing this statement, you can re-treated the same as series HH bonds. If you are Change from method 1. If you want to
quest permission to change from method 2 toa cash method taxpayer, you must report the change your method of reporting the interest
method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,interest when you receive it. from method 1 to method 2, you can do so
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
after the reissue, is income to the formerTable 1-2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest co-owner.
This income-reporting rule also applies when
the bonds are reissued in the name of yourIF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ...
former co-owner and a new co-owner. But theyou buy a bond in your name and the name of you. new co-owner will report only his or her share ofanother person as co-owners, using only your the interest earned after the transfer.own funds If bonds that you and a co-owner bought
jointly are reissued to each of you separately inyou buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond.
the same proportion as your contribution to thewho is the sole owner of the bond
purchase price, neither you nor your co-owneryou and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion has to report at that time the interest earnedco-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond. before the bonds were reissued.purchase price
Example 1. You and your spouse eachyou and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 seriesproperty state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally
EE savings bond. The bond was issued to youproperty report one-half of the interest.
and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-
pone reporting interest on the bond. You later
have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, onefollow the form instructions for an automatic your child. This choice is made by filing an in-
in your name and one in your spouse's name. Atcome tax return that shows all the interestchange. No user fee is required.
that time neither you nor your spouse has toearned to date, and by stating on the return thatCo-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in report the interest earned to the date of reissue.your child chooses to report the interest eachthe names of co-owners, such as you and your
year. Either you or your child should keep a copychild or you and your spouse, interest on the Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EEof this return.bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who savings bond entirely with your own funds. TheUnless your child is otherwise required to filebought the bond. bond was issued to you and your spouse asa tax return for any year after making this choice, co-owners. You both postponed reporting inter-One co-owner's funds used. If you used your child does not have to file a return only to est on the bond. You later have the bond reis-your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the tax report the annual accrual of U.S. savings bond sued as two $500 bonds, one in your name andon the interest. This is true even if you let the interest under this choice. However, see Tax on one in your spouse's name. You must report halfother co-owner redeem the bond and keep all investment income of certain children , earlier, the interest earned to the date of reissue.the proceeds. Under these circumstances, the under General Information. Neither you nor your
co-owner who redeemed the bond will receive a child can change the way you report the interest Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, seriesForm 1099-INT at the time of redemption and unless you request permission from the IRS, as EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to amust provide you with another Form 1099-INT discussed earlier under Change from method 2. trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you mustshowing the amount of interest from the bond include in your income for that year the interest
taxable to you. The co-owner who redeemed the Ownership transferred. If you bought series earned to the date of transfer if you have not
E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with yourbond is a ªnominee.º See Nominee distributions already reported it. However, if you are consid-
own funds and had them reissued in yourunder How To Report Interest Income, later, for ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in
co-owner's name or beneficiary's name alone,more information about how a person who is a value both before and after the transfer contin-
you must include in your gross income for thenominee reports interest income belonging to ues to be taxable to you, you can continue to
year of reissue all interest that you earned onanother person. defer reporting the interest earned each year.
these bonds and have not previously reported. You must include the total interest in your in-Both co-owners' funds used. If you and But, if the bonds were reissued in your name come in the year you cash or dispose of thethe other co-owner each contribute part of the alone, you do not have to report the interest bonds or the year the bonds finally mature,bond's purchase price, the interest is generally accrued at that time. whichever is earlier.taxable to each of you, in proportion to the This same rule applies when bonds (other The same rules apply to previously unre-amount each of you paid. than bonds held as community property) are ported interest on series EE or series E bonds if
transferred between spouses or incident to di-Community property. If you and your the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or
vorce.spouse live in a community property state and series H bonds you acquired in a trade for the
series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bondshold bonds as community property, one-half of
Example. You bought series EE bonds en- traded, later.the interest is considered received by each of
tirely with your own funds. You did not choose toyou. If you file separate returns, each of you Decedents. The manner of reporting interestreport the accrued interest each year. Later, yougenerally must report one-half of the bond inter- income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,transfer the bonds to your former spouse underest. For more information about community after the death of the owner, depends on thea divorce agreement. You must include the de-property, see Publication 555, Community Prop- accounting and income-reporting methods pre-ferred accrued interest, from the date of theerty. viously used by the decedent.original issue of the bonds to the date of transfer,
Table 1-2. These rules are also shown in in your income in the year of transfer. Your Decedent who reported interest each year.Table 1-2. former spouse includes in income the interest on If the bonds transferred because of death were
the bonds from the date of transfer to the date of owned by a person who used an accrual
Child as only owner. Interest on U.S. savings redemption. method, or who used the cash method and had
bonds bought for and registered only in the chosen to report the interest each year, thePurchased jointly. If you and a co-ownername of your child is income to your child, even interest earned in the year of death up to theeach contributed funds to buy series E, seriesif you paid for the bonds and are named as date of death must be reported on that person'sEE, or series I bonds jointly and later have thebeneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E, final return. The person who acquires the bondsbonds reissued in the co-owner's name alone,or series I bonds, the interest on the bonds is includes in income only interest earned after theyou must include in your gross income for theincome to your child in the earlier of the year the date of death.year of reissue your share of all the interestbonds are cashed or disposed of or the year the earned on the bonds that you have not previ- Decedent who postponed reporting inter-bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re- ously reported. The former co-owner does not est. If the transferred bonds were owned by aport the interest income each year. have to include in gross income at the time of decedent who had used the cash method and
Choice to report interest each year. The reissue his or her share of the interest earned had not chosen to report the interest each year,
choice to report the accrued interest each year that was not reported before the transfer. This and who had bought the bonds entirely with his
can be made either by your child or by you for interest, however, as well as all interest earned or her own funds, all interest earned before
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
death must be reported in one of the following a trade for series EE bonds. You were the bene- income in the year of the trade. If you made this
ways. ficiary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cash choice, it is treated as a change from method 1.
method and did not choose to report the interest See Change from method 1  under Series EE1. The surviving spouse or personal repre- on the series EE bonds each year as it accrued. and series I bonds, earlier.sentative (executor, administrator, etc.) Your aunt's executor chose not to include any
who files the final income tax return of the interest earned before your aunt's death on her Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond inter-decedent can choose to include on that final return. est. When you cash a bond, the bank or otherreturn all interest earned on the bonds The income in respect of the decedent is the payer that redeems it must give you a Formbefore the decedent's death. The person sum of the unreported interest on the series EE 1099-INT if the interest part of the payment youwho acquires the bonds then includes in bonds and the interest, if any, payable on the receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Formincome only interest earned after the date series HH bonds but not received as of the date 1099-INT should show the interest as the differ-of death. of your aunt's death. You must report any inter- ence between the amount you received and theest received during the year as income on your2. If the choice in (1) is not made, the interest amount paid for the bond. However, your Formreturn. The part of the interest payable but notearned up to the date of death is income in 1099-INT may show more interest than youreceived before your aunt's death is income inrespect of the decedent and should not be have to include on your income tax return. Forrespect of the decedent and may qualify for theincluded in the decedent's final return. All example, this may happen if any of the followingestate tax deduction. For information on when tointerest earned both before and after the are true.report the interest on the series EE bondsdecedent's death (except any part reported
traded, see Savings bonds traded, below. • You chose to report the increase in theby the estate on its income tax return) is
redemption value of the bond each year.income to the person who acquires the Savings bonds distributed from a retirement The interest shown on your Formbonds. If that person uses the cash or profit-sharing plan. If you acquire a U.S.method and does not choose to report the 1099-INT will not be reduced by amountssavings bond in a taxable distribution from ainterest each year, he or she can postpone previously included in income.retirement or profit-sharing plan, your income forreporting it until the year the bonds are • You received the bond from a decedent.the year of distribution includes the bond's re-cashed or disposed of or the year they demption value (its cost plus the interest ac- The interest shown on your Formmature, whichever is earlier. In the year crued before the distribution). When you redeem 1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter-that person reports the interest, he or she the bond (whether in the year of distribution or est reported by the decedent before death,can claim a deduction for any federal es- later), your interest income includes only the or on the decedent's final return, or by thetate tax paid on the part of the interest interest accrued after the bond was distributed. estate on the estate's income tax return.included in the decedent's estate. To figure the interest reported as a taxable distri-
• Ownership of the bond was transferred.For more information on income in respect of a bution and your interest income when you re-
The interest shown on your Formdecedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec- deem the bond, see Worksheet for savings
1099-INT will not be reduced by interestutors, and Administrators. bonds distributed from a retirement or
that accrued before the transfer.profit-sharing plan under How To Report Interest
Example 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax- Income, later. • You were named as a co-owner, and thepayer, died and left you a $1,000 series EE other co-owner contributed funds to buySavings bonds traded. If you postponed re-bond. He had bought the bond for $500 and had the bond. The interest shown on yourporting the interest on your series EE or series Enot chosen to report the interest each year. At Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by thebonds, you did not recognize taxable incomethe date of death, interest of $200 had accrued amount you received as nominee for thewhen you traded the bonds for series HH oron the bond, and its value of $700 was included other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier inseries H bonds, unless you received cash in thein your uncle's estate. Your uncle's executor
this section, for more information abouttrade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-chose not to include the $200 accrued interest in
the reporting requirements.)ries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can-your uncle's final income tax return. The $200 is
not trade any other series of bonds for series HHincome in respect of the decedent. • You received the bond in a taxable distri-
bonds.) Any cash you received is income up to bution from a retirement or profit-sharingYou are a cash method taxpayer and do not the amount of the interest earned on the bonds plan. The interest shown on your Formchoose to report the interest each year as it is traded. When your series HH or series H bonds 1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter-earned. If you cash the bond when it reaches mature, or if you dispose of them before matur- est portion of the amount taxable as amaturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter- ity, you report as interest the difference between distribution from the plan and not taxableest income Ðthe difference between maturity their redemption value and your cost. Your cost as interest. (This amount is generallyvalue of $1,000 and the original cost of $500. is the sum of the amount you paid for the tradedFor that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane- shown on Form 1099-R, Distributionsseries EE or series E bonds plus any amountous itemized deduction not subject to the From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement oryou had to pay at the time of the trade.2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) any federal Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance
estate tax paid because the $200 interest was Contracts, etc., for the year of distribution.)Example.  In May 2004, you traded seriesincluded in your uncle's estate. EE bonds (on which you postponed reporting
For more information on including the correctthe interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds andExample 2. If, in Example 1, the executor amount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav-$223 in cash. You reported the $223 as taxablehad chosen to include the $200 accrued interest ings bond interest previously reported  or Nomi-income in 2004, the year of the trade. At the timein your uncle's final return, you would report only nee distributions under How To Report Interestof the trade, the series EE bonds had accrued$300 as interest when you cashed the bond at Income, later.interest of $523 and a redemption value ofmaturity. $300 is the interest earned after your $2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma- Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-uncle's death. turity, when you receive $2,500. You must report empt from state and local taxes. The$300 as interest income in the year of maturity. Form 1099-INT you receive will indi-Example 3. If, in Example 1, you make or
TIP This is the difference between their redemption cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bondshave made the choice to report the increase in value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the interest in box 3. Do not include this income onredemption value as interest each year, you amount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It is your state or local income tax return.include in gross income for the year you acquire also the difference between the accrued interestthe bond all of the unreported increase in value of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223of all series E, series EE, and series I bonds you cash received on the trade.)hold, including the $200 on the bond you inher- Education Savings Bond Program
Choice to report interest in year of trade.ited from your uncle.
You may be able to exclude from income all orYou could have chosen to treat all of the previ-
part of the interest you receive on the redemp-Example 4. When your aunt died, she ously unreported accrued interest on series EE
tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during theowned series HH bonds that she had acquired in or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds as
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year if you pay qualified higher educational ex- c. Employer-provided educational assis- • $106,650 to $136,650 for married taxpay-
penses during the same year. This exclusion is ers filing jointly, or for a qualifyingtance.
known as the Education Savings Bond Program. widow(er) with dependent child.
You do not qualify for this exclusion if your 5. Any expense used in figuring the American You do not qualify for the interest exclusion iffiling status is married filing separately. Opportunity and lifetime learning credits. your modified AGI is equal to or more than the
upper limit for your filing status.For information about these benefits, see Pub-Form 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In-
lication 970.terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Modified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposesIssued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At- of this exclusion, is adjusted gross incometach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in- (Form 1040A, line 21, or Form 1040, line 37)
terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav- figured before the interest exclusion, and modi-Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified ings bonds you redeem during the year are not fied by adding back any:U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued more than your adjusted qualified higher educa-after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be 1. Foreign earned income exclusion,tional expenses for the year, you may be able toissued either in your name (sole owner) or in exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds are 2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction,your and your spouse's names (co-owners). more than the expenses, you may be able toYou must be at least 24 years old before the 3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residentsexclude only part of the interest.bond's issue date. For example, a bond bought of American Samoa,To determine the excludable amount, multi-by a parent and issued in the name of his or her
ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction. 4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,child under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu-
The numerator (top part) of the fraction is thesion by the parent or child. 5. Exclusion for adoption benefits receivedqualified higher educational expenses you paid under an employer's adoption assistanceThe issue date of a bond may be earlier during the year. The denominator (bottom part) program,than the date the bond is purchased of the fraction is the total proceeds you receivedbecause the issue date assigned to a
CAUTION
! 6. Deduction for tuition and fees,during the year.bond is the first day of the month in which it is
7. Deduction for student loan interest, andpurchased. Example. In February 2011, Mark and
8. Deduction for domestic production activi-Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-Beneficiary. You can designate any individ-
ties.ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in Aprilual (including a child) as a beneficiary of the
1997. They received proceeds of $8,124, repre-bond. Use the worksheet in the instructions for line
senting principal of $5,000 and interest of 9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If youVerification by IRS. If you claim the exclu- $3,124. In 2011, they paid $4,000 of their daugh- claim any of the exclusion or deduction itemssion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp- ter's college tuition. They are not claiming an listed above (except items 6, 7, and 8), add thetion information from the Department of education credit for that amount, and their amount of the exclusion or deduction (exceptTreasury. daughter does not have any tax-free educational any deduction for tuition and fees, student loan
assistance. They can exclude $1,538 ($3,124 ×Qualified expenses. Qualified higher educa- interest, or domestic production activities) to the
($4,000 ÷  $8,124)) of interest in 2011. Theytional expenses are tuition and fees required for amount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the
must pay tax on the remaining $1,586 ($3,124 −you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom total on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI.
you claim an exemption) to attend an eligible $1,538) interest. Royalties included in modified AGI. Be-educational institution. Figuring the interest part of the proceeds cause the deduction for interest expenses dueQualified expenses include any contribution (Form 8815, line 6). To figure the interest to to royalties and other investments is limited toyou make to a qualified tuition program or to a report on Form 8815, line 6, use the Line 6 your net investment income (see InvestmentCoverdell education savings account. For infor- Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions. Interest in chapter 3), you cannot figure themation about these programs, see Publication deduction for interest expenses until you have970, Tax Benefits for Education. If you previously reported any interest figured this exclusion of savings bond interest.Qualified expenses do not include expenses from savings bonds cashed during Therefore, if you had interest expenses due tofor room and board or for courses involving 2011, use the Alternate Line 6 Work-
 royalties and deductible on Schedule E (Formsports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a sheet below instead. 1040), you must make a special computation ofdegree or certificate granting program. your deductible interest to figure the net royaltyAlternate Line 6 WorksheetEligible educational institutions. These income included in your modified AGI. You must
institutions include most public, private, and figure deductible interest without regard to this1. Enter the amount from Form 8815,
nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational line 5 ................... . exclusion of bond interest.
schools that are accredited and eligible to par- 2. Enter the face value of all post-1989 You can use a ªdummyº Form 4952, Invest-
paper series EE bonds cashed inticipate in student aid programs run by the De- ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make the2011 .................... .partment of Education. special computation. On this form, include in3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50) your net investment income your total interestReduction for certain benefits. You must 4. Enter the face value of all electronic income for the year from series EE and I U.S.reduce your qualified higher educational ex- series EE bonds (including savings bonds. Use the deductible interestpenses by all of the following tax-free benefits. post-1989 series EE bonds amount from this form only to figure the netconverted from paper to electronic1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow- royalty income included in your modified AGI.format) and all series I bondsships. Do not attach this form to your tax return.cashed in 2011 ............. .
After you figure this interest exclusion, use a5. Add lines 3 and 4 ........... .2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
separate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc-6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. ..... .tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.
7. Enter the amount of interest tion for investment interest expenses and attach
3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por- reported as income in previous that form to your return.
tion of distributions from a qualified tuition years ................... . Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-program. 8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter the est exclusion, you must keep a writtenresult here and on Form 8815, line 64. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or record of the qualified U.S. savings
RECORDS
inheritances) received as educational as- bonds you redeem. Your record must includeModified adjusted gross income limit.sistance, such as: the serial number, issue date, face value, andThe interest exclusion is limited if your modified total redemption proceeds (principal and inter-adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:a. Veterans' educational assistance bene- est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818,fits, • $71,100 to $86,100 for taxpayers filing sin- Optional Form To Record Redemption of Series
gle or head of household, andb. Qualified tuition reductions, or EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989,
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to record this information. You should also keep is a premium. (See Bond Premium Amortization State or Local
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu- in chapter 3.) Government Obligationsmentation that shows you paid qualified higher For other information on these notes oreducational expenses during the year. Interest you receive on an obligation issued by abonds, write to:
state or local government is generally not tax-Bureau of The Public Debt
able. The issuer should be able to tell youP.O. Box 7015U.S. Treasury Bills,
whether the interest is taxable. The issuerParkersburg, WV 26106-7015Notes, and Bonds should also give you a periodic (or year-end)
Or, on the Internet, visit: www. statement showing the tax treatment of the obli-Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts treasurydirect.gov/indiv/indiv.htm. gation. If you invested in the obligation through a(obligations) of the U.S. Government. trust, a fund, or other organization, that organi-
zation should give you this information.Treasury inflation-protected securitiesTaxation of interest. Interest income from
(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a Even if interest on the obligation is notTreasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to
year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amount subject to income tax, you may have tofederal income tax but is exempt from all state
report capital gain or loss when you selladjusted to take into account inflation and defla-and local income taxes. You should receive
CAUTION
!
it. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax maytion. For the tax treatment of these securities,Form 1099-INT showing the interest (in box 3)
apply to other dispositions of the obligation.see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments  underpaid to you for the year.
Original Issue Discount (OID), later.Payments of principal and interest generally
will be credited to your designated checking or
Tax-Exempt Interestsavings account by direct deposit through the Retirement, sale, or redemption. For infor-
TreasuryDirect  system. mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption of Interest on a bond used to finance government
U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or- operations generally is not taxable if the bond isTreasury bills. These bills generally have a dinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non- issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a4-week, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturity taxable Trades  in chapter 4 for information U.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi-period. They are issued at a discount in the about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer- sions. Political subdivisions include:amount of $100 and multiples of $100. The dif- tain other designated issues. • Port authorities,ference between the discounted price you pay
for the bills and the face value you receive at • Toll road commissions,Bonds Sold Between Interestmaturity is interest income. Generally, you re-
• Utility services authorities,Datesport this interest income when the bill is paid at
maturity. See Discount on Short-Term Obliga- • Community redevelopment agencies, andIf you sell a bond between interest paymenttions under Discount on Debt Instruments, later. dates, part of the sales price represents interest • Qualified volunteer fire departments (forIf you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur- accrued to the date of sale. You must report that certain obligations issued after 1980).ity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you will part of the sales price as interest income for the There are other requirements for tax-exemptreceive payment for the difference between the year of sale. bonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern-proceeds of the maturing bill (par amount less
If you buy a bond between interest payment ment agency or see sections 103 and 141any tax withheld) and the purchase price of the
dates, part of the purchase price represents through 150 of the Internal Revenue Code andnew Treasury security. However, you must re-
interest accrued before the date of purchase. the related regulations.port the full amount of the interest income on
When that interest is paid to you, treat it as aeach of your Treasury bills at the time it reaches
Obligations that are not bonds. Inter-return of your capital investment, rather thanmaturity.
est on a state or local government obli-interest income, by reducing your basis in the
gation may be tax exempt even if thebond. See Accrued interest on bonds  under
TIPTreasury notes and bonds. Treasury notes obligation is not a bond. For example, interest onHow To Report Interest Income , later in thishave maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang- a debt evidenced only by an ordinary writtenchapter, for information on reporting the pay-ing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for Treasury agreement of purchase and sale may be taxment.bonds are longer than 10 years. Both generally exempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer onare issued in denominations of $100 to $1 mil- default by the state or political subdivision mayInsurancelion and both generally pay interest every 6 be tax exempt.months. Generally, you report this interest for Registration requirement. A bond issued af-Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-the year paid. When the notes or bonds mature, ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis-ciary of the insured person are usually not tax-you can redeem these securities for face value tered form for the interest to be tax exempt.able. But if you receive the proceeds inor use the proceeds from the maturing note or
installments, you must usually report part ofbond to reinvest in another note or bond of the Indian tribal government. Bonds issued after
each installment payment as interest income.same type and term. If you do nothing, the pro- 1982 by an Indian tribal government (including
ceeds from the maturing note or bond will be tribal economic development bonds issued afterFor more information about insurance pro-
deposited in your bank account. February 17, 2009) are treated as issued by aceeds received in installments, see Publication
state. Interest on these bonds is generally tax525.Treasury notes and bonds are sold by auc-
exempt if the bonds are part of an issue of whichtion. Two types of bids are accepted: competi-
substantially all proceeds are to be used in thetive bids and noncompetitive bids. If you make a Interest option on insurance. If you leave life exercise of any essential government function.competitive bid and a determination is made that insurance proceeds on deposit with an insur- However, the essential government function re-the purchase price is less than the face value, ance company under an agreement to pay inter- quirement does not apply to tribal economicyou will receive a refund for the difference be- est only, the interest paid to you is taxable. development bonds issued after February 17,tween the purchase price and the face value.
2009, for tax-exempt treatment. Interest on pri-This amount is considered original issue dis-
vate activity bonds (other than certain bonds forAnnuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-count. However, the original issue discount rules tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxable.ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-(discussed later) do not apply if the discount is
ceive are taxed as pension and annuity incomeless than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the face Original issue discount. Original issue dis-
from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income.amount, multiplied by the number of full years count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern-
See Publication 939, General Rule for Pensionsfrom the date of original issue to maturity. See ment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest.
and Annuities, for information on taxation ofDe minimis OID  under Original Issue Discount For information on the treatment of OID
(OID), later. If the purchase price is determined pension and annuity income from nonqualified when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, see
to be more than the face amount, the difference plans. Tax-exempt state and local government bonds
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
under Discounted Debt Instruments  in chapter Build America bonds. A build America bond), qualified veterans' mortgage bond, or
bond is any bond (other than a private activity4. qualified 501(c)(3) bond (a bond issued for the
bond) issued after February 17, 2009, and benefit of certain tax-exempt organizations).Stripped bonds or coupons. For special before January 1, 2011, by an issuer who makes Interest you receive on these tax-exemptrules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga- an irrevocable election to have the rules of Inter- bonds, if issued after August 7, 1986, generallytions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons  under nal Revenue Code section 54AA apply; and, is a ªtax preference itemº and may be subject toOriginal Issue Discount (OID), later. except for that election, the interest on the bond the alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251
would have been excludable from income under and its instructions for more information.Information reporting requirement. If you Internal Revenue Code section 103. The interest on the following bonds is not amust file a tax return, you are required to show These bonds pay taxable interest. However, tax preference item and is not subject to theany tax-exempt interest you received on your the bondholder is allowed a tax credit equal to alternative minimum tax.return. This is an information-reporting require- 35% of the interest payable on the interest pay-ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter- • Qualified 501(c)(3) bonds.ment date of the bond. The credit is treated asest to taxable interest. See Reporting taxable interest. Use Form 8912 to claim the • New York Liberty bonds.tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter- credit for a build America bond.est Income, later in this chapter. • Gulf Opportunity Zone bonds.
Mortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds of • Midwestern disaster area bonds.these bonds are used to finance mortgage loans
Taxable Interest for homebuyers. Generally, interest on state or • Hurricane Ike disaster area bonds.
local government home mortgage bonds issuedInterest on some state or local obligations is • Exempt facility bonds issued after July 30,after April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bondstaxable. 2008.are qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter-
ans' mortgage bonds. • Qualified mortgage bonds issued afterFederally guaranteed bonds. Interest on July 30, 2008.federally guaranteed state or local obligations Arbitrage bonds. Interest on arbitrage bonds
issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This rule • Qualified veterans' mortgage bonds is-issued by state or local governments after Octo-
does not apply to interest on obligations guaran- sued after July 30, 2008.ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is a
teed by the following U.S. Government agen- bond any portion of the proceeds of which is
cies. Qualified bonds issued in 2009 or 2010.expected to be used to buy (or to replace funds
The interest on any qualified bond issued inused to buy) higher yielding investments. A• Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran- 2009 or 2010 is not a tax preference item and isbond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuertee was under the Northwest Power Act as not subject to the alternative minimum tax. Forintentionally uses any part of the proceeds of thein effect on July 18, 1984). this purpose, a refunding bond (whether a cur-issue in this manner.
• Department of Veterans Affairs. rent or advanced refunding) is treated as issued
Private activity bonds. Interest on a private on the date the refunded bond was issued (or on• Federal home loan banks. (The guarantee activity bond that is not a qualified bond (defined the date the original bond was issued in the casemust be made after July 30, 2008, in con- below) is taxable. Generally, a private activity of a series of refundings). However, this rulenection with the original bond issue during bond is part of a state or local government bond does not apply to any refunding bond issued tothe period beginning on July 30, 2008, and issue that meets both the following require- refund any qualified bond issued during 2004ending on December 31, 2010 (or a re- ments. through 2008 or after 2010.newal or extension of a guarantee so
made) and the bank must meet safety and Qualified bonds issued after December 31,1. More than 10% of the proceeds of the is-
soundness requirements.) 2010. A portion of the interest on specifiedsue is to be used for a private business
private activity bonds issued after December 31,use.• Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora- 2010, may be a tax preference item subject totion. 2. More than 10% of the payment of the prin- the alternative minimum tax. The tax preferencecipal or interest is:• Federal Housing Administration. status will apply to the portion of the interest that
remains after reducing it by deductions thata. Secured by an interest in property to be• Federal National Mortgage Association.
would be allowed if the interest were taxable.used for a private business use (or pay-• Government National Mortgage Corpora- ments for this property), or Enterprise zone facility bonds. Interest ontion.
certain private activity bonds issued by a state orb. Derived from payments for property (or• Resolution Funding Corporation. local government to finance a facility used in anborrowed money) used for a private
empowerment zone or enterprise community isbusiness use.• Student Loan Marketing Association.
tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see
section 1394 of the Internal Revenue Code.Also, a bond is generally considered a privateTax credit bonds. Tax credit bonds generally activity bond if the proceeds to be used to New York Liberty bonds. New York Libertydo not pay interest. Instead, the bondholder is make or finance loans to persons other than bonds are bonds issued after March 9, 2002, toallowed an annual tax credit. The credit com- government units is more than 5% of the pro- finance the construction and rehabilitation ofpensates the holder for lending money to the ceeds or $5 million (whichever is less). real property in the designated ªLiberty Zoneº ofissuer and functions as interest paid on the
New York City. Interest on these bonds issuedQualified bond. Interest on a private activ-bond. Use Form 8912, Credit to Holders of Tax
before 2012 is tax exempt.ity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. ACredit Bonds, to claim the credit for the following
qualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ-tax credit bonds and to figure the amount of the
Market discount. Market discount on aing an enterprise zone facility bond, a New Yorkcredit to report as interest income.
tax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If youLiberty bond, a Midwestern disaster area bond,• Clean renewable energy bond. bought the bond after April 30, 1993, you cana Hurricane Ike disaster area bond, a Gulf Op-
choose to accrue the market discount over theportunity Zone bond treated as an exempt facil-• Gulf tax credit bond.
period you own the bond and include it in yourity bond, or any recovery zone facility bond• Midwestern tax credit bond. income currently as taxable interest. See Marketissued after February 17, 2009, and before Jan-
Discount Bonds under Discount on Debt Instru-• Qualified forestry conservation bond. uary 1, 2012), qualified student loan bond, quali-
ments, later. If you do not make that choice, or iffied small issue bond (including a tribal• New clean renewable energy bond. you bought the bond before May 1, 1993, anymanufacturing facility bond), qualified redevel-
gain from market discount is taxable when you• Qualified energy conservation bond. opment bond, qualified mortgage bond (includ-
dispose of the bond.ing a Gulf Opportunity Zone bond, a Midwestern• Qualified zone academy bond. For more information on the treatment ofdisaster area bond, or a Hurricane Ike disaster
market discount when you dispose of a• Qualified school construction bond. area bond treated as a qualified mortgage
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax-exempt bond, see Discounted Debt Instru- De minimis OID. You can treat the discount on Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, and
as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) also Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentments under Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss in
of the stated redemption price at maturity multi- under How To Report Interest Income , later inchapter 4.
plied by the number of full years from the date of this chapter, for more information.
original issue to maturity. This small discount is
Form 1099-OID not received. If you had OIDknown as ªde minimisº OID.
for the year but did not receive a FormDiscount on 1099-OID, see the OID tables found at www.irs.Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond with
gov/formspubs/article/0,,id=213465,00.html ,a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,Debt Instruments which list total OID on certain debt instrumentsissued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth of
and has information that will help you figure OID.1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10Terms you may need to know If your debt instrument is not listed, consult the(the number of full years from the date of original
(see Glossary): issuer for further information about the accruedissue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20
OID for the year.discount is less than $25, the OID is treated asMarket discount zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you will
Nominee. If someone else is the holder ofMarket discount bond recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)
record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-Original issue discount (OID) ment belonging to you and receives a FormExample 2. The facts are the same as in
1099-OID on your behalf, that person must givePremium Example 1, except that the bond was issued at
you a Form 1099-OID.$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount
If you receive a Form 1099-OID that includesis more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you
A debt instrument, such as a bond, note, deben- amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-must include the OID in income as it accrues
ture, or other evidence of indebtedness, that inee distributions under How To Report Interestover the term of the bond.
bears no interest or bears interest at a lower Income, later.Debt instrument bought after original is-than current market rate will usually be issued at sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID.less than its face amount. This discount is, in minimis OID at a premium, the discount is not You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or boxeffect, additional interest income. The following includible in income. If you buy a debt instrument 6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the followingare some types of discounted debt instruments. with de minimis OID at a discount, the discount apply.• U.S. Treasury bonds. is reported under the market discount rules. See
• You bought the debt instrument after itsMarket Discount Bonds, later in this chapter.• Corporate bonds. original issue and paid a premium or an
Exceptions to reporting OID. The OID rules acquisition premium.• Municipal bonds. discussed here do not apply to the following debt • The debt instrument is a stripped bond or• Certificates of deposit. instruments. a stripped coupon (including certain zero• Notes between individuals. coupon instruments). See Figuring OID1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see
under Stripped Bonds and Coupons, laterStripped tax-exempt obligations, later.)• Stripped bonds and coupons.
in this chapter.2. U.S. savings bonds.• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).
3. Short-term debt instruments (those with aThe discount on these instruments (except mu- See Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentfixed maturity date of not more than 1 yearnicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. The under How To Report Interest Income , later infrom the date of issue).discount on municipal bonds generally is not this chapter, for information about reporting thetaxable (but see State or Local Government correct amount of OID.4. Obligations issued by an individual beforeObligations, earlier, for exceptions). See also March 2, 1984. Premium. You bought a debt instrument atREMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs , later, for
a premium if its adjusted basis immediately after5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow-information about applying the rules discussed
purchase was greater than the total of alling are true.in this section to the regular interest holder of a
amounts payable on the instrument after thereal estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi- a. The lender is not in the business of purchase date, other than qualified stated inter-nancial asset securitization investment trust, or lending money. est.other CDO.
If you bought an OID debt instrument at ab. The amount of the loan, plus the
premium, you generally do not have to reportamount of any outstanding prior loansOriginal Issue any OID as ordinary income.between the same individuals, isDiscount (OID) $10,000 or less. Qualified stated interest. In general, this is
stated interest unconditionally payable in cashOID is a form of interest. You generally include c. Avoiding any federal tax is not one of
or property (other than debt instruments of theOID in your income as it accrues over the term of the principal purposes of the loan.
issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate.the debt instrument, whether or not you receive
any payments from the issuer. Acquisition premium. You bought a debt
A debt instrument generally has OID when instrument at an acquisition premium if both the
Form 1099-OIDthe instrument is issued for a price that is less following are true.
than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID The issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro- • You did not pay a premium.is the difference between the stated redemption ker, if you held the instrument through a broker)price at maturity and the issue price. • The instrument's adjusted basis immedi-should give you Form 1099-OID, Original Issue ately after purchase (including purchase atAll debt instruments that pay no interest Discount, or a similar statement, if the total OID original issue) was greater than its ad-before maturity are presumed to be issued at a for the calendar year is $10 or more. Form justed issue price. This is the issue pricediscount. Zero coupon bonds are one example 1099-OID will show, in box 1, the amount of OID plus the OID previously accrued, minusof these instruments. for the part of the year that you held the bond. It any payment previously made on the in-The OID accrual rules generally do not apply also will show, in box 2, the stated interest you strument other than qualified stated inter-to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma- must include in your income. A copy of Form est.turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). 1099-OID will be sent to the IRS. Do not file your
See Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later. copy with your return. Keep it for your records.
For information about the sale of a debt in- In most cases, you must report the entire Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OID
strument with OID, see Original issue discount amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as includible in your income. For information about
(OID) on debt instruments in chapter 4. interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown figuring the correct amount of OID to include in
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your income, see Figuring OID on Long-Term Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generally coupons are treated as separate debt instru-
must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDs ments issued with OID.Debt Instruments in Publication 1212.
not in registered form. They are not issued in the The holder of a stripped bond has the right to
Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form depositor's name and are transferable from one receive the principal (redemption price) pay-
1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument individual to another. ment. The holder of a stripped coupon has the
or acquired it from another holder during the right to receive interest on the bond.Banks must provide the IRS and the person
Stripped bonds and stripped coupons in-year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates , redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.
clude:earlier, for information about the treatment of
Time deposit open account arrangement.periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of • Zero coupon instruments availableThis is an arrangement with a fixed maturity dateForm 1099-OID for that instrument. through the Department of the Treasury'sin which you make deposits on a schedule ar- Separate Trading of Registered Interestranged between you and your bank. But there is and Principal of Securities (STRIPS) pro-no actual or constructive receipt of interest untilApplying the OID Rules gram and government-sponsored enter-the fixed maturity date is reached. For instance, prises such as the Resolution FundingThe rules for reporting OID depend on the date you and your bank enter into an arrangement Corporation and the Financing Corpora-the long-term debt instrument was issued. under which you agree to deposit $100 each tion, andmonth for a period of 5 years. Interest will be
Debt instruments issued after 1954 and compounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payable • Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se-
before May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a only at the end of the 5-year period. You must curities that represent ownership interests
government instrument). For these instru- include a part of the interest in your income as in those securities, such as obligations
OID each year. Each year the bank must givements, you do not report the OID until the year backed by U.S. Treasury bonds offered
you a Form 1099-OID to show you the amountyou sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If primarily by brokerage firms.
you must include in your income for the year.a gain results and the instrument is a capital
asset, the amount of gain equal to the OID is Seller. If you strip coupons from a bond andRedemption before maturity. If, before theordinary interest income. The rest is capital gain. sell the bond or coupons, include in income thematurity date, you redeem a deferred interestIf there is a loss on the sale of the instrument, the interest that accrued while you held the bondaccount for less than its stated redemption priceentire loss is a capital loss and no reporting of before the date of sale, to the extent you did notat maturity, you can deduct OID that you previ-OID is required. previously include this interest in your income.ously included in income but did not receive.In general, the amount of gain that is ordinary For an obligation acquired after October 22,
interest income equals the following amount: 1986, you must also include the market discountRenewable certificates. If you renew a CD at
that accrued before the date of sale of thematurity, it is treated as a redemption and aNumber of full months Original stripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you didpurchase of a new certificate. This is true re-you held the instrument × Issue not previously include this discount in your in-gardless of the terms of renewal.Number of full months from date of Discount come. original issue to date of maturity Add the interest and market discount that
you include in income to the basis of the bondFace-Amount Certificates
and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be-Debt instruments issued after May 27, 1969 These certificates are subject to the OID rules. tween the items you keep and the items you sell,(after July 1, 1982, if a government instru- They are a form of endowment contracts issued based on the fair market value of the items. Thement), and before 1985. If you hold these by insurance or investment companies for either difference between the sale price of the bond (ordebt instruments as capital assets, you must a lump-sum payment or periodic payments, with coupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (orinclude a part of the discount in your gross the face amount becoming payable on the ma- coupon) is your gain or loss from the sale.income each year that you own the instruments. turity date of the certificate. Treat any item you keep as an OID bond
Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru- originally issued and bought by you on the saleIn general, the difference between the face
ment is increased by the amount of OID you date of the other items. If you keep the bond,amount and the amount you paid for the contract
include in your gross income. treat the amount of the redemption price of theis OID. You must include a part of the OID in
bond that is more than the basis of the bond asyour income over the term of the certificate.
OID. If you keep the coupons, treat the amountDebt instruments issued after 1984. For The issuer must give you a statement on
payable on the coupons that is more than thethese debt instruments, you report the total OID Form 1099-OID indicating the amount you must
basis of the coupons as OID.that applies each year regardless of whether include in your income each year.
you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset.
Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or stripped
Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru- coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued onInflation-Indexedment is increased by the amount of OID you the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond,Debt Instrumentsinclude in your gross income. treat as OID any excess of the stated redemp-
tion price at maturity over your purchase price. IfIf you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument
you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID any(other than a series I U.S. savings bond), youCertificates of Deposit (CDs) excess of the amount payable on the due date ofmust report as OID any increase in the infla-
the coupon over your purchase price.tion-adjusted principal amount of the instrumentIf you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1 that occurs while you held the instrument duringyear, you must include in income each year a Figuring OID. The rules for figuring OID onthe year. In general, an inflation-indexed debtpart of the total interest due and report it in the stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend oninstrument is a debt instrument on which thesame manner as other OID. the date the debt instruments were purchased,payments are adjusted for inflation and deflationThis also applies to similar deposit arrange- not the date issued.(such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securi-
ments with banks, building and loan associa- You must refigure OID shown on the Formties). You should receive Form 1099-OID from
tions, etc., including: 1099-OID you receive for a stripped bond orthe payer showing the amount you must report
coupon. For information about figuring the cor-as OID and any qualified stated interest paid to• Time deposits, rect amount of OID on these instruments toyou during the year. For more information, see
• Bonus plans, include in your income, see Figuring OID onPublication 1212.
Stripped Bonds and Coupons  in Publication• Savings certificates, 1212. However, owners of stripped bonds and
• Deferred income certificates, coupons should not rely on the OID shown inStripped Bonds and Coupons
Section II of the OID tables (available at www.• Bonus savings certificates, and If you strip one or more coupons from a bond irs.gov/formspubs/article/0,,id=213465,00.html)
• Growth savings certificates. and sell the bond or the coupons, the bond and because the amounts listed in Section II for
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
stripped bonds or coupons are figured without one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp- • State that you have included market dis-
reference to the date or price at which you ac- tion price of the bond multiplied by the number of count in your gross income for the year
quired them. full years to maturity (after you acquire the under section 1278(b) of the Internal Rev-
bond). enue Code, andStripped inflation-indexed debt instru-
If a market discount bond also has OID, thements. OID on stripped inflation-indexed debt • Describe the method you used to figuremarket discount is the sum of the bond's issueinstruments is figured under the discount bond the accrued market discount for the year.price and the total OID includible in the grossmethod. This method is described in Regula-
income of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, thetions section 1.1275-7(e). Once you make this choice, it will apply to alltotal OID that accrued) before you acquired the market discount bonds you acquire during theStripped tax-exempt obligations. You do bond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi- tax year and in later tax years. You cannot re-not have to pay tax on OID on any stripped ately after you acquired it. voke your choice without the consent of the IRS.tax-exempt bond or coupon you bought before For information on how to revoke your choice,June 11, 1987. However, if you acquired it after Bonds acquired at original issue. Generally, see section 32 of the Appendix to RevenueOctober 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on it to a bond you acquired at original issue is not a Procedure 2011-14 in Internal Revenue Bulletindetermine its basis when you dispose of it. See market discount bond. If your adjusted basis in a 2011-4. You can find this revenue procedure atOriginal issue discount (OID) on debt instru- bond is determined by reference to the adjusted www.irs.gov/irb/2011-04_IRB/ar08.html.ments under Stocks and Bonds in chapter 4. basis of another person who acquired the bond Also see Election To Report All Interest asYou may have to pay tax on part of the OID at original issue, you are also considered to
OID, later. If you make that election, you muston stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons that have acquired it at original issue.
use the constant yield method.you bought after June 10, 1987. For information Exceptions. A bond you acquired at origi-on figuring the taxable part, see Tax-Exempt Effect on basis. You increase the basis ofnal issue can be a market discount bond if eitherBonds and Coupons  under Figuring OID on your bonds by the amount of market discountof the following is true.Stripped Bonds and Coupons  in Publication you include in your income.
1212. • Your cost basis in the bond is less than
the bond's issue price. Partial principal payments. If you receive a
Market Discount Bonds partial payment of principal on a market discount• The bond is issued in exchange for a mar-
bond you acquired after October 22, 1986, andket discount bond under a plan of reorgan-A market discount bond is any bond having you did not choose to include the discount inization. (This does not apply if the bond ismarket discount except: income currently, you must treat the payment asissued in exchange for a market discount
ordinary interest income up to the amount of thebond issued before July 19, 1984, and the• Short-term obligations (those with fixed
bond's accrued market discount. Reduce theterms and interest rates of both bonds arematurity dates of up to 1 year from the
amount of accrued market discount reportablethe same.)date of issue),
as interest at disposition by that amount.• Tax-exempt obligations you bought before There are three methods you can use toAccrued market discount. The accrued mar-May 1, 1993, figure accrued market discount for this purpose.ket discount is figured in one of two ways.• U.S. savings bonds, and
1. On the basis of the constant yield method,Ratable accrual method. Treat the market• Certain installment obligations. described earlier.discount as accruing in equal daily installments
during the period you hold the bond. Figure the 2. In proportion to the accrual of OID for anyMarket discount arises when the value of a daily installments by dividing the market dis- accrual period, if the debt instrument hasdebt obligation decreases after its issue date. count by the number of days after the date you OID.Generally, this is due to an increase in interest acquired the bond, up to and including its matur-rates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar- 3. In proportion to the amount of stated inter-ity date. Multiply the daily installments by theket, it may have market discount. est paid in the accrual period, if the debtnumber of days you held the bond to figure yourWhen you buy a market discount bond, you instrument has no OID.accrued market discount.can choose to accrue the market discount over
Under method (2) above, figure accruedConstant yield method. Instead of usingthe period you own the bond and include it in
market discount for a period by multiplying thethe ratable accrual method, you can choose toyour income currently as interest income. If you
total remaining market discount by a fraction.figure the accrued discount using a constantdo not make this choice, the following rules
The numerator (top part) of the fraction is theinterest rate (the constant yield method). Makegenerally apply.
OID for the period, and the denominator (bottomthis choice by attaching to your timely filed return• You must treat any gain when you dispose part) is the total remaining OID at the beginninga statement identifying the bond and stating thatof the bond as ordinary interest income, of the period.you are making a constant interest rate election.up to the amount of the accrued market The choice takes effect on the date you acquired Under method (3) above, figure accrueddiscount. See Discounted Debt Instru- the bond. If you choose to use this method for market discount for a period by multiplying thements under Capital Gains and Losses in any bond, you cannot change your choice for total remaining market discount by a fraction.chapter 4. that bond. The numerator is the stated interest paid in the
• You must treat any partial payment of prin- accrual period, and the denominator is the totalFor information about using the constant
cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in- stated interest remaining to be paid at the begin-yield method, see Constant yield method under
come, up to the amount of the accrued ning of the accrual period.Debt Instruments Issued After 1984  in Publica-
market discount. See Partial principal pay- tion 1212. To use this method to figure market
ments, later in this discussion. discount (instead of OID), treat the bond as Discount on
having been issued on the date you acquired it.• If you borrow money to buy or carry the Short-Term ObligationsTreat the amount of your basis (immediatelybond, your deduction for interest paid on after you acquired the bond) as the issue price. When you buy a short-term obligation (one withthe debt is limited. See Limit on interest Then apply the formula shown in Publication a fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from thededuction for market discount bonds 1212. date of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga-under When To Deduct Investment Inter-
tion, you can generally choose to include anyest in chapter 3. Choosing to include market discount in in- discount and interest payable on the obligationcome currently. You can make this choice if in income currently. If you do not make thisMarket discount. Market discount is the you have not revoked a prior choice to include choice, the following rules generally apply.amount of the stated redemption price of a bond market discount in income currently within the
• You must treat any gain when you sell,at maturity that is more than your basis in the last 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at-
exchange, or redeem the obligation as or-bond immediately after you acquire it. You treat taching to your timely filed return a statement in
dinary income, up to the amount of themarket discount as zero if it is less than which you:
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ratable share of the discount. See Dis- You must make your choice by the due date the discount on certain debt instruments. See
of your return, including extensions, for the first U.S. Savings Bonds  and Discount on Debt In-counted Debt Instruments under Capital
year for which you are making the choice. Attach struments, earlier.Gains and Losses in chapter 4.
a statement to your return or amended return• If you borrow money to buy or carry the Example. On September 1, 2009, youindicating:obligation, your deduction for interest paid loaned another individual $2,000 at 12% com-• Your name, address, and social securityon the debt is limited. See Limit on interest pounded annually. You are not in the businessnumber;deduction for short-term obligations under of lending money. The note stated that principalWhen To Deduct Investment Interest in and interest would be due on August 31, 2011.• The choice you are making and that it ischapter 3. In 2011, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-being made under section 1283(c)(2) of
pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cashthe Internal Revenue Code;
method, you must include in income on yourShort-term obligations for which no choice • The period for which the choice is being 2011 return the $508.80 interest you received inis available. You must include any discount or made and the obligation to which it ap- that year.interest in current income as it accrues for any plies; andshort-term obligation (other than a tax-exempt Constructive receipt. You constructively• Any other information necessary to showobligation) that is: receive income when it is credited to your ac-you are entitled to make this choice. count or made available to you. You do not need• Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer;
to have physical possession of it. For example,• Held primarily for sale to customers in the Choosing to include accrued discount and you are considered to receive interest, divi-ordinary course of your trade or business; other interest in current income. If you ac- dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-
quire short-term discount obligations that are not count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar• Held by a bank, regulated investment
subject to the rules for current inclusion in in- financial institution, or interest on life insurancecompany, or common trust fund;
come of the accrued discount or other interest, policy dividends left to accumulate, when they• Held by certain pass-through entities; you can choose to have those rules apply. This are credited to your account and subject to your
choice applies to all short-term obligations you withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet• Identified as part of a hedging transaction;
acquire during the year and in all later years. entered in your passbook.or
You cannot change this choice without the con- You constructively receive income on the• A stripped bond or stripped coupon held sent of the IRS. deposit or account even if you must:by the person who stripped the bond or The procedures to use in making this choicecoupon (or by any other person whose • Make withdrawals in multiples of evenare the same as those described for choosing tobasis in the obligation is determined by amounts,include acquisition discount instead of OID onreference to the basis in the hands of the nongovernment obligations in current income. • Give a notice to withdraw before makingperson who stripped the bond or coupon). However, you should indicate that you are mak- the withdrawal,
ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of the • Withdraw all or part of the account to with-Internal Revenue Code.Effect on basis. Increase the basis of your draw the earnings, orobligation by the amount of discount you include Also see the following discussion. If you
in income currently. • Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unlessmake the election to report all interest currently
the interest you are to receive on an earlyas OID, you must use the constant yield method.
Figuring the accrued discount. Figure the withdrawal or redemption is substantially
accrued discount by using either the ratable less than the interest payable at maturity.Election To Reportaccrual method or the constant yield method All Interest as OIDdiscussed previously in Accrued market dis- Accrual method. If you use an accrualcount under Market Discount Bonds, earlier. Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on a method, you report your interest income when
debt instrument acquired during the tax year as you earn it, whether or not you have received it.Government obligations. For an obligation OID and include it in income currently. For pur- Interest is earned over the term of the debtdescribed above that is a short-term govern- poses of this election, interest includes stated instrument.ment obligation, the amount you include in your interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimisincome for the current year is the accrued acqui- OID, market discount, de minimis  market dis- Example. If, in the previous example, yousition discount, if any, plus any other accrued count, and unstated interest as adjusted by any use an accrual method, you must include theinterest payable on the obligation. The acquisi- amortizable bond premium or acquisition pre- interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldtion discount is the stated redemption price at mium. See Regulations section 1.1272-3. report the interest as follows: 2009, $80; 2010,maturity minus your basis. $249.60; and 2011, $179.20.If you choose to use the constant yield
method to figure accrued acquisition discount, Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is
treat the cost of acquiring the obligation as the taxable in the year the coupon becomes due andWhen To Reportissue price. If you choose to use this method, payable. It does not matter when you mail the
you cannot change your choice. coupon for payment.Interest Income
Nongovernment obligations. For an obliga- Terms you may need to knowtion listed above that is not a government obliga- (see Glossary):tion, the amount you include in your income for How To Reportthe current year is the accrued OID, if any, plus Accrual methodany other accrued interest payable. If you Interest IncomeCash methodchoose the constant yield method to figure ac-
crued OID, apply it by using the obligation's Terms you may need to knowissue price. (see Glossary):When to report your interest income depends on
Choosing to include accrued acquisition whether you use the cash method or an accrual Nomineediscount instead of OID. You can choose to method to report income.
report accrued acquisition discount (defined Original issue discount (OID)
earlier under Government obligations ) rather Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use
than accrued OID on these short-term obliga- the cash method. If you use this method, you
tions. Your choice will apply to the year for which generally report your interest income in the year Generally, you report all your taxable interest
it is made and to all later years and cannot be in which you actually or constructively receive it. income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, line
changed without the consent of the IRS. However, there are special rules for reporting 8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional) 2 1 1 0 - 5 4 5 1  . o N  B M O. o n  e n o h p e l e t  d n a  , e d o c  P I Z  , e t a t s  , y t i c  , s s e r d d a  t e e r t s  , e m a n  S ’ R E Y A P
Interest Income
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is being
furnished to the Internal
Revenue Service. If you are
required to file a return, a
negligence penalty or other
sanction may be imposed
on you if this income is
taxable and the IRS
determines that it has not
been reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-INT
Interest on U.S. Savings Bonds and Treas. obligations3
$
Federal income tax withheld Investment expenses54
$$
Foreign tax paid6
$
7
Early withdrawal penalty2
$
Interest income1
$ 11
Specified private activity bond interest9Tax-exempt interest8
$
10 Tax-exempt bond CUSIP no. (see instructions)
$
Foreign country or U.S. possession
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest You cannot use Form 1040A if you must use 8. You are reporting OID in an amount less
income is more than $1,500. Instead, you must than the amount shown on FormForm 1040, as described next.
use Form 1040A or Form 1040. 1099-OID.
In addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ if 9. Statement (2) in the preceding list is true.Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead
you must use Form 1040, as described later, or of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if: In Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and theif any of the statements listed under Schedule B,
amount received from each. If you received alater, are true. 1. You forfeited interest income because of Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-the early withdrawal of a time deposit; kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule B 2. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987,(Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, if you file Form Reporting tax-exempt interest. Total youryou choose to reduce interest income from1040A and any of the following are true. tax-exempt interest (such as interest or accruedthe bonds by any amortizable bond pre-
OID on certain state and municipal bonds, in-1. Your taxable interest income is more than mium, and you are deducting the excess of
cluding tax-exempt interest on zero coupon mu-$1,500. bond premium amortization for the accrual nicipal bonds) and exempt-interest dividendsperiod over the qualified stated interest for2. You are claiming the interest exclusion from a mutual fund as shown in box 8 of Formthe period (discussed in chapter 3 underunder the Education Savings Bond Pro- 1099-INT. Add this amount to any otherBond Premium Amortization); orgram (discussed earlier). tax-exempt interest you received. Report the
total on line 8b of Form 1040A or Form 1040. If3. You received tax-exempt interest from pri-3. You received interest from a
you file Form 1040EZ, enter ªTEIº and theseller-financed mortgage, and the buyer vate activity bonds issued after August 7,
amount in the space to the left of line 2. Do notused the property as a home. 1986.
add tax-exempt interest in the total on Form
4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. 1040EZ, line 2.Schedule B. You must complete Schedule
savings bond interest that includes Box 9 shows the tax-exempt interest subjectB (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, if you file Formamounts you reported before 2011. to the alternative minimum tax on Form 6251,1040 and any of the following apply. Alternative Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. It is al-5. You received, as a nominee, interest that ready included in the amount in box 8. Do not1. Your taxable interest income is more thanactually belongs to someone else. add the amount in box 9 to, or subtract it from,$1,500.
6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest the amount in box 8.2. You are claiming the interest exclusionon frozen deposits. Do not report interest from an individ-under the Education Savings Bond Pro-7. You are reporting OID in an amount less ual retirement arrangement (IRA) asgram (discussed earlier).than the amount shown on Form tax-exempt interest.
CAUTION
!
3. You received interest from a1099-OID.
seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest used the property as a home. except for interest from U.S. savings bonds andon a bond you bought between interest
Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Formpayment dates. 4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.
1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxablesavings bond interest that includes9. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 interest income you received. You must reportamounts you reported before 2011.and choose to reduce interest income from all your taxable interest income even if you dothe bonds by any amortizable bond pre- 5. You received, as a nominee, interest that not receive a Form 1099-INT. Contact your fi-mium (discussed in chapter 3 under Bond actually belongs to someone else. nancial institution if you do not receive a FormPremium Amortization). 1099-INT by February 15. Your identifying num-6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
List each payer's name and the amount of inter- ber may be shortened on any paper Formon frozen deposits.est income received from each payer on line 1. If 1099-INT you receive for 2011.
7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interestyou received a Form 1099-INT or Form If you forfeited interest income because of
on a bond you bought between interest1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker- the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
age firm as the payer. payment dates. ductible amount will be shown on Form
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with- 2. Below the subtotal enter ªU.S. Savings Use the worksheet below to figure the
drawal of savings, later. amount you subtract from the interestBond Interest Previously Reportedº and
Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the interest shown on Form 1099-INT.enter amounts previously reported or inter-
income you received from U.S. savings bonds, est accrued before you received the bond.
Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and Treasury 3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal A. Enter the amount of cash receivedbonds. Add the amount shown in box 3 to any and enter the result on line 2. upon redemption of the bond ... .other taxable interest income you received, un-
less part of the amount in box 3 was previously
B. Enter the value of the bond at theincluded in your interest income. If part of the Example 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav- time of distribution by the plan ... .amount shown in box 3 was previously included ings bonds for you when you were a child. The
in your interest income, see U.S. savings bond bonds were issued in your name, and the inter- C. Subtract the amount on line B frominterest previously reported , later. If you re- est on the bonds was reported each year as it the amount on line A. This is thedeemed U.S. savings bonds you bought after accrued. (See Choice to report interest each amount of interest accrued on the1989 and you paid qualified educational ex- year under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.) bond since it was distributed by thepenses, see Interest excluded under the Educa- In March 2011, you redeemed one of the plan .................... .tion Savings Bond Program, later. bonds Ð a $1,000 series EE bond. The bondBox 4 (federal income tax withheld) of Form D. Enter the amount of interest shownwas originally issued in March 1992. When you1099-INT will contain an amount if you were on your Form 1099-INT ....... .redeemed the bond, you received $1,341.20 forsubject to backup withholding. Report the it.amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7; on E. Subtract the amount on line C fromThe Form 1099-INT you received shows in-Form 1040A, line 36; or on Form 1040, line 62. the amount on line D. This is theterest income of $841.20. However, since theBox 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment amount you include in ªU.S. Savingsinterest on your savings bonds was reportedexpenses you may be able to deduct as an Bond Interest Previously Reportedº
yearly, you need only include the $26.00 interestitemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-
Your employer should tell you the value ofthat accrued from January 2011 to March 2011.ment expenses.
each bond on the date it was distributed.You received no other taxable interest forIf there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of Form
2011. You file Form 1040A.1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be Example. You received a distribution of se-able to take a credit for the amount shown in box On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, ries EE U.S. savings bonds in December 20086 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct this line 1, enter your interest income as shown on from your company's profit-sharing plan.amount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as ªOther Form 1099-INT Ð $841.20. (If you had other In March 2011, you redeemed a $100 seriestaxes.º To take the credit, you may have to file taxable interest income, you would enter it next EE bond that was part of the distribution youForm 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor- and then enter a subtotal, as described earlier, received in 2008. You received $97.40 for themation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit before going to the next step.) Several lines bond the company bought in May 1994. Thefor Individuals. above line 2, enter ªU.S. Savings Bond Interest value of the bond at the time of distribution inPreviously Reportedº and enter $815.20Form 1099-OID. The taxable OID on a dis- 2008 was $92.80. (This is the amount you in-($841.20 − $26.00). Subtract $815.20 fromcounted obligation for the part of the year you cluded on your 2008 return.) The bank gave you$841.20 and enter $26.00 on line 2. Enterowned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099-OID. a Form 1099-INT that shows $47.40 interest
$26.00 on Schedule B, line 4, and on FormInclude this amount in your total taxable interest (the total interest from the date the bond was
1040A, line 8a.income. But see Refiguring OID shown on Form purchased to the date of redemption). Since a
1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID) , part of the interest was included in your incomeExample 2. Your uncle died and left you aearlier. Your identifying number may be short- in 2008, you need to include in your 2011 in-
$1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bondened on any paper Form 1099-OID you receive come only the interest that accrued after the
when it reaches maturity.for 2011. bond was distributed to you.
Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500You must report all taxable OID even if you On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 1,
do not receive a Form 1099-OID. of the amount you receive upon redemption is include all the interest shown on your Form
Box 2 of Form 1099-OID shows any taxable interest income. Your uncle's executor included 1099-INT as well as any other taxable interest
interest on the obligation other than OID. Add in your uncle's final return $200 of the interest income you received. Several lines above line 2,
this amount to the OID shown in box 1 and that had accrued at the time of your uncle's put a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1.
include the result in your total taxable income. death. You have to include only $300 in your Below this subtotal enter ªU.S. Savings Bond
If you forfeited interest or principal on the income. Interest Previously Reportedº and enter the
obligation because of an early withdrawal, the amount figured on the worksheet below.The bank where you redeem the bond gives
deductible amount will be shown in box 3. See you a Form 1099-INT showing interest income
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings, later. of $500. You also receive a Form 1099-INT A. Enter the amount of cash receivedBox 4 of Form 1099-OID will contain an showing taxable interest income of $300 from upon redemption of the bond .. . $97.40amount if you were subject to backup withhold- your savings account. B. Enter the value of the bond at theing. Report the amount from box 4 on Form time of distribution by the plan .. . $92.80You file Form 1040 and complete Schedule1040EZ, line 7; on Form 1040A, line 36; or on C. Subtract the amount on line B fromB. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list the $500 andForm 1040, line 62. the amount on line A. This is the$300 interest amounts shown on your FormsBox 7 of Form 1099-OID shows investment amount of interest accrued on the1099. Several lines above line 2, you put aexpenses you may be able to deduct as an bond since it was distributed bysubtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, enter ªU.S.itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest- the plan ................. . $4.60Savings Bond Interest Previously Reportedº andment expenses. D. Enter the amount of interest shownenter the $200 interest included in your uncle's on your Form 1099-INT ...... . $47.40U.S. savings bond interest previously re- final return. Subtract the $200 from the subtotal E. Subtract the amount on line C fromported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for and enter $600 on line 2. You then complete the the amount on line D. This is theU.S. savings bond interest, the form may show rest of the form. amount you include in ªU.S.
interest you do not have to report. See Form Savings Bond Interest PreviouslyWorksheet for savings bonds distributed1099-INT for U.S. savings bond interest  under Reportedº ............... . $42.80from a retirement or profit-sharing plan. IfU.S. Savings Bonds, earlier. you cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxable Subtract $42.80 from the subtotal and enter theOn Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, distribution from a retirement or profit-sharing result on Schedule B, line 2. You then completeline 1, report all the interest shown on your Form plan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds , the rest of the form.1099-INT. Then follow these steps. earlier), your interest income does not include
the interest accrued before the distribution and1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal Interest excluded under the Education Sav-
taxed as a distribution from the plan.of all interest listed on line 1. ings Bond Program. Use Form 8815 to figure
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your interest exclusion when you redeem quali- U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve- deduct the penalty on Form 1040, line 30. De-
fied savings bonds and pay qualified higher edu- nue Service Center by February 28, 2012 (April duct the entire penalty even if it is more than
cational expenses during the same year. 2, 2012, if you file Form 1099-INT electroni- your interest income.
For more information on the exclusion and cally). Give the actual owner of the interest Copy
qualified higher educational expenses, see the B of the Form 1099-INT by January 31, 2012.
earlier discussion under Education Savings On Form 1099-INT, you should be listed as the
Bond Program. ªPayer.º Prepare one Form 1099-INT for each Dividends and
You must show your total interest from quali- other owner and show that person as the ªRecip-
fied savings bonds you cashed during 2011 on ient.º However, you do not have to file Form Other Distributions
Form 8815, line 6, and on Schedule B (Form 1099-INT to show payments for your spouse.
1040A or 1040). After completing Form 8815, For more information about the reporting re- Dividends are distributions of money, stock, or
enter the result from line 14 (Form 8815) on quirements and the penalties for failure to file (or other property paid to you by a corporation or by
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 3. furnish) certain information returns, see the a mutual fund. You also may receive dividends
General Instructions for Certain Information Re- through a partnership, an estate, a trust, or anInterest on seller-financed mortgage. If an turns. association that is taxed as a corporation. How-individual buys his or her home from you in a Similar rules apply to OID reported to you as ever, some amounts you receive called divi-sale that you finance, you must report the a nominee on Form 1099-OID. You must file a dends are actually interest income. (Seeamount of interest received on Schedule B Form 1099-OID with Form 1096 to show the Dividends that are actually interest  under Tax-(Form 1040A or 1040), line 1. Include on line 1 proper distributions of the OID. able Interest Ð General, earlier.)the buyer's name, address, and SSN. If you do The most common kinds of distributions are:not, you may have to pay a $50 penalty. The Example. You and your sister have a joint • Ordinary dividends,buyer may have to pay a $50 penalty if he or she savings account that paid $1,500 interest for
does not give you this information. 2011. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds in • Capital gain distributions, andYou must also give your name, address, and this account, and you and she have agreed to • Nondividend distributions.SSN (or employer identification number) to the share the yearly interest income in proportion to
buyer. If you do not, you may have to pay a $50 the amount each of you has invested. Because Most distributions are paid in cash (check).penalty. your SSN was given to the bank, you received a However, distributions can consist of more
Form 1099-INT for 2011 that includes the inter- stock, stock rights, other property, or services.Frozen deposits. Even if you receive a Form est income earned belonging to your sister. This1099-INT for interest on deposits that you could amount is $450, or 30% of the total interest of Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Formnot withdraw at the end of 2011, you must ex- $1,500. 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to showclude these amounts from your gross income. You must give your sister a Form 1099-INT you the distributions you received from them(See Interest income on frozen deposits  under by January 31, 2012, showing $450 of interest during the year. Keep this form with your rec-Interest Income , earlier.) Do not include this income she earned for 2011. You must also ords. You do not have to attach it to your taxincome on line 8a of Form 1040A or 1040. On send a copy of the nominee Form 1099-INT, return.Your identifying number may be short-Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, in- along with Form 1096, to the Internal Revenue ened on any paper Form 1099-DIV you receiveclude the full amount of interest shown on your Service Center by February 28, 2012 (April 2, in 2011.Form 1099-INT on line 1. Several lines above 2012, if you file Form 1099-INT electronically).line 2, put a subtotal of all interest income. Below Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.Show your own name, address, and SSN as thatthis subtotal, enter ªFrozen Depositsº and show Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, youof the ªPayerº on the Form 1099-INT. Show yourthe amount of interest that you are excluding. must still report all your taxable dividend in-sister's name, address, and SSN in the blocksSubtract this amount from the subtotal and enter come. For example, you may receive distributiveprovided for identification of the ªRecipient.ºthe result on line 2. shares of dividends from partnerships or S cor-When you prepare your own federal income porations. These dividends are reported to youAccrued interest on bonds. If you received a tax return, report the total amount of interest on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-1Form 1099-INT that reflects accrued interest income, $1,500, on Schedule B (Form 1040A or (Form 1120S).paid on a bond you bought between interest 1040), Part I, line 1, and identify the name of the
Nominees. If someone receives distribu-payment dates, include the full amount shown bank that paid this interest. Show the amount
tions as a nominee for you, that person will giveas interest on the Form 1099-INT on Schedule B belonging to your sister, $450, as a subtraction
you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu-(Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, line 1. Then, from a subtotal of all interest on Schedule B and
tions received on your behalf.below a subtotal of all interest income listed, identify this subtraction as a ªNominee Distribu-
If you receive a Form 1099-DIV that includesenter ªAccrued Interestº and the amount of ac- tion.º (Your sister will report the $450 of interest
amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-crued interest you paid to the seller. That income on her own tax return, if she has to file a
inees under How To Report Dividend Income ,amount is taxable to the seller, not you. Subtract return, and identify you as the payer of that
later, for more information.that amount from the interest income subtotal. amount.)
Enter the result on line 2 and also on Form 1040, Original issue discount (OID) adjustment. If Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-line 8a. you are reporting OID in an amount less than the ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interestFor more information, see Bonds Sold Be- amount shown on Form 1099-OID or other writ- received by a broker on your behalf must between Interest Dates, earlier. ten statement (such as for a REMIC regular reported to you on Form 1099-MISC, Miscella-
interest), include the full amount of OID shownNominee distributions. If you received a neous Income, or a similar statement. See also
on your Form 1099-OID or other statement onForm 1099-INT that includes an amount you Reporting Substitute Payments  under Short
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, line 1.received as a nominee for the real owner, report Sales in chapter 4.
Show OID you do not have to report below athe full amount shown as interest on the Form
Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. Ifsubtotal of the interest and OID listed. Identify1099-INT on Part I, line 1 of Schedule B (Form
you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrectthe amount as ªOID Adjustmentº and subtract it1040A or 1040). Then, below a subtotal of all
amount (or other incorrect information), youfrom the subtotal.interest income listed, enter ªNominee Distribu-
should ask the issuer for a corrected form. Thetionº and the amount that actually belongs to Penalty on early withdrawal of savings. If new Form 1099 you receive will be marked ªCor-someone else. Subtract that amount from the you withdraw funds from a certificate of deposit rected.ºinterest income subtotal. Enter the result on line or other deferred interest account before matur-2 and also on line 8a of Form 1040A or 1040. ity, you may be charged a penalty. The Form Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,
File Form 1099-INT with the IRS. If you 1099-INT or similar statement given to you by exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a
received interest as a nominee in 2011, you the financial institution will show the total dividend is declared but before it is paid, the
must file a Form 1099-INT for that interest with amount of interest in box 1 and will show the owner of record (usually the payee shown on the
the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099-INT with a penalty separately in box 2. You must include in dividend check) must include the dividend in
Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of income all interest shown in box 1. You can income.
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dividends received in January. If a mutual Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per 3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)
above, but the stock for which the dividendshare. The ex-dividend date was July 15, 2011.fund (or other regulated investment company) or
is paid is readily tradable on an estab-Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. showsreal estate investment trust (REIT) declares a
lished securities market in the United$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in boxdividend (including any exempt-interest divi-
States. See Readily tradable stock, later.1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold thedend or capital gain distribution) in October,
5,000 shares on August 11, 2011. You held yourNovember, or December payable to sharehold-
Exception. A corporation is not a qualifiedshares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of theers of record on a date in one of those months
foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-121-day period (from July 9, 2011, through Au-but actually pays the dividend during January of
vestment company during its tax year in whichgust 11, 2011). The 121-day period began onthe next calendar year, you are considered to
the dividends are paid or during its previous taxMay 16, 2011 (60 days before the ex-dividendhave received the dividend on December 31.
year.date), and ended on September 13, 2011. YouYou report the dividend in the year it was de-
have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be-clared. Controlled foreign corporation (CFC).
cause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61 Dividends paid out of a CFC's earnings and
days.Ordinary Dividends profits that were not previously taxed are quali-
fied dividends if the CFC is otherwise a qualifiedExample 2. Assume the same facts as inOrdinary (taxable) dividends are the most com- foreign corporation and the other requirementsExample 1 except that you bought the stock onmon type of distribution from a corporation or a in this discussion are met. Certain dividendsJuly 14, 2011 (the day before the ex-dividendmutual fund. They are paid out of earnings and paid by a CFC that would be treated as a pas-
date), and you sold the stock on September 15,profits and are ordinary income to you. This sive foreign investment company but for section
2011. You held the stock for 63 days (from Julymeans they are not capital gains. You can as- 1297(d) of the Internal Revenue Code may be
15, 2011, through September 15, 2011). Thesume that any dividend you receive on common treated as qualified dividends. For more infor-
$500 of qualified dividends shown in box 1b ofor preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless mation, see Notice 2004-70, which can be found
your Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividendsthe paying corporation or mutual fund tells you at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-44_IRB/ar09.html.
because you held the stock for 61 days of theotherwise. Ordinary dividends will be shown in Readily tradable stock. Any stock (such as121-day period (from July 15, 2011, throughbox 1a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive. common, ordinary, or preferred stock), or anSeptember 13, 2011).
American depositary receipt in respect of that
stock, is considered to satisfy requirement (3) ifExample 3. You bought 10,000 shares ofQualified Dividends it is listed on one of the following securitiesABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 8,
markets: the New York Stock Exchange, theQualified dividends are the ordinary dividends 2011. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend of
NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Ex-subject to the same 0% or 15% maximum tax 10 cents per share. The ex-dividend date was
change, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cincin-rate that applies to net capital gain. They should July 15, 2011. The ABC Mutual Fund advises
nati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stockbe shown in box 1b of the Form 1099-DIV you you that the portion of the dividend eligible to be
Exchange, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, orreceive. treated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per
the Pacific Exchange, Inc.share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC MutualQualified dividends are subject to the 15%
Fund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000rate if the regular tax rate that would apply is
Table 1-3. Income Tax Treatiesand qualified dividends of $200. However, you25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that would
sold the 10,000 shares on August 11, 2011. Youapply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends are Income tax treaties that the United Stateshave no qualified dividends from ABC Mutualsubject to the 0% rate. has with the following countries satisfyFund because you held the ABC Mutual FundTo qualify for the 0% or 15% maximum rate, requirement (2) under Qualified foreignstock for less than 61 days.all of the following requirements must be met. corporation.
Holding period reduced where risk of loss• The dividends must have been paid by a Australia Indonesia Romaniais diminished. When determining whetherU.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor- Austria Ireland Russianyou met the minimum holding period discussedporation. (See Qualified foreign corpora- Bangladesh Israel Federationearlier, you cannot count any day during whichtion later.) Barbados Italy Slovakyou meet any of the following conditions.
Belgium Jamaica Republic• The dividends are not of the type listed
Bulgaria Japan Slovenia1. You had an option to sell, were under alater under Dividends that are not qualified
contractual obligation to sell, or had made Canada Kazakhstan South Africadividends.
(and not closed) a short sale of substan- China Korea Spain• You meet the holding period (discussed tially identical stock or securities. Cyprus Latvia Sri Lankanext). Czech Lithuania Sweden2. You were grantor (writer) of an option to Republic Luxembourg Switzerlandbuy substantially identical stock or securi-Holding period. You must have held the stock Denmark Malta Thailandties.for more than 60 days during the 121-day period Egypt Mexico Trinidad and
3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holdingthat begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date. Estonia Morocco Tobago
one or more other positions in substantiallyThe ex-dividend date is the first date following Finland Netherlands Tunisia
similar or related property.the declaration of a dividend on which the buyer France New Zealand Turkey
of a stock is not entitled to receive the next Germany Norway UkraineFor information about how to apply conditiondividend payment. When counting the number Greece Pakistan United(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.of days you held the stock, include the day you Hungary Philippines Kingdom
disposed of the stock, but not the day you ac- Qualified foreign corporation. A foreign cor- Iceland Poland Venezuelaquired it. See the examples, below. poration is a qualified foreign corporation if it India Portugal
meets any of the following conditions. Exception for preferred stock. In the case
  of preferred stock, you must have held the stock 1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.more than 90 days during the 181-day period possession.that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend date Dividends that are not qualified dividends.
2. The corporation is eligible for the benefitsif the dividends are due to periods totaling more The following dividends are not qualified divi-
of a comprehensive income tax treaty with dends. They are not qualified dividends even ifthan 366 days. If the preferred dividends are due
the United States that the Treasury De- they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold-
partment determines is satisfactory for thising period in the preceding paragraph applies. • Capital gain distributions.purpose and that includes an exchange of
Example 1. You bought 5,000 shares of information program. For a list of those • Dividends paid on deposits with mutual
treaties, see Table 1-3.XYZ Corp. common stock on July 8, 2011. XYZ savings banks, cooperative banks, credit
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
unions, U.S. building and loan associa- in your income, but you reduced the basis ofCapital Gain Distributions
your stock to $20. You received a nondividendtions, U.S. savings and loan associations,
distribution of $30 in 2011. The first $20 of thisCapital gain distributions (also called capitalfederal savings and loan associations, and
amount reduced your basis to zero. You reportgain dividends) are paid to you or credited tosimilar financial institutions. (Report these
the other $10 as a long-term capital gain foryour account by mutual funds (or other regu-amounts as interest income.)
2011. You must report as a long-term capitallated investment companies) and real estate• Dividends from a corporation that is a gain any nondividend distribution you receive oninvestment trusts (REITs). They will be shown in
tax-exempt organization or farmer's coop- box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive from this stock in later years.
erative during the corporation's tax year in the mutual fund or REIT.
which the dividends were paid or during Example 2. You bought shares in DaughReport capital gain distributions as long-term
the corporation's previous tax year. Mutual Fund in 2007 for $12 a share. In 2008,capital gains, regardless of how long you owned
you received a nondividend distribution of $5 ayour shares in the mutual fund or REIT. See• Dividends paid by a corporation on em- share. You reduced your basis in each share byCapital gain distributions under How To Reportployer securities held on the date of record $5 to an adjusted basis of $7. In 2009, youDividend Income, later in this chapter.by an employee stock ownership plan received a nondividend distribution of $1 perUndistributed capital gains of mutual funds(ESOP) maintained by that corporation. share and further reduced your basis in eachand REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs• Dividends on any share of stock to the share to $6. In 2010, you received a nondividendkeep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on distribution of $2 per share. Your basis wasextent you are obligated (whether under a them. You must treat your share of these gains reduced to $4. In 2011, the nondividend distribu-short sale or otherwise) to make related as distributions, even though you did not actu- tion from the mutual fund was $5 a share. Youpayments for positions in substantially ally receive them. However, they are not in- reduce your basis in each share to zero. Yoursimilar or related property. cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are 2011 Form 1099-B from Daugh Mutual Fund forreported to you in box 1a of Form 2439, Notice• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if the transaction shows your basis is zero andto Shareholder of Undistributed Long-Termyou know or have reason to know the pay- your gain or loss is long-term. You will reportCapital Gains.ments are not qualified dividends. your zero basis in column (f) of Form 8949, inForm 2439 will also show how much, if any, Part II with box A checked since you held the• Payments shown on Form 1099-DIV, box of the undistributed capital gains is: shares more than a year and you received a1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1b), Form 1099-B that showed your basis for theyou know or have reason to know the pay- transaction.ments are not qualified dividends. • Gain from qualified small business stock
(section 1202 gain, box 1c), or For more information on Form 8949
and Schedule D, see Reporting Capital• Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1d).Dividends Used To Gains and Losses  in chapter 4. See
TIPBuy More Stock For information about these terms, see Capital also Schedule D, Form 8949, and the 2011
Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. Instructions for Schedule D.The corporation in which you own stock may
have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan The tax paid on these gains by the mutual
fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.lets you choose to use your dividends to buy Liquidating Distributions
(through an agent) more shares of stock in the Basis adjustment. Increase your basis in Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liqui-corporation instead of receiving the dividends in your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, by dating dividends, are distributions you receivecash. Most mutual funds also permit sharehold- the difference between the gain you report and during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-ers to automatically reinvest distributions in the credit you claim for the tax paid. poration. These distributions are, at least in part,more shares in the fund, instead of receiving one form of a return of capital. They may be paidcash. If you use your dividends to buy more Nondividend Distributions in one or more installments. You will receivestock at a price equal to its fair market value, you Form 1099-DIV from the corporation showingstill must report the dividends as income. A nondividend distribution is a distribution that is you the amount of the liquidating distribution innot paid out of the earnings and profits of aIf you are a member of a dividend reinvest- box 8 or 9.corporation or a mutual fund. You should re-ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a price Any liquidating distribution you receive is notceive a Form 1099-DIV or other statementless than its fair market value, you must report taxable to you until you have recovered theshowing you the nondividend distribution. Onas dividend income the fair market value of the basis of your stock. After the basis of your stockForm 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution willadditional stock on the dividend payment date. has been reduced to zero, you must report thebe shown in box 3. If you do not receive such a liquidating distribution as a capital gain. WhetherYou also must report as dividend income any statement, you report the distribution as an ordi- you report the gain as a long-term or short-termservice charge subtracted from your cash divi- nary dividend. capital gain depends on how long you have helddends before the dividends are used to buy the the stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4.Basis adjustment. A nondividend distributionadditional stock. But you may be able to deduct reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxedthe service charge. See Expenses of Producing Stock acquired at different times. If youuntil your basis in the stock is fully recovered.Income in chapter 3. acquired stock in the same corporation in moreThis nontaxable portion is also called a return of than one transaction, you own more than oneIn some dividend reinvestment plans, you capital; it is a return of your investment in the block of stock in the corporation. If you receivecan invest more cash to buy shares of stock at a stock of the company. If you buy stock in a distributions from the corporation in completeprice less than fair market value. If you choose corporation in different lots at different times, liquidation, you must divide the distributionto do this, you must report as dividend income and you cannot definitely identify the shares among the blocks of stock you own in the follow-the difference between the cash you invest and subject to the nondividend distribution, reduce ing proportion: the number of shares in thatthe fair market value of the stock you buy. When the basis of your earliest purchases first. block over the total number of shares you own.When the basis of your stock has been re-figuring this amount, use the fair market value of Divide distributions in partial liquidation amongduced to zero, report any additional nondividendthe stock on the dividend payment date. that part of the stock redeemed in the partialdistribution you receive as a capital gain. liquidation. After the basis of a block of stock isWhether you report it as a long-term or reduced to zero, you must report the part of anyMoney Market Funds short-term capital gain depends on how long later distribution for that block as a capital gain.you have held the stock. See Holding Period in
Report amounts you receive from money market Distributions less than basis. If the totalchapter 4.
funds as dividend income. Money market funds liquidating distributions you receive are less
are a type of mutual fund and should not be Example 1. You bought stock in 1998 for than the basis of your stock, you may have a
confused with bank money market accounts that $100. In 2001, you received a nondividend dis- capital loss. You can report a capital loss only
pay interest. tribution of $80. You did not include this amount after you have received the final distribution in
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
liquidation that results in the redemption or can- income ratably over the period during which the stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-
cellation of the stock. Whether you report the stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issued dend. However, with the approval of the share-
loss as a long-term or short-term capital loss after October 9, 1990, you include the redemp- holders, the corporation may set up a plan in
depends on how long you held the stock. See tion premium on the basis of its economic ac- which fractional shares are not issued but in-
Holding Period in chapter 4. crual over the period during which the stock stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are given
cannot be redeemed, as if it were original issue to the shareholders. Any cash you receive for
discount on a debt instrument. See Original Is-Distributions of Stock fractional shares under such a plan is treated as
sue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter. an amount realized on the sale of the fractionaland Stock Rights The redemption premium is not a construc- shares. Report this transaction on Form 8949,
tive distribution, and is not taxable as a result, inDistributions by a corporation of its own stock Sales and Other Dispositions of Capital Assets.the following situations.are commonly known as stock dividends. Stock Enter your gain or loss, the difference between
rights (also known as ªstock optionsº) are distri- the cash you receive and the basis of the frac-1. The stock was issued before October 10,butions by a corporation of rights to acquire the tional shares sold, in column (h) of Schedule D1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re-corporation's stock. Generally, stock dividends in Part I or Part II, whichever is appropriate.deemable solely at the option of the is-and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you suer), and the redemption premium is Report these transactions on Formdo not report them on your return. ªreasonable.º (For stock issued before Oc- 8949 with the correct box (A, B, or C)
tober 10, 1990, only the part of the re- checked.Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.
CAUTION
! demption premium that is not ªreasonableºDistributions of stock dividends and stock rights For more information on Form 8949 andis a constructive distribution.) The redemp-are taxable to you if any of the following apply. Schedule D (Form 1040), see Reporting Capitaltion premium is reasonable if it is not more
Gains and Losses  in chapter 4. Also see thethan 10% of the issue price on stock not1. You or any other shareholder have the
Instructions for Schedule D.redeemable for 5 years from the issue datechoice to receive cash or other property
or is in the nature of a penalty for making ainstead of stock or stock rights. Example. You own one share of commonpremature redemption.2. The distribution gives cash or other prop- stock that you bought on January 3, 2002, for2. The stock was issued after October 9,erty to some shareholders and an increase $100. The corporation declared a common stock1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem-in the percentage interest in the corpora- dividend of 5% on June 30, 2011. The fair mar-able solely at the option of the issuer), andtion's assets or earnings and profits to ket value of the stock at the time the stockthe redemption premium is ªde minimis.ºother shareholders. dividend was declared was $200. You were paidThe redemption premium is de minimis if it $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under3. The distribution is in convertible preferred is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the a plan described in the above paragraph. Youstock and has the same result as in (2). redemption price multiplied by the number
figure your gain or loss as follows:of full years from the date of issue to the4. The distribution gives preferred stock to
date redeemable.some common stock shareholders and Fair market value of old stock ... . $200.00common stock to other common stock 3. The stock was issued after October 9, Fair market value of stock dividendshareholders. 1990, and must be redeemed at a speci- (cash received) ............. . + 10.00
Fair market value of old stock andfied time or is redeemable at your option,5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The
stock dividend .............. . $210.00but the redemption is unlikely because it isdistribution, however, is not taxable if it is
Basis (cost) of old stocksubject to a contingency outside your con-an increase in the conversion ratio of con- after the stock dividendtrol (not including the possibility of default,vertible preferred stock made solely to take (($200 ÷  $210) ×  $100) ........ . $95.24insolvency, etc.).into account a stock dividend, stock split, Basis (cost) of stock dividendor similar event that would otherwise result 4. The stock was issued after December 19, (($10 ÷  $210) ×  $100) ......... . + 4.76in reducing the conversion right.) 1995, and is redeemable solely at the op- Total .................... . $100.00
tion of the issuer, but the redemption pre-The term ªstockº includes rights to acquire Cash received .............. .  $10.00mium is in the nature of a penalty forstock, and the term ªshareholderº includes a Basis (cost) of stock dividend .... . − 4.76premature redemption or redemption is notholder of rights or convertible securities.
more likely than not to occur. The redemp-If you receive taxable stock dividends or Gain  $5.24tion will be treated under a ªsafe harborº asstock rights, include their fair market value at the
not more likely than not to occur if all of thetime of distribution in your income. Because you had held the share of stock for
following are true. more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend
Constructive distributions. You must treat was declared, your gain on the stock dividend isa. You and the issuer are not relatedcertain transactions that increase your propor- a long-term capital gain.under the rules discussed in chapter 4tionate interest in the earnings and profits or under Losses on Sales or Trades of Scrip dividends. A corporation that de-assets of a corporation as if they were distribu- Property, substituting ª20%º for ª50%.º clares a stock dividend may issue you a scriptions of stock or stock rights. These constructive
certificate that entitles you to a fractional share.distributions are taxable if they have the same b. There are no plans, arrangements, or
The certificate is generally nontaxable when youresult as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4), agreements that effectively require or
receive it. If you choose to have the corporationor (5) of the above discussion. are intended to compel the issuer to
sell the certificate for you and give you the pro-redeem the stock.This treatment applies to a change in your
ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be-stock's conversion ratio or redemption price, a c. The redemption would not reduce the tween the proceeds and the part of your basis indifference between your stock's redemption stock's yield. the corporation's stock allocated to the certifi-price and issue price, a redemption not treated
as a sale or exchange of your stock, and any cate.
other transaction having a similar effect on your However, if you receive a scrip certificateBasis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-interest in the corporation. that you can choose to redeem for cash insteadceived in a taxable distribution is their fair market
of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-Preferred stock redeemable at a premium. value when distributed. If you receive stock or
ceive it. You must include its fair market value inIf you hold preferred stock having a redemption stock rights that are not taxable to you, see
income on the date you receive it.price higher than its issue price, the difference Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Investment
(the redemption premium) generally is taxable Property in chapter 4 for information on how to
as a constructive distribution of additional stock figure their basis. Other Distributions
on the preferred stock.
You may receive any of the following distribu-For stock issued before October 10, 1990, Fractional shares. You may not own enough
you include the redemption premium in your stock in a corporation to receive a full share of tions during the year.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
OMB No. 1545-0110 
2011
Form  1099-DIV 
Dividends and 
Distributions 
Copy B 
For Recipient 
This is important tax 
information and is 
being furnished to 
the Internal Revenue 
Service. If you are 
required to file a 
return, a negligence 
penalty or other 
sanction may be 
imposed on you if 
 this income is taxable 
and the IRS 
determines that it has 
not been reported. 
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. 
PAYER’S federal identification   
number 
RECIPIENT’S identification   
number 
RECIPIENT’S name 
Street address (including apt. no.) 
City, state, and ZIP code 
Account number (see instructions) 
1a   Total ordinary dividends 
$ 
1b  Qualified dividends
$ 
2a  Total capital gain distr.
$ 
2b  Unrecap. Sec. 1250 gain 
$ 
2c  Section 1202 gain 
$ 
2d  Collectibles (28%) gain 
$ 
3  Nondividend distributions 
$ 
4  Federal income tax withheld 
$ 
5  Investment expenses 
$ 
6  Foreign tax paid 
$ 
7  Foreign country or U.S. possession 
8  Cash liquidation distributions 
$ 
9  Noncash liquidation distributions 
$ 
Form 1099-DIV (keep for your records) Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue Service
Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest all net premiums you paid for the contract. (For
dividends you receive from a mutual fund or information on the treatment of a distribution How To Reportother regulated investment company, including from a modified endowment contract, see Distri-
those received from a qualified fund of funds in bution Before Annuity Starting Date From a Dividend Incomeany tax year beginning after December 22, Nonqualified Plan  under Taxation of Nonperi-
2010, are not included in your taxable income. odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension and Terms you may need to know(However, see Information reporting require- Annuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu- (see Glossary):ment, next.) Exempt-interest dividends should tions on insurance policies on Form 1040, line
be shown in box 8 of Form 1099-INT. 21. Nominee
Information reporting requirement. Al- Restricted stockDividends on veterans' insurance. Divi-though exempt-interest dividends are not tax- dends you receive on veterans' insurance poli-able, you must show them on your tax return if cies are not taxable. In addition, interest onyou have to file a return. This is an information Generally, you can use either Form 1040 ordividends left with the Department of Veteransreporting requirement and does not change the Form 1040A to report your dividend income.Affairs is not taxable.exempt-interest dividends to taxable income. Report the total of your ordinary dividends on
See Reporting tax-exempt interest  under How line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. ReportPatronage dividends. Generally, patronageTo Report Interest Income, earlier. qualified dividends on line 9b.dividends you receive in money from a coopera-
If you receive capital gain distributions, youtive organization are included in your income.Alternative minimum tax treatment. Ex-
may be able to use Form 1040A or you mayempt-interest dividends paid from specified pri- Do not include in your income patronage
have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-vate activity bonds may be subject to the dividends you receive on:
butions, later. If you receive nondividend distri-alternative minimum tax. The exempt-interest • Property bought for your personal use, or butions required to be reported as capital gains,dividends subject to the alternative minimum tax
you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Form• Capital assets or depreciable propertyshould be shown in box 9 of Form 1099-INT.
1040EZ if you receive any dividend income.bought for use in your business. But youSee Form 6251 and its instructions for more
must reduce the basis (cost) of the itemsinformation. Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichbought. If the dividend is more than the
you received $10 or more in dividends and otherDividends on insurance policies. Insurance adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-
distributions, you should receive a Formpolicy dividends the insurer keeps and uses to port the excess as income.
1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive a Formpay your premiums are not taxable. However,
1099-DIV, you must report all your taxable divi-you must report as taxable interest income the These rules are the same whether the cooper-
dend income.interest that is paid or credited on dividends left ative paying the dividend is a taxable or
with the insurance company. tax-exempt cooperative. See Form 1099-DIV for more information on
 If dividends on an insurance contract (other how to report dividend income.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do notthan a modified endowment contract) are distrib-
report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-uted to you, they are a partial return of the Form 1040A or Form 1040. You must com-
port these amounts on Form 1040, line 21; Formpremiums you paid. Do not include them in your plete Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part II,
1040A, line 13; or Form 1040EZ, line 3.gross income until they are more than the total of and attach it to your Form 1040A or 1040, if:
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV, amount in box 1a. Do not include any of the Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to
box 1a) are more than $1,500, or figure your tax.following on line 9b.
You can report your capital gain distributions• You received, as a nominee, dividends • Qualified dividends you received as a on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Formthat actually belong to someone else. nominee. See Nominees, later. 1040, if both the following are true.
If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500, • Dividends on stock for which you did not • None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substituteyou must also complete Schedule B, Part III. meet the holding period. See Holding pe- statements) you received have an amountriod, earlier under Qualified Dividends.List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, each in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.
payer's name and the ordinary dividends you • Dividends on any share of stock to the • You do not have to file Form 1040 for anyreceived. If your securities are held by a broker- extent you are obligated (whether under a other capital gains or losses.age firm (in ªstreet nameº), list the name of the short sale or otherwise) to make related
brokerage firm shown on Form 1099-DIV as the payments for positions in substantially Exception 2. You must file Schedule Dpayer. If your stock is held by a nominee who is similar or related property. (Form 1040), but generally do not have to filethe owner of record, and the nominee credited or Form 8949, if Exception 1 does not apply and• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only ifpaid you dividends on the stock, show the name your only capital gains and losses are:you know or have reason to know the pay-of the nominee and the dividends you received ments are not qualified dividends. • Capital gain distributions,or for which you were credited.
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed • Payments shown on Form 1099-DIV, box • A capital loss carryover from 2010,on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a 1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent
• A gain from Form 2439 or 6252 or Part I ofnominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this you know or have reason to know the pay-
Form 4797,total on Form 1040, line 9a. ments are not qualified dividends.
• A gain or loss from Form 4684, 6781, orDividends received on restricted stock. Re- If you have qualified dividends, you must fig- 8824, orstricted stock is stock you get from your em- ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-
ployer for services you perform and that is • A gain or loss from a partnership, S corpo-dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the
nontransferable and subject to a substantial risk ration, estate, or trust.Form 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched-
of forfeiture. You do not have to include the ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-
value of the stock in your income when you Undistributed capital gains. To report un-tions, whichever applies. Enter qualified
receive it. However, if you get dividends on re- distributed capital gains, you must completedividends on line 2 of the worksheet.
stricted stock, you must include them in your Schedule D (Form 1040) and attach it to yourInvestment interest deducted. If you claimincome as wages, not dividends. See Restricted return. Report these gains on Schedule D (Forma deduction for investment interest, you mayProperty in Publication 525 for information on 1040), line 11, column (h), and attach Copy B ofhave to reduce the amount of your qualifiedrestricted stock dividends. Form 2439 to your return. Report the tax paid bydividends that are eligible for the 0% or 15% taxYour employer should include these divi- the mutual fund on these gains on Form 1040,rate. Reduce it by the qualified dividends youdends in the wages shown on your Form W-2. If line 71, and check box a on that line.choose to include in investment income whenyou also get a Form 1099-DIV for these divi- The mutual fund (or other regulated invest-figuring the limit on your investment interest de-dends, list them on Schedule B (Form 1040A or ment company) or real estate investment trustduction. This is done on the Qualified Dividends1040), line 5, with the other dividends you re- (REIT) making the distribution should tell youand Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Sched-ceived. Enter a subtotal of all your dividend how much of it is:ule D Tax Worksheet. For more informationincome several lines above line 6. Below the • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 2b),about the limit on investment interest, see Inter-subtotal, enter ªDividends on restricted stock orest Expenses in chapter 3.reported as wages on Form 1040 (or Form
1040A), line 7,º and enter the dividends included • Section 1202 gain (box 2c).Capital gain distributions. If you receivedin your wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form For information about these terms, see Capitalcapital gain distributions, you report them either1040A. Subtract this amount from the subtotal Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.directly on Form 1040, line 13, or on Schedule Dand enter the result on line 6.
(Form 1040), line 13, depending on your situa- Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured SectionElection. You can choose to include the tion. Distributions of net realized short-term cap- 1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-value of restricted stock in gross income as pay ital gains are not treated as capital gains. tions the part reported to you as unrecapturedfor services. If you make this choice, report the Instead, they are included on Form 1099-DIV as section 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualifieddividends on the stock like any other dividends. ordinary dividends. Report them on your tax small business stock (section 1202 gain), followList them on Part II, line 5, of Schedule B, along return as ordinary dividends. the reporting instructions under Section 1202with your other dividends (if the amount of ordi- Exclusion in chapter 4.nary dividends received from all sources is more Exceptions to filing Form 8949 and Schedule
than $1,500). If you receive both a Form D (Form 1040). There are certain situations Nondividend distributions. Report nondivi-
1099-DIV and a Form W-2 showing these divi- where you may not have to file Form 8949 and/ dend distributions (box 3 of Form 1099-DIV)
dends, do not include the dividends in your or Schedule D (Form 1040). only after your basis in the stock has been re-
wages reported on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form duced to zero. After the basis of your stock hasException 1. You do not have to file Form1040A. Attach a statement to your Form 1040 or been reduced to zero, you must show this ex-8949 or Schedule D (Form 1040) if both of theForm 1040A explaining why the amount shown cess amount on Form 8949, Part I, line 1, if youfollowing apply.on line 7 of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A is held the stock 1 year or less. Show it on Form
different from the amount shown on your Form 1. You have no capital losses, and your only 8949, Part II, line 3, if you held the stock for more
W-2. capital gains are capital gain distributions than 1 year. Enter ªNondividend Distribution Ex-
from Form(s) 1099-DIV, box 2a (or substi- ceeding Basisº in column (a) of Form 8949 andIndependent contractor. If you received
tute statements). the name of the company. Report the amount ofrestricted stock for services as an independent
the excess distribution in column (e) and yourcontractor, the rules in the previous discussion 2. None of the Form(s) 1099-DIV (or substi- zero basis in column (f) of Form 8949.apply. Generally, you must treat dividends you tute statements) have an amount in box 2b
receive on the stock as income from (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), box 2c Report these transactions on Form
self-employment. (section 1202 gain), or box 2d (collectibles 8949 with the correct box (A, B, or C)
(28%) gain). checked.
CAUTION
!Qualified dividends. Report qualified divi-
If both the above statements apply, report yourdends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b of For more information on Form 8949 and
capital gain distributions directly on line 13 ofForm 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in box Schedule D (Form 1040), see Reporting Capital
Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also1b is already included in box 1a. Do not add the Gains and Losses  in chapter 4. Also see the
use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gainamount in box 1b to, or subtract it from, the Instructions for Schedule D.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nominees. If you received ordinary dividends Treatment of buyer. If you buy stripped pre- A REMIC regular interest is treated as a debt
ferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in- instrument for income tax purposes. Accord-as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in your
clude certain amounts in your gross income ingly, the OID, market discount, and incomename but actually belong to someone else),
while you hold the stock. These amounts are reporting rules that apply to bonds and otherinclude them on line 5 of Schedule B (Form
ordinary income. They are equal to the amounts debt instruments as described earlier in this1040A or 1040). Several lines above line 6, put a
you would have included in gross income if the publication under Discount on Debt Instrumentssubtotal of all dividend income listed on line 5.
stock were a bond that: apply, with certain modifications discussed be-Below this subtotal, enter ªNominee Distribu-
low.tionº and show the amount received as a nomi- 1. Was issued on the purchase date of the Generally, you report your income from anee. Subtract the total of your nominee stock, and regular interest on Form 1040, line 8a. For moredistributions from the subtotal. Enter the result information on how to report interest and OID,2. Has OID equal to:on line 6. see How To Report Interest Income, earlier.If you received a capital gain distribution or a. The redemption price for the stock, mi-were allocated an undistributed capital gain as a Holders must use accrual method. Holdersnus
nominee, report only the amount that belongs to of regular interests must use an accrual methodb. The price at which you bought theyou on Form 1040A, line 10; Form 1040, line 13; of accounting to report OID and interest income.stock.or Schedule D (Form 1040), line 13, whichever Because income under an accrual method is not
is appropriate. Attach a statement to your return determined by the receipt of cash, you may haveReport these amounts as other income onshowing the full amount you received or were to include OID or interest income in your taxableForm 1040, line 21. For information about OID, income even if you have not received any cashallocated and the amount you received or were see Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier. payments.allocated as a nominee. This treatment also applies to you if you
File Form 1099-DIV with the IRS. If you acquire the stock in such a way (for example, by Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You should
received dividends as a nominee in 2011, you gift) that your basis in the stock is determined by receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form
using a buyer's basis.must file a Form 1099-DIV (or Form 2439) for 1099-OID from the REMIC. You will also receive
those dividends with the IRS. Send the Form a written statement by March 15, 2012 (if youTreatment of person stripping stock. If you1099-DIV with a Form 1096, Annual Summary are a calendar year taxpayer), that providesstrip the rights to one or more dividends fromand Transmittal of U.S. Information Returns, to additional information. The statement shouldstripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav-your Internal Revenue Service Center by Febru- contain enough information to enable you toing purchased the stock. You are treated asary 28, 2012 (April 2, 2012, if you file Form figure your accrual of market discount or amor-making the purchase on the date you disposed tizable bond premium.1099-DIV electronically). Give the actual owner of the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in the Form 1099-INT shows interest income thatof the dividends Copy B of the Form 1099-DIV stripped preferred stock is treated as your accrued to you for the period you held the regu-by January 31, 2012. On Form 1099-DIV, you purchase price. The rules described in Treat- lar interest.should be listed as the ªPayer.º The other owner ment of buyer, earlier, apply to you. Form 1099-OID shows OID and interest, ifshould be listed as the ªRecipient.º You do not,
any, that accrued to you for the period you heldhowever, have to file a Form 1099-DIV to show
the regular interest. You will not need to makepayments for your spouse. For more information
any adjustments to the amounts reported even ifabout the reporting requirements and the penal- REMICs, FASITs, you held the regular interest for only a part of theties for failure to file (or furnish) certain informa- calendar year. However, if you bought the regu-tion returns, see the General Instructions for and Other CDOs lar interest at a premium or acquisition premium,Certain Information Returns and the Instructions see Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OIDfor Form 2439. Holders of interests in real estate mortgage in- under Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier.vestment conduits (REMICs), financial asset
You may not get a Form 1099. Corpora-securitization investment trusts (FASITs), andLiquidating distributions. If you receive a
tions and other persons specified in Regulationsother collateralized debt obligations (CDOs)liquidating distribution on stock, the corporation
section 1.6049-7(c) will not receive Forms 1099.must follow special rules for reporting incomewill give you a Form 1099-DIV showing the liqui-
These persons and fiscal year taxpayers mayand any expenses from these investment prod-dating distribution in boxes 8 and 9.
obtain tax information by contacting the REMICucts.
or the issuer of the CDO, if they hold their inter-
est directly from the REMIC or issuer of theREMICs
CDO. Publication 938, Real Estate MortgageStripped Investment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Infor-A REMIC is an entity formed for the purpose of
mation, explains how to request this information.holding a fixed pool of mortgages secured byPreferred Stock interests in real property. A REMIC issues regu- Publication 938 is available only on thelar and residual interests to investors. For tax If the dividend rights are stripped from certain Internet at IRS.gov.purposes, a REMIC is generally treated as apreferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre-
 partnership with the residual interest holdersferred stock may have to include amounts in treated as the partners. The regular interests areincome equal to the amounts that would have If you hold a regular interest or CDO throughtreated as debt instruments.been included if the stock were a bond with OID. a nominee (rather than directly), you can re-REMIC income or loss is not income or loss
quest the information from the nominee.from a passive activity.Stripped preferred stock defined. Stripped For more information about the qualificationspreferred stock is any stock that meets both of Allocated investment expenses. Regular in-and tax treatment that apply to a REMIC and thethe following tests. terest holders in a REMIC may be allowed tointerests of investors in a REMIC, see sections
deduct the REMIC's investment expenses, but860A through 860G of the Internal Revenue1. There has been a separation in ownership only if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. ACode, and the regulations under those sections.between the stock and any dividend on the single-class REMIC is one that generally would
stock that has not become payable. be classified as a trust for tax purposes if it had
not elected REMIC status.2. The stock: Regular Interest
The single-class REMIC will report your
a. Is limited and preferred as to dividends, A REMIC can have several classes (also known share of its investment expenses in box 5 of
as ªtranchesº) of regular interests. A regular Form 1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. Itb. Does not participate in corporate growth interest unconditionally entitles the holder to re- will also include this amount in box 1 of Formto any significant extent, and ceive a specified principal amount (or other simi- 1099-INT or box 2 of Form 1099-OID, and on the
c. Has a fixed redemption price. lar amount). additional written statement.
Page 26 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 27 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You may be able to take a deduction for For more information about reporting your FASITs
these expenses subject to a 2% limit that also income (or loss) from a residual interest in a
applies to certain other miscellaneous itemized REMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) and A financial asset securitization investment trust
deductions. See Expenses of Producing Income Schedule E (Form 1040) instructions. (FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt obliga-
in chapter 3 for more information. tions such as credit card receivables, home eq-
Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- uity loans, and automobile loans.Redemption of regular interests at maturity. gross-income limit, you may be able to claim a A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as aRedemption of debt instruments at their maturity miscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or- debt instrument. The rules described under Col-is treated as a sale or exchange. You must dinary and necessary expenses you paid or in- lateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap-report redemptions on your tax return whether or curred in connection with your investment in a ply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that anot you realize gain or loss on the transaction. REMIC. These expenses may include certain holder of a regular interest in a FASIT must useYour basis is your adjusted issue price, which expense items incurred by the REMIC and an accrual method of accounting to report OIDincludes any OID you previously reported in passed through to you. The REMIC will report and interest income.income. these expenses to you on Schedule Q, line 3b. For more information about FASITs, seeAny amount you receive on the retirement of See Expenses of Producing Income in chapter 3 sections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev-a debt instrument is treated as if you had sold or for information on how to report these expenses. enue Code.exchanged that instrument. A debt instrument is
retired when it is reacquired or redeemed by the Beginning January 1, 2005, the specialCollateralized Debtissuer and canceled. rules for FASITs are repealed. How-
Obligations (CDOs) ever, the special rules still apply to any
CAUTION
!Sale or exchange of a regular interest. FASIT in existence on October 22, 2004, to theSome of your gain on the sale or exchange of a A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a debt extent that regular interests issued by the FASITREMIC regular interest may be ordinary income. instrument, other than a REMIC regular interest, before that date continue to remain outstandingThe ordinary income part, if any, is: that is secured by a pool of mortgages or other in accordance with the original terms of issu-evidence of debt and that has principal pay-• The amount that would have been in- ance.ments subject to acceleration. (Note: Whilecluded in your income if the yield to matur-
REMIC regular interests are collateralized debtity on the regular interest had been 110%
obligations, they have unique rules that do notof the applicable federal rate at the begin-
apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) CDOs, alsoning of your holding period, minus S Corporationsknown as ªpay-through bonds,º are commonly
• The amount you included in your income. divided into different classes (also called
In general, an S corporation does not pay a taxªtranchesº).
on its income. Instead, its income and expensesCDOs can be secured by a pool of mort-Residual Interest are passed through to the shareholders, whogages, automobile loans, equipment leases, or
then report these items on their own income taxcredit card receivables.A residual interest is an interest in a REMIC that returns.For more information about the qualificationsis not a regular interest. It is designated as a If you are an S corporation shareholder, yourand the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of aresidual interest by the REMIC. share of the corporation's current year incomeCDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the InternalIf you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC, or loss and other tax items are taxed to youRevenue Code and the regulations under thatyou must take into account on a quarterly basis whether or not you receive any amount. Gener-section.your daily portion of the taxable income or net ally, those items increase or decrease the basisThe OID, market discount, and in-loss of the REMIC for each day during the tax of your S corporation stock as appropriate. Forcome-reporting rules that apply to bonds andyear you hold the residual interest. You must more information on basis adjustments for Sother debt instruments, as described earlier inreport these amounts as ordinary income or corporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds underthis chapter under Discount on Debt Instru-loss. Basis of Investment Property in chapter 4.ments, also apply to a CDO.Basis in the residual interest. Your basis in Generally, S corporation distributions, ex-You must include interest income from yourthe residual interest is increased by taxable in- cept dividend distributions, are considered a re-CDO in your gross income under your regularcome you take into account. Your basis is de- turn of capital and reduce your basis in the stockmethod of accounting. Also include any OIDcreased (but not below zero) by the cash or the of the corporation. The part of any distributionaccrued on your CDO during the tax year.fair market value of any property distributed to that is more than your basis is treated as a gainGenerally, you report your income from ayou, and by any net loss you have taken into from the sale or exchange of property. The cor-CDO on Form 1040, line 8a. For more informa-account. If you sell your residual interest, you poration's distributions may be in the form oftion about reporting these amounts on your re-must adjust your basis to reflect your share of cash or property.turn, see How To Report Interest Income ,the REMIC's taxable income or net loss immedi- S corporation distributions are not treated asearlier.ately before the sale. See Wash Sales, in chap- dividends except in certain cases in which the
ter 4, for more information about selling a corporation has accumulated earnings and prof-Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You should
residual interest. its from years before it became an S corporation.receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form
1099-OID. You will also receive a written state-Treatment of distributions. You must in- Reporting S corporation income, deduc-ment by March 15, 2012, that provides addi-clude in your gross income the part of any distri- tions, and credits. The S corporation shouldtional information. The statement should containbution that is more than your adjusted basis. send you a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S)enough information about the CDO to enableTreat the distribution as a gain from the sale or showing your share of the S corporation's in-you to figure your accrual of market discount orexchange of your residual interest. come, credits, and deductions for the tax year.amortizable bond premium. You must report your distributive share of the SSchedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residual Form 1099-INT shows the interest income corporation's income, gain, loss, deductions, orinterest, you should receive Schedule Q (Form paid to you for the period you held the CDO. credits on the appropriate lines and schedules of1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interest Form 1099-OID shows the OID accrued to your Form 1040.Holder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net Loss you and the interest, if any, paid to you for the For more information about your treatment ofAllocation, and instructions from the REMIC period you held the CDO. You should not need S corporation tax items, see Shareholder's In-each quarter. Schedule Q will indicate your to make any adjustments to the amounts re- structions for Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).share of the REMIC's quarterly taxable income ported even if you held the CDO for only a part of
(or loss). Do not attach Schedule Q to your tax the calendar year. However, if you bought the Limit on losses and deductions. The de-
return. Keep it for your records. CDO at a premium or acquisition premium, see duction for your share of losses and deductions
Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part IV, to Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID under shown on Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) is limited
report your total share of the REMIC's taxable Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier. to the adjusted basis of your stock and any debt
income (or loss) for each quarter included in If you did not receive a Form 1099, see You the corporation owes you. Any loss or deduction
your tax year. may not get a Form 1099 under REMICs, earlier. not allowed because of this limit is carried over
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 27

Page 28 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and treated as a loss or deduction in the next tax treated were different from those explained in Club as a Corporation
year. the following discussions. An investment club
An investment club formed after 1996 is taxedthat existed before 1997 is treated for later yearsPassive activity losses. Rules apply that as a corporation if:the same way it was treated before 1997, unlesslimit losses from passive activities. Your copy of it chooses to be treated a different way under the • It is formed under a federal or state lawSchedule K-1 and its instructions will explain the new rules. To make that choice, the club must that refers to it as incorporated or as alimits and tell you where on your return to report file Form 8832, Entity Classification Election. corporation, body corporate, or body poli-your share of S corporation items from passive
tic,activities.
• It is formed under a state law that refers toClub as a PartnershipForm 8582. If you have a passive activity
it as a joint-stock company or joint-stockloss from an S corporation, you must complete
If your club is not taxed as a corporation or a association, orForm 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, to
trust, it will be treated as a partnership.figure the allowable loss to enter on your return. • It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.See Publication 925 for more information. Filing requirement. If your investment club is
treated as a partnership, it must file Form 1065. Choosing to be taxed as a corporation. To
However, as a partner in the club, you must choose to be taxed as a corporation, the club
report on your individual return your share of the cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) orInvestment Clubs club's income, gains, losses, deductions, and otherwise subject to special treatment under the
credits for the club's tax year. (Its tax year gener- tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to makeAn investment club is formed when a group of ally must be the same tax year as that of the the choice.friends, neighbors, business associates, or partners owning a majority interest.) You mustothers pool their money to invest in stock or report these items whether or not you actually Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as aother securities. The club may or may not have a receive any distribution from the partnership. corporation, it must file Form 1120. In that case,written agreement, a charter, or bylaws.
you do not report any of its income or expensesUsually the group operates informally with Schedule K-1. You should receive a copy of on your individual return. All ordinary incomemembers pledging to pay a regular amount into Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), Partner's Share of and expenses and capital gains and losses mustthe club monthly. Some clubs have a committee Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the part- be reported on the Form 1120. Any distributionthat gathers information on securities, selects nership. The amounts shown on Schedule K-1 the club makes that qualifies as a dividend mustthe most promising securities, and recommends are your share of the partnership's income, de- be reported on Form 1099-DIV if total distribu-that the club invest in them. Other clubs rotate ductions, and credits. Report each amount on tions to the shareholder are $10 or more for thethese responsibilities among all their members. the appropriate lines and schedules of your in-
year.Most clubs require all members to vote for or come tax return.
against all investments, sales, trades, and other You must report any distributions you re-The club's expenses for producing or collect-
transactions. ceive from the club on your individual return.ing income, for managing investment property,
You should receive a copy of Form 1099-DIVor for determining any tax are listed separatelyIdentifying number. Each club must have an from the club showing the distributions you re-on Schedule K-1. Each individual partner whoemployer identification number (EIN) to use ceived.itemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)when filing its return. The club's EIN also may
can deduct his or her share of those expenses. Some corporations can choose not to behave to be given to the payer of dividends or
The expenses are listed on Schedule A, line 23, taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-other income from investments recorded in the
along with other miscellaneous deductions sub- ers. See S Corporations, earlier.club's name. To obtain an EIN, file Form SS-4,
ject to the 2% limit. See Expenses of ProducingApplication for Employer Identification Number. For more information about corporations,
Income in chapter 3 for more information on theSee chapter 5 of this publication for more infor- see Publication 542, Corporations.
2% limit.mation about how to get this form.
For more information about reporting your
Investments in name of member. When income from a partnership, see the Schedule Club as a Trustan investment is recorded in the name of one K-1 instructions. Also see Publication 541, Part-
club member, this member must give his or her In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as anerships.
SSN to the payer of investment income. (When trust. In general, a trust is an arrangementPassive activity losses. Rules apply thatan investment is held in the names of two or through which trustees take title to property forlimit losses from passive activities. Your copy ofmore club members, the SSN of only one mem- the purpose of protecting or conserving it for theSchedule K-1 (Form 1065) and its instructionsber must be given to the payer.) This member is beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied inwill tell you where on your return to report yourconsidered the record owner for the actual chancery or probate courts. An arrangement isshare of partnership items from passive activi-owner, the investment club. This member is a treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purposeties. If you have a passive activity loss from aªnomineeº and must file an information return is to vest in trustees responsibility for protectingpartnership, you must complete Form 8582 towith the IRS. For example, the nominee member and conserving property for beneficiaries whofigure the amount of the allowable loss to entermust file Form 1099-DIV for dividend income, cannot share in that responsibility and so are noton your tax return.showing the club as the owner of the dividend, associates in a joint enterprise for the conduct ofhis or her SSN, and the EIN of the club. business for profit. If you need more informationNo social security coverage for investment
about trusts, see Regulations sectionclub earnings. If an investment club partner-
Tax Treatment of the Club 301.7701-4.ship's activities are limited to investing in sav-
ings certificates, stock, or securities, andGenerally, an investment club is treated as a Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as acollecting interest or dividends for its members'partnership for federal tax purposes unless it trust, it must file Form 1041. You should receiveaccounts, a member's share of income is notchooses otherwise. In some situations, how- a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) from theearnings from self-employment. You cannot vol-ever, it is taxed as a corporation or a trust. trust. Report the amounts shown on Scheduleuntarily pay the self-employment tax to increase
K-1 on the appropriate lines and schedules ofClubs formed before 1997. Before 1997, the your social security coverage and ultimate bene-
your income tax return.rules for determining how an investment club is fits.
Page 28 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 29 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rules To Curb 
Abusive Tax SheltersAbusive Tax Shelters
Congress has enacted a series of income taxAbusive tax shelters are marketing schemes
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive taxinvolving artificial transactions with little or no
shelters. These provisions include the following.economic reality. They often make use of un-
realistic allocations, inflated appraisals, losses Disclosure of reportable transactions.
2. You must disclose information for each reporta-in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis-
ble transaction in which you participate. Seematching of income and deductions, financing
Reportable Transaction Disclosure Statement ,techniques that do not conform to standard com-
later.mercial business practices, or mischaracteriza-
Tax Shelters and Material advisors with respect to any reporta-tion of the substance of the transaction. Despite
ble transaction must disclose information aboutappearances to the contrary, the taxpayer gen-
the transaction on Form 8918, Material Advisorerally risks little.Other
Disclosure Statement.Abusive tax shelters commonly involve Material advisors will receive a reportablepackage deals designed from the start to gener-Reportable transaction number for the disclosed reportableate losses, deductions, or credits that will be far transaction. They must provide this number tomore than present or future investment. Or, they all persons to whom they acted as a materialTransactions may promise investors from the start that future advisor. They must provide the number at the
inflated appraisals will enable them, for exam- time the transaction is entered into. If they do not
ple, to reap charitable contribution deductions have the number at that time, they must provide
based on those appraisals. (But see the ap-Introduction it within 60 days from the date the number is
praisal requirements discussed under Rules To mailed to them. For information on penalties forInvestments that yield tax benefits are some- Curb Abusive Tax Shelters , later.) They are failure to disclose and failure to maintain lists,times called ªtax shelters.º In some cases, Con- commonly marketed in terms of the ratio of tax see Internal Revenue Code sections 6707,gress has concluded that the loss of revenue is 6707A, and 6708.deductions allegedly available to each dollar in-an acceptable side effect of special tax provi-
vested. This ratio (or ªwrite-offº) is frequentlysions designed to encourage taxpayers to make Requirement to maintain list. Material ad-
said to be several times greater thancertain types of investments. In many cases, visors must maintain a list of persons to whom
one-to-one.however, losses from tax shelters produce little they provide material aid, assistance, or advice
or no benefit to society, or the tax benefits are on any reportable transaction. The list must beBecause there are many abusive tax shel-
exaggerated beyond those intended. Those available for inspection by the IRS, and the infor-ters, it is not possible to list all the factors youcases are called ªabusive tax shelters.º An in- mation required to be included on the list gener-should consider in determining whether an offer-vestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub- ally must be kept for 7 years. See Regulationsing is an abusive tax shelter. However, youject to restrictions, including the requirement section 301.6112-1 for more information (includ-should ask the following questions, which mightthat it be disclosed, as discussed later. ing what information is required to be includedprovide a clue to the abusive nature of the plan.
on the list).
Topics • Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco-
Confidentiality privilege. The confidential-This chapter discusses: nomic benefits? ity privilege between you and a federally author-
• Is this a transaction you would seriously ized tax practitioner does not apply to written• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter, consider, apart from the tax benefits, if you communications made after October 21, 2004,
• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax hoped to make a profit? regarding the promotion of your direct or indirect
shelters, participation in any tax shelter.• Do shelter assets really exist and, if so,
• Investor's reporting requirements, and Appraisal requirement for donated prop-are they insured for less than their
erty. If you claim a deduction of more thanpurchase price?• Penalties that may apply.
$5,000 for an item or group of similar items of• Is there a nontax justification for the way donated property, you generally must get a qual-profits and losses are allocated to part-Useful Items ified appraisal from a qualified appraiser and
ners?You may want to see: complete and attach section B of Form 8283 to
your tax return. If you claim a deduction of more• Do the facts and supporting documents
Publication than $500,000 for the donated property, youmake economic sense? In that connec-
generally must attach the qualified appraisal totion, are there sales and resales of the tax❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods your tax return. For more information about ap-shelter property at ever increasing prices? praisals, including exceptions, see Publication❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal
• Does the investment plan involve a gim- 561.Rights, and Claims for Refund
mick, device, or sham to hide the eco- Passive activity loss and credit limits.❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated nomic reality of the transaction? The passive activity loss and credit rules limit theProperty
• Does the promoter offer to backdate docu- amount of losses and credits that can be❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules claimed from passive activities and limit thements after the close of the year? Are you
amount that can offset nonpassive income, suchinstructed to backdate checks coveringForm (and Instructions) as certain portfolio income from investments.your investment?
For more detailed information about determining❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement • Is your debt a real debt or are you assured and reporting income, losses, and credits from❏ 8275-R Regulation Disclosure Statement by the promoter that you will never have to passive activities, see Publication 925.
pay it?❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions Interest on penalties. If you are assessed
• Does this transaction involve laundering an accuracy-related or civil fraud penalty (as❏ 8886 Reportable Transaction Disclosure
United States source income through for- discussed under Penalties, later), interest will beStatement
eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha- imposed on the amount of the penalty from the
ven and owned by United States due date of the return (including any extensions)See chapter 5  for information about getting
shareholders? to the date you pay the penalty.these publications and forms.
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions Page 29

Page 30 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Accounting method restriction. Tax shel- If you fail to file Form 8886 as required or fail exceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2004-66 in
to include any required information on the form,ters generally cannot use the cash method of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-50 (or future
you may have to pay a penalty. See Penalty foraccounting. published guidance) available at www.irs.gov/
failure to disclose a reportable transaction, later irb/2004-50_IRB/ar11.html.Uniform capitalization rules. The uniform under Penalties.capitalization rules generally apply to producing Transaction of interest. A transaction ofThe following discussion briefly describes re-property or acquiring it for resale. Under those interest is a transaction entered into after No-portable transactions. For more details, see therules, the direct cost and part of the indirect cost vember 1, 2006, that is the same as or substan-Instructions for Form 8886.
of the property must be capitalized or included in tially similar to one of the types of transactions
inventory. For more information, see Publication that the IRS has identified by notice, regulation,Reportable transaction. A reportable trans-
action is any of the following.538. or other form of published guidance as a trans-
action of interest. As of the date this publicationDenial of deduction for interest on an un- • A listed transaction. was prepared for print, the IRS has identified thederpayment due to a reportable transaction. • A confidential transaction. following transactions of interest.You cannot deduct any interest you paid or ac-
• A transaction with contractual protection.crued on any part of an underpayment of tax due • ªTogglingº grantor trusts as described in
to an understatement arising from a reportable Notice 2007-73, 2007-36 I.R.B. 545, avail-• A loss transaction.transaction (discussed later) if the relevant facts able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-36_IRB/ar20.
• A transaction of interest entered into afteraffecting the tax treatment of the item are not html.
November 1, 2006.adequately disclosed. This rule applies to re- • Certain transactions involving contribu-portable transactions entered into in tax years tions of a successor member interest in abeginning after October 22, 2004. limited liability company as described inNote. Transactions with a brief asset hold-
Notice 2007-72, 2007-36 I.R.B. 544, avail-ing period were removed from the definition of
able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-36_IRB/ar19.reportable transaction for transactions enteredAuthority for Disallowance of Tax
html.into after August 2, 2007.Benefits
• Certain transactions involving the sale orListed transaction. A listed transaction isThe IRS has published guidance concluding that other disposition of all interests in a chari-the same as or substantially similar to one of thethe claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax types of transactions the IRS has determined to table remainder trust and claiming little orshelters should be disallowed. The guidance is be a tax-avoidance transaction. These transac- no taxable gain as described in Noticethe conclusion of the IRS on how the law is tions have been identified in notices, regula- 2008-99, 2008-47 I.R.B. 1194, available atapplied to a particular set of facts. Guidance is tions, and other published guidance issued by www.irs.gov/irb/2008-47_IRB/ar11.html.published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin for the IRS. For a list of existing guidance, see • Certain transactions involving a U.S. tax-taxpayers' information and also for use by IRS Notice 2009-59 in Internal Revenue Bulletin payer owning controlled foreign corpora-officials. So, if your return is examined and an 2009-31, available at www.irs.gov/irb/ tions (CFC) that hold stock of a lower-tierabusive tax shelter is identified and challenged, 2009-31_IRB/ar07.html.
CFC through a domestic partnership topublished guidance dealing with that type of Confidential transaction. A confidential avoid reporting income as described inshelter, which disallows certain claimed tax transaction is offered to you under conditions of Notice 2009-7, 2009-3 I.R.B. 312, avail-shelter benefits, could serve as the basis for the confidentiality and for which you have paid an able at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-03_IRB/ar10.examining official's challenge of the tax benefits advisor a minimum fee. A transaction is offered html.you claimed. In such a case, the examiner will under conditions of confidentiality if the advisornot compromise even if you or your representa- who is paid the fee places a limit on your disclo- For updates to this list, go to www.irs.gov/tive believes you have authority for the positions sure of the tax treatment or tax structure of the businesses/corporations and click on ªAbusivetaken on your tax return. transaction and the limit protects the confidenti- Tax Shelters and Transactions.ºality of the advisor's tax strategies. The transac-The courts have generally been un-
tion is treated as confidential even if thesympathetic to taxpayers involved in Penaltiesconditions of confidentiality are not legally bind-abusive tax shelter schemes and have
CAUTION
!
ing on you.ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of the Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be ancases in which these shelters have been chal- Transaction with contractual protection. expensive proposition when you consider all thelenged. Generally, a transaction with contractual protec- consequences. First, the promoter generally
tion is one in which you or a related party has the charges a substantial fee. If your return is ex-
right to a full or partial refund of fees if all or part amined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter-Investor Reporting
of the intended tax consequences of the trans- mined, you will be faced with payment of more
You may be required to file a reportable transac- action are not sustained, or a transaction for tax, interest on the underpayment, possibly a
tion disclosure statement. which the fees are contingent on your realizing 20%, 30%, or even 40% accuracy-related pen-
the tax benefits from the transaction. For infor- alty, or a 75% civil fraud penalty. You may also
mation on exceptions, see Revenue Procedure be subject to the penalty for failure to pay tax.
Reportable Transaction Disclosure 2007-20 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2007-7, These penalties are explained in the following
Statement available at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-07_IRB/ar15. paragraphs.
html.
Use Form 8886 to disclose information for each Accuracy-related penalties. An accuracy-Loss transaction. For individuals, a lossreportable transaction in which you participated. related penalty of 20% can be imposed for un-transaction is one that results in a deductibleGenerally, you must attach Form 8886 to your derpayments of tax due to:loss if the gross amount of the loss is at least $2return for each tax year in which you participated
million in a single tax year or $4 million in anyin the transaction. Under certain circumstances, • Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-combination of tax years. A loss from a foreigna transaction must be disclosed within 90 days tions,currency transaction under Internal Revenueof the transaction being identified as a listed • Substantial understatement of tax,Code section 988 is a loss transaction if thetransaction or a transaction of interest. In addi- gross amount of the loss is at least $50,000 in a • Substantial valuation misstatement (in-tion, for the first year Form 8886 is attached to single tax year, whether or not the loss flows creased to 40% for gross valuation mis-your return, you must send a copy of the form to: through from an S corporation or partnership. statement),Internal Revenue Service Certain losses (such as losses from casual-
• Transaction lacking economic substanceOTSA Mail Stop 4915 ties, thefts, and condemnations) are excepted
(increased to 40% for undisclosed trans-1973 North Rulon White Blvd. from this category and do not have to be re-
action lacking economic substance), orOgden, Utah 84404 ported on Form 8886. For information on other
Page 30 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 31 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Undisclosed foreign financial asset under- Also, the understatement penalty will not be Any excessive amount of an erroneous
claim for an income tax refund or creditstatement (40% in all cases). imposed if you can show there was reasonable
(other than a refund or credit related tocause for the underpayment caused by the un-
CAUTION
!Except for a transaction lacking economic sub- the earned income credit) that results from aderstatement and that you acted in good faith.stance, this penalty will not be imposed if you transaction found to be lacking economic sub-An important factor in establishing reasonablecan show you had reasonable cause for any stance will not be treated as having a reasona-cause and good faith will be the extent of yourunderstatement of tax and that you acted in ble basis and could be subject to a 20% penalty.effort to determine your proper tax liability undergood faith. Your failure to disclose a reportable
the law.transaction is a strong indication that you failed Undisclosed foreign financial asset under-
to act in good faith. statement. For tax years beginning afterSubstantial valuation misstatement. In
March 18, 2010, you may be liable for a 40%general, you are liable for a 20% penalty for aIf you are charged an accuracy-related pen- penalty for an understatement of your tax liabilitysubstantial valuation misstatement if all the fol-alty, interest will be imposed on the amount of due to an undisclosed foreign financial asset. Anthe penalty from the due date of the return (in- lowing are true. undisclosed foreign financial asset is any assetcluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen- • The value or adjusted basis of any prop- for which an information return, required to bealty. erty claimed on the return is 150% or more provided under Internal Revenue Code sectionThe 20% penalties do not apply to any un- 6038, 6038B, 6038D, 6046A, or 6048 for anyof the correct amount.derpayment attributable to a reportable transac- taxable year, is not provided. The penalty ap-• You underpaid your tax by more thantion understatement subject to an plies to any part of an underpayment related toaccuracy-related penalty (discussed later). $5,000 because of the misstatement. the following undisclosed foreign financial as-
sets.Negligence or disregard of rules or regula- • You cannot establish that you had reason-
tions. The penalty for negligence or disregard able cause for the underpayment and that • Any foreign business you control, reporta-of rules or regulations is imposed only on the you acted in good faith. ble on Form 5471 or Form 8865.part of the underpayment due to negligence or
• Certain transfers of property to a foreigndisregard of rules or regulations. The penalty will You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for a
corporation or partnership, reportable onnot be charged if you can show you had reason- gross valuation misstatement. If you misstate
Form 926, or certain distributions to a for-able cause for understating your tax and that the value or the adjusted basis of property by eign person, reportable on Form 8865.you acted in good faith. 200% or more of the amount determined to be
 Negligence includes any failure to make a correct, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%, • Your ownership interest in certain foreign
reasonable attempt to comply with the provi- financial assets, temporarily reportable oninstead of 20%, of the amount you underpaid
sions of the Internal Revenue Code. It also in- Form 8275 or 8275-R.because of the gross valuation misstatement.
cludes any failure to keep adequate books and The penalty rate is also 40% if the property's
records. A return position that has a reasonable correct value or adjusted basis is zero. Instead of, or in addition to, Form 8275basis is not negligence. or 8275-R, you may have to file newTransaction lacking economic substance.Disregard includes any careless, reckless, or Form 8938, Statement of Foreign Fi-The economic substance doctrine only applies
CAUTION
!intentional disregard of rules or regulations. nancial Assets, with your tax return beginning into an individual that entered into a transaction inThe penalty for disregard of rules and regula- 2011. Check www.irs.gov/form8938 for details.connection with a trade or business or an activitytions can be avoided if all the following are true. engaged in for the production of income. For • Your acquisition, disposition, or substantial• You keep adequate books and records. transactions entered into after March 30, 2010, change in ownership interest in a foreign
a transaction has economic substance for you• You have a reasonable basis for your po- partnership, reportable on Form 8865.
as an individual taxpayer only if:sition on the tax issue. • Creation or transfer of money or property
• The transaction changes your economic• You make an adequate disclosure of your to certain foreign trusts, reportable on
position in a meaningful way (apart fromposition. Form 3520.
Federal income tax effects), orUse Form 8275 to make your disclosure and
• You have a substantial purpose (apartattach it to your tax return. To disclose a position
from Federal income tax effects) for enter-contrary to a regulation, use Form 8275-R. Use Penalty for incorrect appraisals. The person
ing into the transaction.Form 8886 to disclose a reportable transaction who prepares an appraisal of the value of prop-
(discussed earlier). erty may have to pay a penalty if:For purposes of determining whether eco-Substantial understatement of tax. An • He or she knows, or reasonably shouldnomic substance exists, a transaction's profitunderstatement is considered to be substantial if have known, that the appraisal would bepotential will only be taken into account if theit is more than the greater of: used in connection with a return or claimpresent value of the reasonably expected for refund; and• 10% of the tax required to be shown on pre-tax profit from the transaction is substantial
the return, or compared to the present value of the expected • The claimed value of the property on a
net tax benefits that would be allowed if the return or claim for refund based on that• $5,000.
appraisal results in a substantial valuationtransaction were respected.
An ªunderstatementº is the amount of tax re- misstatement or a gross valuation mis-If any part of your underpayment is due toquired to be shown on your return for a tax year statement as discussed earlier.any disallowance of claimed tax benefits by rea-minus the amount of tax shown on the return,
son of a transaction lacking economic sub- For details on the penalty amount and excep-reduced by any rebates. The term ªrebateº gen-
tions, see Publication 561.stance or failing to meet the requirements of anyerally means a decrease in the tax shown on
similar rule of law, that part of your underpay-your original return as the result of your filing an Penalty for failure to disclose a reportablement will be subject to the 20% accuracy-relatedamended return or claim for refund. transaction. If you fail to include any requiredpenalty even if you had a reasonable cause andFor items other than tax shelters, you can file information regarding a reportable transactionacted in good faith concerning that part.Form 8275 or Form 8275-R to disclose items (discussed earlier) on a return or statement, you
Additionally, the penalty increases to 40% ifthat could cause a substantial understatement may have to pay a penalty of 75% of the de-
you do not adequately disclose on your return orof income tax. In that way, you can avoid the crease in tax shown on your return as a result of
in a statement attached to your return the rele-substantial understatement penalty if you have a such transaction (or that would have resulted if
vant facts affecting the tax treatment of a trans-reasonable basis for your position on the tax the transaction were respected for Federal tax
action that lacks economic substance. Relevantissue. Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a tax purposes). For an individual, the minimum pen-
facts include any facts affecting the tax treat-return does not reduce the amount of the under- alty is $5,000 and the maximum is $10,000 (or
statement. ment of the transaction. $100,000 for a listed transaction). This penalty is
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions Page 31

Page 32 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in addition to any other penalty that may be At-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to
imposed. most income-producing activities. These rules
The IRS may rescind or abate the penalty for limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the
3.failing to disclose a reportable transaction under amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally,
certain limited circumstances but cannot rescind this is the cash and the adjusted basis of prop-
the penalty for failing to disclose a listed transac- erty you contribute to the activity. It also includes
tion. For information on rescission, see Revenue money you borrow for use in the activity if youInvestmentProcedure 2007-21 in Internal Revenue Bulletin are personally liable for repayment or if you use
2007-9 available at www.irs.gov/irb/ property not used in the activity as security for
2007-09_IRB/ar12.html. the loan. For more information, see PublicationExpenses
925.Accuracy-related penalty for a reportable
transaction understatement. If you have a Passive activity losses and credits. TheTerms you may need to know
reportable transaction understatement, you may amount of losses and tax credits you can claim(see Glossary):have to pay a penalty equal to 20% of the from passive activities is limited. Generally, you
amount of that understatement. This applies to At-risk rules are allowed to deduct passive activity losses
any item due to a listed transaction or other only up to the amount of your passive activityPassive activityreportable transaction with a significant purpose income. Also, you can use credits from passive
of avoiding or evading federal income tax. The Portfolio income activities only against tax on the income from
penalty is 30% rather than 20% for the part of passive activities. There are exceptions for cer-
any reportable transaction understatement if the tain activities, such as rental real estate activi-
transaction was not properly disclosed. You may ties.Topicsnot have to pay the 20% penalty if you meet the This chapter discusses: Passive activity. A passive activity gener-strengthened reasonable cause and good faith ally is any activity involving the conduct of anyexception. The reasonable cause and good faith • Limits on Deductions, trade or business in which you do not materiallyexception does not apply to any part of a report- participate and any rental activity. However, if• Interest Expenses,able transaction understatement attributable to you are involved in renting real estate, the activ-one or more transactions that lack economic • Bond Premium Amortization, ity is not a passive activity if both of the followingsubstance. are true.• Expenses of Producing Income,This penalty does not apply to the part of an
understatement on which the fraud penalty, • More than one-half of the personal serv-• Nondeductible Expenses, andgross valuation misstatement penalty, or pen- ices you perform during the year in all
• How To Report Investment Expenses.alty for nondisclosure of noneconomic sub- trades or businesses are performed in real
stance transactions is imposed. property trades or businesses in which
you materially participate.Civil fraud penalty. If any underpayment of Useful Items
tax on your return is due to fraud, a penalty of You may want to see: • You perform more than 750 hours of serv-
75% of the underpayment will be added to your ices during the year in real property trades
tax. Publication or businesses in which you materially par-
ticipate.Joint return. The fraud penalty on a joint ❏ 535 Business Expensesreturn applies to a spouse only if some part of
❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rulesthe underpayment is due to the fraud of that The term ªtrade or businessº generally means
spouse. any activity that involves the conduct of a trade❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and
or business, is conducted in anticipation of start-DependentsFailure to pay tax. If a deficiency is assessed
ing a trade or business, or involves certain re-and is not paid within 10 days of the demand for
search or experimental expenditures. However,Form (and Instructions)payment, an investor can be penalized with up
it does not include rental activities or certainto a 25% addition to tax if the failure to pay ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized activities treated as incidental to holding prop-continues. Deductions erty for investment.
❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense You are considered to materially participate inWhether To Invest
Deduction an activity if you are involved on a regular, con-
In light of the adverse tax consequences and the tinuous, and substantial basis in the operations
substantial amount of penalties and interest that See chapter 5  for information about getting of the activity.
will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal- these publications and forms. Other income (nonpassive income). Gen-lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest- erally, you can use losses from passive activitiesments carefully and seek competent legal and only to offset income from passive activities.financial advice. You cannot use passive activity losses to offsetLimits on Deductions your other income, such as your wages or your
portfolio income. Portfolio income includesYour deductions for investment expenses may gross income from interest, dividends, annui-be limited by: ties, or royalties that is not derived in the ordi-
nary course of a trade or business. It also• The at-risk rules,
includes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi-• The passive activity loss limits, nary course of a trade or business) from the sale
or trade of property (other than an interest in a• The limit on investment interest, or
passive activity) producing portfolio income or• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous held for investment. This includes capital gainitemized deductions. distributions from mutual funds (and other regu-
lated investment companies) and real estateThe at-risk rules and passive activity rules are investment trusts.explained briefly in this section. The limit on You cannot use passive activity losses toinvestment interest is explained later in this offset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is
explained later in this chapter under Expenses Expenses. Do not include in the computa-
of Producing Income. tion of your passive activity income or loss:
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Expenses (other than interest) that are Example 1. You borrow $10,000 and use entity, you can make the allocation using any
clearly and directly allocable to your port- $8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 to reasonable method.
folio income, or buy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt
Additional allocation rules. For more infor-is used for, and allocated to, investment pur-• Interest expense properly allocable to mation about allocating interest expense, seeposes, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest-portfolio income. chapter 4 of Publication 535.ment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible
However, this interest and other expenses may personal interest.
be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-
Debt proceeds received in cash. If you re- When To Deductplained in the rest of this chapter.
ceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds are Investment Interest
Additional information. For more informa- generally not treated as investment property.
tion about determining and reporting income If you use the cash method of accounting, you
Debt proceeds deposited in account. If youand losses from passive activities, see Publica- must pay the interest before you can deduct it. 
deposit debt proceeds in an account, that de-tion 925. If you use an accrual method of accounting,
posit is treated as investment property, regard- you can deduct interest over the period it ac-
less of whether the account bears interest. But, if crues, regardless of when you pay it. For an
you withdraw the funds and use them for an- exception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re-
other purpose, you must reallocate the debt to lated party under When To Report InvestmentInterest Expenses determine the amount considered to be for in- Expenses, later in this chapter.
vestment purposes.This section discusses interest expenses you
Example. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-may be able to deduct as an investor. Example 2. Assume in Example 1 that you tember 2, 2011, payable in 90 days at 12%For information on business interest, see borrowed the money on March 1 and immedi- interest. On December 1, 2011, you paid thischapter 4 of Publication 535. ately bought the stock for $8,000. You did not with a new note for $1,030, due on March 1,You cannot deduct personal interest ex- buy the household items until June 1. You had 2012. If you use the cash method of accounting,penses other than qualified home mortgage in- deposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no you cannot deduct any part of the $30 interestterest, as explained in Publication 936, Home other transactions on the bank account until on your return for 2011 because you did notMortgage Interest Deduction, and interest on June. You did not sell the stock, and you made actually pay it. If you use an accrual method, youcertain student loans, as explained in Publica- no principal payments on the debt. You paid may be able to deduct a portion of the interest ontion 970, Tax Benefits for Education. interest from another account. The $8,000 is the loans through December 31, 2011, on your
treated as being used for an investment pur- return for 2011.Investment Interest pose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for an
Interest paid in advance. Generally, if youinvestment purpose for the 3-month period.If you borrow money to buy property you hold for pay interest in advance for a period that goesYour total interest expense for 3 months on thisinvestment, the interest you pay is investment beyond the end of the tax year, you must spreaddebt is investment interest. In June, when youinterest. You can deduct investment interest the interest over the tax years to which it belongsspend the $2,000 for household items, you mustsubject to the limit discussed later. However, under the OID rules discussed in chapter 1. Youbegin to allocate 80% of the debt and the inter-you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro- can deduct in each year only the interest for thatest expense to investment purposes and 20% toduce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in- year.personal purposes.come under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Nor
Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re-can you deduct interest expenses on straddles, Interest on margin accounts. If you are a
ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-also discussed under Nondeductible Expenses. cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interest
ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treatInvestment interest does not include any on margin accounts to buy taxable securities as
any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)qualified home mortgage interest or any interest investment interest in the year you paid it. You
made from any account you own, or from cash,taken into account in computing income or loss are considered to have paid interest on these
as made from those proceeds. This applies tofrom a passive activity. accounts only when you actually pay the broker
any payment made within 30 days before or or when payment becomes available to the bro-
after the proceeds are received in cash or de-Investment property. Property held for in- ker through your account. Payment may be-
posited in your account.vestment includes property that produces inter- come available to the broker through your
If you received the loan proceeds in cash,est, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derived account when the broker collects dividends or
you can treat the payment as made on the datein the ordinary course of a trade or business. It interest for your account, or sells securities held
you received the cash instead of the date youalso includes property that produces gain or loss for you or received from you.
actually made the payment.(not derived in the ordinary course of a trade or You cannot deduct any interest on money
business) from the sale or trade of property borrowed for personal reasons.Payments on debt may require new alloca-producing these types of income or held for tion. As you repay a debt used for more than Limit on interest deduction for market dis-investment (other than an interest in a passive one purpose, you must reallocate the balance. count bonds. The amount you can deduct foractivity). Investment property also includes an You must first reduce the amount allocated to interest expense you paid or accrued during theinterest in a trade or business activity in which personal purposes by the repayment. You then year to buy or carry a market discount bond mayyou did not materially participate (other than a reallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is be limited. This limit does not apply if you accruepassive activity). for investment purposes. the market discount and include it in your in-Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries. come currently.To determine your investment interest, combine Example 3. If, in Example 2 , you repay Under this limit, the interest is deductibleyour share of investment interest from a partner- $500 on November 1, the entire repayment is only to the extent it is more than:ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your applied against the amount allocated to per-
other investment interest. sonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo- 1. The total interest and OID includible in
cated as $8,000 for investment purposes and gross income for the bond for the year,
$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next plus
Allocation of Interest Expense reallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷
2. The market discount for the number of$9,500) of the debt and the interest expense isIf you borrow money for business or personal days you held the bond during the year.allocated to investment.purposes as well as for investment, you must Figure the amount in (2) above using the rulesallocate the debt among those purposes. Only Pass-through entities. If you use borrowed for figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1the interest expense on the part of the debt used funds to buy an interest in a partnership or S under Market Discount Bonds.for investment purposes is treated as invest- corporation, then the interest on those funds
ment interest. The allocation is not affected by must be allocated based on the assets of the Interest not deducted due to limit. In the
the use of property that secures the debt. entity. If you contribute to the capital of the year you dispose of the bond, you can deduct
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any interest expense you were not allowed to royalties). Investment income does not include amount by a percentage that is equal to the
deduct in earlier years because of the limit. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by
not include qualified dividends or net capital gain the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. SubtractChoosing to deduct disallowed interest unless you choose to include them. the result from the amount on Form 8814, lineexpense before the year of disposition. You 12.can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex- Choosing to include qualified dividends.
pense in any year before the year you dispose of Investment income generally does not include Example. Your 10-year-old child has tax-the bond, up to your net interest income from the qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 1. able interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per-bond during the year. The rest of the disallowed However, you can choose to include all or part of manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You chooseinterest expense remains deductible in the year your qualified dividends in investment income. to report this on your return. You enter $4,000 onyou dispose of the bond. You make this choice by completing Form Form 8814, line 1a, $2,000 on line 2a, and4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.Net interest income. This is the interest $6,000 on line 4. You then enter $4,100 on FormIf you choose to include any of your qualifiedincome (including OID) from the bond that you 8814, lines 6 and 12, and Form 1040, line 21.dividends in investment income, you must re-include in income for the year, minus the interest You figure the amount of your child's incomeduce your qualified dividends that are eligible forexpense paid or accrued during the year to that you can consider your investment incomethe lower capital gains tax rates by the samepurchase or carry the bond. as follows:amount.
Limit on interest deduction for short-term $4,100 − ($4,100 ×  ($2,000 ÷  $6,000))Choosing to include net capital gain. In-obligations. If the current income inclusion vestment income generally does not include netrules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount on You include the result, $2,733, on Form 4952,capital gain from disposing of investment prop-Short-Term Obligations do not apply to you, the line 4a.erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-amount you can deduct for interest expense you tual funds). However, you can choose to include Child's capital gain distributions. If partpaid or accrued during the year to buy or carry a all or part of your net capital gain in investment of the amount you report is your child's capitalshort-term obligation is limited. income. gain distributions, that part (which is reported onThe interest is deductible only to the extent it You make this choice by completing Form Schedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13)is more than: 4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. generally does not count as investment income.
If you choose to include any of your net• The amount of acquisition discount or OID However, you can choose to include all or part of
capital gain in investment income, you muston the obligation for the tax year, plus it in investment income, as explained in Choos-
reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for ing to include net capital gain, earlier.• The amount of any interest payable on the the lower capital gains tax rates by the same Your investment income also includes theobligation for the year that is not included amount. amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable,in income because of your accounting For more information about the capital gains the reduced amount figured under Child'smethod (other than interest taken into ac- rates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier).count in determining the amount of acqui-
Before making either choice, considersition discount or OID).
Investment expenses. Investment expensesthe overall effect on your tax liability.The method of determining acquisition discount are your allowed deductions (other than interestCompare your tax if you make one or
TIPand OID for short-term obligations is discussed expense) directly connected with the productionboth of these choices with your tax if you do not.in chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli- of investment income. Investment expenses
gations. Investment income of child reported on par- that are included as a miscellaneous itemized
ent's return. Investment income includes the deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040) are allow-Interest not deducted due to limit. In the part of your child's interest and dividend income able deductions after applying the 2% limit thatyear you dispose of the obligation, or, if you you choose to report on your return. If the child applies to miscellaneous itemized deductions.choose, in another year in which you have net does not have qualified dividends, Alaska Per- Use the smaller of:interest income from the obligation, you can manent Fund dividends, or capital gain distribu-deduct any interest expense you were not al- • The investment expenses included ontions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form 8814,lowed to deduct for an earlier year because of Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, orParents' Election To Report Child's Interest andthe limit. Follow the same rules provided in the Dividends. Include it on line 4a of Form 4952. • The amount on Schedule A, line 27.earlier discussion under Limit on interest deduc-
tion for market discount bonds, earlier. See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for aExample. Your 8-year-old son has interest
discussion of the 2% limit.income of $2,200, which you choose to report on
Limit on Deduction your own return. You enter $2,200 on Form Losses from passive activities. Income or8814, lines 1a and 4, and $300 on lines 6 and 12Generally, your deduction for investment inter- expenses that you used in computing income orand complete Part II. Also enter $300 on Formest expense is limited to your net investment loss from a passive activity are not included in1040, line 21. Your investment income includesincome. determining your investment income or invest-this $300.You can carry over the amount of investment ment expenses (including investment interest
Child's qualified dividends. If part of theinterest you could not deduct because of this expense). See Publication 925 for information
amount you report is your child's qualified divi-limit to the next tax year. The interest carried about passive activities.
dends, that part (which is reported on Formover is treated as investment interest paid or
1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in-accrued in that next year. Example. Ted is a partner in a partnership
vestment income. However, you can choose toYou can carry over disallowed investment that operates a business. However, he does not
include all or part of it in investment income, asinterest to the next tax year even if it is more than materially participate in the partnership's busi-
explained under Choosing to include qualifiedyour taxable income in the year the interest was ness. Ted's interest in the partnership is consid-
dividends, earlier.paid or accrued. ered a passive activity.
Your investment income also includes the Ted's investment income from interest and
amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, dividends (other than qualified dividends) is
Net Investment Income the reduced amount figured next under Child's $10,000. His investment expenses (other than
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends). interest) are $3,200 after taking into account theDetermine the amount of your net investment 2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions.Child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.income by subtracting your investment ex- His investment interest expense is $8,000. TedIf part of the amount you report is your child'spenses (other than interest expense) from your also has income from the partnership of $2,000.Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that partinvestment income.
does not count as investment income. To figure Ted figures his net investment income and
Investment income. This generally includes the amount of your child's income that you can the limit on his investment interest expense de-
your gross income from property held for invest- consider your investment income, start with the duction in the following way:
ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form  4952 
Department of the Treasury 
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Investment Interest Expense Deduction 
/uni25B6 Attach to your tax return.
OMB No. 1545-0191 
2011
Attachment 
Sequence No. 51 
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number 
Part I Total Investment Interest Expense 
1 Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2011 (see instructions) . . . . . . . . 1 
2 Disallowed investment interest expense from 2010 Form 4952, line 7 . . . . . . . . . 2 
3 Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
Part II Net Investment Income 
4 
 
a 
 
Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net 
gain from the disposition of property held for investment) . . .  4a 
b Quali/f_ied dividends included on line 4a . . . . . . . . . 4b 
c Subtract line 4b from line 4a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4c 
d Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment . . 4d 
e 
 
Enter the smaller of line 4d or your net capital gain from the 
disposition of property held for investment (see instructions)   .
4e 
f Subtract line 4e from line 4d . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4f 
g 
 
Enter the amount from lines 4b and 4e that you elect to include in investment income (see 
instructions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4g
h Investment income. Add lines 4c, 4f, and 4g . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4h 
5 Investment expenses (see instructions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 
6 Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4h. If zero or less, enter -0- . . . . . . 6 
Part III Investment Interest Expense Deduction 
7 
 
Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2012. Subtract line 6 from 
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 
8 Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions . . 8 
Jane Smith  1 1 1-00-1 1 1 1
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
10,000
9,000
3,000
1,000
9,000
13,000
980
480
12,020
12,020
Total investment income ....... . $10,000 the sale of the painting). Her net investment interest includible in your income. If you make
Minus: Investment expenses (other income is $12,020 ($13,000 total investment this choice, you must reduce your basis in the
than interest) ............... . 3,200 income − $980 other investment expenses). bond by the amortization for the year.
Net investment income ........ . $6,800 Jane's illustrated Form 4952 is shown If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, you
above. Her investment interest expense deduc- must amortize the premium. This amortizedDeductible investment interest tion is limited to $12,020, the amount of her net amount is not deductible in determining taxableexpense for the year .......... . $6,800 investment income. The $480 disallowed invest- income. However, each year you must reducement interest expense is carried forward to your basis in the bond (and tax-exempt interestThe $2,000 of income from the passive activ- 2012. otherwise reportable on Form 1040, line 8b) byity is not used in determining Ted's net invest-
ment income. His investment interest deduction the amortization for the year.Exception to use of Form 4952. You do notfor the year is limited to $6,800, the amount of have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to yourhis net investment income. Bond premium. Bond premium is the amountreturn if you meet all of the following tests.
by which your basis in the bond right after you
• Your investment interest expense is not get it is more than the total of all amounts pay-more than your investment income fromForm 4952 able on the bond after you get it (other thaninterest and ordinary dividends minus any payments of qualified stated interest). For exam-Use Form 4952 to figure your deduction for qualified dividends. ple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000investment interest. • You do not have any other deductible in- generally would have a $50 premium if you buy it
vestment expenses. for $1,050.Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 2011
income includes $3,000 in dividends (other than • You have no carryover of investment inter- Special rules to determine amounts pay-
qualified dividends) and a net capital gain of est expense from 2010. able on a bond. For special rules that apply to
$9,000 from the sale of investment property. determine the amounts payable on a variable
She also has a gain of $1,000 from the sale of a If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct rate bond, an inflation-indexed debt instrument,
painting given to her by an artist friend. The all of your investment interest. a bond that provides for certain alternative pay-painting is not a capital asset because Jane's ment schedules (for example, a bond callablebasis in the painting is determined by reference prior to the stated maturity date of the bond), or ato her friend's basis in the painting. She incurred bond that provides for remote or incidental con-$12,500 of investment interest expense. Her Bond Premium tingencies, see Regulations section 1.171-3.other investment expenses directly connected
with the production of investment income total Basis. In general, your basis for figuringAmortization
$980 after applying the 2% limit on miscellane- bond premium amortization is the same as your
ous itemized deductions on Schedule A (Form basis for figuring any loss on the sale of theIf you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-
1040). bond. However, you may need to use a differentmium is part of your basis in the bond. If the
basis for:For 2011, Jane chooses to include all of her bond yields taxable interest, you can choose to
net capital gain in investment income. Her total amortize the premium. This generally means • Convertible bonds,investment income is $13,000 ($3,000 divi- that each year, over the life of the bond, you use
• Bonds you got in a trade, anddends + $9,000 net capital gain + $1,000 from a part of the premium to reduce the amount of
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Bonds whose basis has to be determined 8.07439% compounded annually. You choose How To Report
using the basis of the person who trans- to use annual accrual periods ending on Febru- Amortizationferred the bond to you. ary 1 of each year. To find your bond premium
amortization for the accrual period ending on Subtract the bond premium amortization fromSee Regulations section 1.171-1(e). February 1, 2011, you multiply the adjusted ac- your interest income from these bonds.
quisition price at the beginning of the periodDealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyone Report the bond's interest on Schedule B($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract thewho holds them mainly for sale to customers in (Form 1040A or 1040), line 1. Several linesresult ($8,881.83) from the qualified stated inter-the ordinary course of a trade or business or above line 2, put a subtotal of all interest listedest for the period ($10,000), you find that yourwho would properly include bonds in inventory on line 1. Below this subtotal, print ªABP Adjust-bond premium amortization for the period isat the close of the tax year) cannot claim a ment,º and the amortization amount. Subtract$1,118.17.deduction for amortizable bond premium. this amount from the subtotal, and enter the
See section 75 of the Internal Revenue Code Special rules to figure amortization. For result on line 2.
for the treatment of bond premium by a dealer in special rules to figure the bond premium amorti-
tax-exempt bonds. zation on a variable rate bond, an infla- Bond premium amortization more than inter-
tion-indexed debt instrument, a bond that est. If the amount of your bond premium amor-
How To Figure provides for certain alternative payment sched- tization for an accrual period is more than the
ules (for example, a bond callable prior to the qualified stated interest for the period, you canAmortization
stated maturity date of the bond), or a bond that deduct the difference as a miscellaneous item-
For bonds issued after September 27, 1985, you provides for remote or incidental contingencies, ized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
must amortize bond premium using a constant see Regulations section 1.171-3. 28.
yield method on the basis of the bond's yield to  But your deduction is limited to the amount
maturity, determined by using the bond's basis by which your total interest inclusions on the
and compounding at the close of each accrual Bonds Issued Before bond in prior accrual periods is more than your
period. September 28, 1985 total bond premium deductions on the bond in
prior periods. Any amount you cannot deductFor these bonds, you can amortize bond pre-Constant yield method. Figure the bond pre- because of this limit can be carried forward tomium using any reasonable method. Reasona-mium amortization for each accrual period as the next accrual period.ble methods include:follows.
• The straight-line method, andStep 1: Determine your yield. Your yield is Pre-1998 election to amortize bond premium.
the discount rate that, when used in figuring the Generally, if you first elected to amortize bond• The Revenue Ruling 82-10 method.present value of all remaining payments to be premium before 1998, the above treatment of
made on the bond (including payments of quali- the premium does not apply to bonds you ac-
Straight-line method. Under this method, thefied stated interest), produces an amount equal quired before 1988.
amount of your bond premium amortization isto your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as of Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986.the same each month. Divide the number ofthe date you got the bond. It must be constant The amortization of the premium on these bondsmonths you held the bond during the year by theover the term of the bond and must be figured to is a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub-at least two decimal places when expressed as number of months from the beginning of the tax ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.a percentage. year (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to the
If you do not know the yield, consult your date of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiply Bonds acquired after October 22, 1986, but
broker or tax advisor. Databases available to the result by the bond premium (reduced by any before 1988. The amortization of the premium
them are likely to show the yield at the date of bond premium amortization claimed in earlier on these bonds is investment interest expense
purchase. years). This gives you your bond premium amor- subject to the investment interest limit, unless
tization for the year. you choose to treat it as an offset to interestStep 2: Determine the accrual periods.
income on the bond.You can choose the accrual periods to use.
Revenue Ruling 82-10 method. Under thisThey may be of any length and may vary in
method, the amount of your bond premiumlength over the term of the bond, but each ac-
amortization increases each month over the lifecrual period can be no longer than 1 year and
of the bond. This method is explained in Reve-each scheduled payment of principal or interest Expenses of
nue Ruling 82-10, 1982-1 C.B. 46.must occur either on the first or the final day of
Producing Incomean accrual period. The computation is simplest if
accrual periods are the same as the intervals Choosing To Amortize
You deduct investment expenses (other thanbetween interest payment dates.
You choose to amortize the premium on taxable interest expenses) as miscellaneous itemizedStep 3: Determine the bond premium for bonds by reporting the amortization for the year deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To bethe accrual period. To do this, multiply your on your income tax return for the first tax year deductible, these expenses must be ordinaryadjusted acquisition price at the beginning of the you want the choice to apply. You should attach and necessary expenses paid or incurred:accrual period by your yield. Then subtract the a statement to your return that you are makingresult from the qualified stated interest for the • To produce or collect income, orthis choice under section 171. See How To Re-period. port Amortization, next. • To manage property held for producing in-Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin- come.This choice is binding for the year you makening of the first accrual period is the same as it and for later tax years. It applies to all taxableyour basis. After that, it is your basis decreased The expenses must be directly related to thebonds you own in the year you make the choiceby the amount of bond premium amortized for income or income-producing property, and theand also to those you acquire in later years.earlier periods and the amount of any payment income must be taxable to you.
You can change your decision to amortizepreviously made on the bond other than a pay- The deduction for most income-producing ex-bond premium only with the written approval ofment of qualified stated interest. penses is subject to a 2% limit that also appliesthe IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115,
to certain other miscellaneous itemized deduc-Application for Change in Accounting Method.Example. On February 1, 2010, you bought
tions. The amount deductible is limited to theFor more information on requesting approval,a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has a
total of these miscellaneous deductions that issee section 5 of the Appendix to Revenue Pro-stated principal amount of $100,000, payable at
more than 2% of your adjusted gross income.cedure 2011-14 in Internal Revenue Bulletinmaturity on February 1, 2017, making your pre-
For information on how to report expenses of2011-4. You can find Revenue Proceduremium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). The
producing income, see How To Report Invest-2011-14 at www.irs.gov/irb/2011-04_IRB/ar08.bond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000
ment Expenses, later.html.on February 1 of each year. Your yield is
Page 36 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 37 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Attorney or accounting fees. You can de- Investment counsel and advice. You can 1099-DIV or a substitute statement. If you are a
duct attorney or accounting fees that are neces- deduct fees you pay for counsel and advice residual interest holder in a REMIC, you must
sary to produce or collect taxable income. about investments that produce taxable income. report as ordinary income on Schedule E (Form
However, in some cases, attorney or accounting This includes amounts you pay for investment 1040) the total amounts shown on Schedule Q
fees are part of the basis of property. See Basis advisory services. (Form 1066), lines 1b and 3b. If you are a
of Investment Property in chapter 4. REMIC regular interest holder, you must include
Safe deposit box rent. You can deduct rent the amount of any expense allocation you re-Automatic investment service and dividend you pay for a safe deposit box if you use the box ceived on Form 1040, line 8a.reinvestment plans. A bank may offer its to store taxable income-producing stocks,
Publicly-offered mutual funds. Most mutualchecking account customers an automatic in- bonds, or other investment-related papers and
funds are publicly offered. These mutual funds,vestment service so that, for a charge, each documents. If you also use the box to store
generally, are traded on an established securi-customer can choose to invest a part of the tax-exempt securities or personal items, you can
ties exchange. These funds do not pass invest-checking account each month in common stock. deduct only part of the rent. See Tax-exempt
ment expenses through to you. Instead, theOr a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent for income under Nondeductible Expenses, later, to
dividend income they report to you in box 1a ofa number of publicly-owned corporations may figure what part you can deduct.
Form 1099-DIV is already reduced by yourset up an automatic dividend reinvestment serv-
State and local transfer taxes. You cannot share of investment expenses. As a result, youice. Through that service, cash dividends are
deduct the state and local transfer taxes you pay cannot deduct the expenses on your return.reinvested in more shares of stock after the bank
when you buy or sell securities. If you pay these Include the amount from box 1a of Formdeducts a service charge.
transfer taxes when you buy securities, you 1099-DIV in your income.A corporation in which you own stock also
must treat them as part of the cost of the prop-may have a dividend reinvestment plan. This A nonpublicly offered mutual fund iserty. If you pay these transfer taxes when youplan lets you choose to use your dividends to one that:sell securities, you must treat them as a reduc-buy more shares of stock in the corporation
TIP
tion in the amount realized.instead of receiving the dividends in cash.
You can deduct the monthly service charge 1. Is not continuously offered pursuant to aTrustee's commissions for revocable trust.you pay to a bank to participate in an automatic public offering,If you set up a revocable trust and have itsinvestment service. If you participate in a divi- income distributed to you, you can deduct the 2. Is not regularly traded on an establisheddend reinvestment plan, you can deduct any commission you pay the trustee for managing securities market, andservice charge subtracted from your cash divi- the trust to the extent it is to produce or collectdends before the dividends are used to buy 3. Is held by fewer than 500 persons at anytaxable income or to manage property. How-more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in the time during the year.ever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis-year you pay them. sion used for producing or collecting tax-exempt Contact your mutual fund if you are not sure
income or for managing property that produces whether it is nonpublicly offered.Clerical help and office rent. You can deduct
tax-exempt income.office expenses, such as rent and clerical help,
If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay thethat you pay in connection with your investments
commissions for several years in advance, youand collecting the taxable income on them.
must deduct a part of the commission each year.
Cost of replacing missing securities. To re- You cannot deduct the entire amount in the year Nondeductibleplace your taxable securities that are mislaid, you pay it.
lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to post ExpensesInvestment expenses from pass-through en-an indemnity bond. You can deduct the premium
tities. If you hold an interest in a partnership, Syou pay to buy the indemnity bond and the Some expenses that you incur as an investorcorporation, real estate mortgage investmentrelated incidental expenses. are not deductible.conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offered mu-You may, however, get a refund of part of the
tual fund, you can deduct your share of thatbond premium if the missing securities are re- Stockholders' meetings. You cannot deductentity's investment expenses. A partnership or Scovered within a specified time. Under certain transportation and other expenses you pay tocorporation will show your share of these ex-types of insurance policies, you can recover attend stockholders' meetings of companies inpenses on your Schedule K-1. A nonpubliclysome of the expenses. which you have no interest other than owningoffered mutual fund will indicate your share ofIf you receive the refund in the tax year you stock. This is true even if your purpose in attend-these expenses in box 5 of Form 1099-DIV, or apay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ- ing is to get information that would be useful insubstitute statement. Publicly-offered mutualence between the expenses paid and the making further investments.funds are discussed later.amount refunded. If the refund is made in a later Investment-related seminar. You cannot de-If you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex-tax year, you must include the refund in income duct expenses for attending a convention, semi-penses relating to your residual interest invest-in the year you received it, but only to the extent nar, or similar meeting for investment purposes.ment will be shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066),that the expenses decreased your tax in the year
line 3b. Any expenses relating to your regularyou deducted them. Single-premium life insurance, endowment,interest investment will appear in box 5 of Form and annuity contracts. You cannot deductFees to collect income. You can deduct fees 1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. interest on money you borrow to buy or carry ayou pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similar Report your share of these investment ex- single-premium life insurance, endowment, oragent to collect investment income, such as penses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to annuity contract.your taxable bond or mortgage interest, or your the 2% limit, in the same manner as your other
Used as collateral. If you use a single pre-dividends on shares of stock. investment expenses.
mium annuity contract as collateral to obtain orFees to buy or sell. You cannot deduct a Including mutual fund or REMIC expenses continue a mortgage loan, you cannot deductfee you pay to a broker to acquire investment in income. Your share of the investment ex- any interest on the loan that is collateralized byproperty, such as stocks or bonds. You must penses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered the annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basis mutual fund, as described above, are consid- est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur-of Investment Property in chapter 4. ered to be indirect deductions through that rent interest rate on the mortgage loan by theYou cannot deduct any broker's fees, com- pass-through entity. You must include in your lesser of the amount of the annuity contract usedmissions, or option premiums you pay (or that gross income an amount equal to the expenses as collateral or the amount of the loan.were netted out) in connection with the sale of allocated to you, whether or not you are able to
investment property. They can be used only to claim a deduction for those expenses. If you are Borrowing on insurance. Generally, you
figure gain or loss from the sale. See Reporting a shareholder in a nonpublicly offered mutual cannot deduct interest on money you borrow to
Capital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for more fund, you must include on your return the full buy or carry a life insurance, endowment, or
information about the treatment of these sale amount of ordinary dividends or other distribu- annuity contract if you plan to systematically
expenses. tions of stock, as shown in box 1a of Form borrow part or all of the increases in the cash
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
value of the contract. This rule applies to the • All the offsetting positions making up the Enter your deductible investment interest ex-
interest on the total amount borrowed to buy or pense on Schedule A, line 14. Include any de-straddle either consist of one or more
carry the contract, not just the interest on the ductible short sale expenses. (See Short Salesqualified covered call options and the op-
borrowed increases in the cash value. in chapter 4 for information on these expenses.)tioned stock or consist of section 1256
Also attach a completed Form 4952 if you usedcontracts (and the straddle is not part of aTax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex- that form to figure your investment interest ex-larger straddle), orpenses you incur to produce tax-exempt in- pense.come. Nor can you deduct interest on money • The straddle is a hedging transaction. Enter the total amount of your other invest-you borrow to buy tax-exempt securities or ment expenses (other than interest expenses)shares in a mutual fund or other regulated in- on Schedule A, line 23. List the type and amountFor information about straddles, including defini-vestment company that distributes only ex- of each expense on the dotted lines next to linetions of the terms used in this discussion, seeempt-interest dividends. 23. (If necessary, you can show the requiredStraddles in chapter 4.
Short-sale expenses. The rule disallowing information on an attached statement.)Interest includes any amount you pay or incura deduction for interest expenses on tax-exempt For information on how to report amortizablein connection with personal property used in asecurities applies to amounts you pay in con- bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza-short sale. However, you must first apply thenection with personal property used in a short tion, earlier in this chapter.rules discussed in Payments in lieu of dividendssale or amounts paid by others for the use of any under Short Sales in chapter 4.collateral in connection with the short sale. How-
To determine the interest on market discountever, it does not apply to the expenses you incur
bonds and short-term obligations that are part ofif you deposit cash as collateral for the property When To Reporta straddle, you must first apply the rules dis-used in the short sale and the cash does not
cussed under Limit on interest deduction forearn a material return during the period of the Investment Expenses
market discount bonds  and Limit on interestsale. Short sales are discussed in Short Sales in
deduction for short-term obligations (both underchapter 4. If you use the cash method to report income and
Interest Expenses, earlier). expenses, you generally deduct your expenses,Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxable except for certain prepaid interest, in the yearNondeductible amount. Figure the nonde-income. You may have expenses that are for you pay them.ductible interest and carrying charges on strad-both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can- If you use an accrual method, you generallydle property as follows.not specifically identify what part of the ex- deduct your expenses when you incur a liabilitypenses is for each type of income, you can for them, rather than when you pay them.1. Add:divide the expenses, using reasonable propor- Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter-tions based on facts and circumstances. You a. Interest on indebtedness incurred or est, earlier in this chapter.must attach a statement to your return showing continued to buy or carry the personalhow you divided the expenses and stating that Unpaid expenses owed to related party. Ifproperty, andeach deduction claimed is not based on you use an accrual method, you cannot deduct
b. All other amounts (including charges totax-exempt income. interest and other expenses owed to a related
insure, store, or transport the personalOne accepted method for dividing expenses cash-basis person until payment is made and
property) paid or incurred to carry theis to do it in the same proportion that each type the amount is includible in the gross income of
personal property.of income is to the total income. If the expenses that person. The relationship, for purposes of
relate in part to capital gains and losses, include this rule, is determined as of the end of the tax
2. Subtract from the amount in (1):the gains, but not the losses, in figuring this year for which the interest or expense would
proportion. To find the part of the expenses that otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is denieda. Interest (including OID) includible inis for the tax-exempt income, divide your under this rule, this rule will continue to applygross income for the year on the per-tax-exempt income by the total income and mul- even if your relationship with the person ceasessonal property,tiply your expenses by the result. to exist before the amount is includible in the
gross income of that person.b. Any income from the personal property
Example. You received $6,000 interest; This rule generally applies to those relation-treated as ordinary income on the dis-
$4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable. ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Partyposition of short-term government obli-
In earning this income, you had $500 of ex- Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-gations or as ordinary income under the
penses. You cannot specifically identify the nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,market discount and short-term bond
amount of each expense item that is for each shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-provisions Ð see Discount on Debt In-
income item, so you must divide your expenses. tions to shareholders.struments in chapter 1,
80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided by The postponement of deductions for unpaidc. The dividends includible in gross in-$6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for the expenses and interest under the related partycome for the year from the personaltax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400 rule does not apply to original issue discountproperty, and(80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deduct (OID), regardless of when payment is made.
$100 (the rest of the expenses) because they This rule also does not apply to loans with be-d. Any payment on a loan of the personal
are for the taxable interest. low-market interest rates or to certain paymentsproperty for use in a short sale that is
for the use of property and services when theincludible in gross income.State income taxes. If you itemize your de- lender or recipient has to include payments peri-ductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in- odically in income, even if a payment has notcome taxes on interest income that is exempt Basis adjustment. Add the nondeductible been made.from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct, amount to the basis of your straddle property.
as either taxes or investment expenses, state
income taxes on other exempt income.
Interest expense and carrying charges on
straddles. You cannot deduct interest and How To Report
carrying charges allocable to personal property
that is part of a straddle. The nondeductible Investment Expenses
interest and carrying charges are added to the
To deduct your investment expenses, you mustbasis of the straddle property. However, this
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).treatment does not apply if:
Page 38 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 39 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Transfers of property at death, covered in A trade is a transfer of property for other
property or services, and may be taxed in thePublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and
same way as a sale.Administrators, and4.
• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac- Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transaction
tivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas- is not a trade when you voluntarily sell property
sive Activity and At-Risk Rules. for cash and immediately buy similar property to
Sales and replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-
rate transactions. But see Like-Kind ExchangesTopics under Nontaxable Trades, later.Trades of This chapter discusses: Redemption of stock. A redemption of stock
is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the• What a sale or trade is,Investment capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-
• Basis, demption is a dividend or other distribution on
stock.Property • Adjusted basis,
Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a• Figuring gain or loss, redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,
• Nontaxable trades, or other distribution depends on the circum-Introduction
stances in each case. Both direct and indirect• Capital gains and losses, andThis chapter explains the tax treatment of sales ownership of stock will be considered. The re-
and trades of investment property. • How to report your gain or loss. demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if:
Investment property. This is property that • The redemption is not essentially
produces investment income. Examples include Useful Items equivalent to a dividend Ð see Dividends
stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. and Other Distributions in chapter 1,You may want to see:Property used in a trade or business is not in- • There is a substantially disproportionatevestment property. Publication redemption of stock,
Form 1099-B. If you sold property such as • There is a complete redemption of all the❏ 551 Basis of Assetsstocks, bonds, mutual funds, or certain com- stock of the corporation owned by themodities through a broker during the year, you shareholder, orForm (and Instructions)should receive, for each sale, a Form 1099-B,
• The redemption is a distribution in partialProceeds From Broker and Barter Exchange ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
liquidation of a corporation.Transactions, or substitute statement, from the and Losses
broker. You should receive the statement by ❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From SectionFebruary 15 of the next year. It will show the Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re-1256 Contracts and Straddlesgross proceeds from the sale. The IRS will also demption or retirement of bonds or notes at theirget a copy of Form 1099-B from the broker. ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.Use Form 1099-B (or substitute statement See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds  and Dis-❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchangesreceived from your broker) to complete Form counted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-8949. If you sold a covered security in 2011, ❏ 8949 Sales and Other Dispositions of nary Gain or Loss, later.your broker will send you a Form 1099-B (or Capital Assets In addition, a significant modification of asubstitute statement) that shows your basis. bond is treated as a trade of the original bond forThis will help you complete Form 8949. Gener- See chapter 5  for information about getting a new bond. For details, see Regulations sec-ally, a covered security is a security you ac- these publications and forms. tion 1.1001-3.quired after 2010, with certain exceptions
Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by aexplained in the 2011 Instructions for Schedule
dominant shareholder who retains ownership ofD.
more than half of the corporation's voting sharesFor more information on Form 8949 What Is a is treated as a contribution to capital rather thanand Schedule D, see Reporting Capital as an immediate loss deductible from taxableGains and Losses in this chapter. See Sale or Trade?
TIP income. The surrendering shareholder must re-also Schedule D, Form 8949, and the 2011 allocate his or her basis in the surrenderedInstructions for Schedule D. shares to the shares he or she retains.Terms you may need to know
(see Glossary):Nominees. If someone receives gross pro- Trade of investment property for an annuity.
ceeds as a nominee for you, that person will give The transfer of investment property to a corpora-Equity optionyou a Form 1099-B, which will show gross pro- tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-
ceeds received on your behalf. Futures contract tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract that
If you receive a Form 1099-B that includes will make guaranteed annual payments to youMarked to marketgross proceeds belonging to another person, for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value of
see Nominees later under Reporting Capital Nonequity option the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-
Gains and Losses for more information. erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the yearOptions dealer of the trade. Figure the present value of theOther property transactions. Certain trans- Regulated futures contract annuity according to factors used by commercialfers of property are discussed in other IRS publi- insurance companies issuing annuities.Section 1256 contractcations. These include:
Transfer by inheritance. The transfer ofShort sale• Sale of your main home, discussed in property of a decedent to the executor or admin-Publication 523, Selling Your Home, istrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-
• Installment sales, covered in Publication ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxableThis section explains what is a sale or trade. It
537, Installment Sales, gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.also explains certain transactions and events
that are treated as sales or trades.• Various types of transactions involving Termination of certain rights and obliga-
business property, discussed in Publica- A sale is generally a transfer of property for tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, or
tion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to other termination of a right or obligation (other
Assets, pay money. than a securities futures contract) with respect to
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 39

Page 40 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property that is a capital asset (or that would be position that begins on the date of the construc- Exceptions. An appreciated financial posi-
a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as a tion does not include the following.tive sale. Then, when you close the transaction,
sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gain you reduce your gain (or increase your loss) by
1. Any position from which all of the apprecia-or loss. the gain recognized on the constructive sale. tion is accounted for under marked to mar-This rule does not apply to the retirement of a
ket rules, including section 1256 contractsdebt instrument. See Redemption or retirement Constructive sale. You are treated as having (described later under Section 1256 Con-of bonds, earlier. made a constructive sale of an appreciated fi- tracts Marked to Market).nancial position if you:
2. Any position in a debt instrument if:Worthless Securities • Enter into a short sale of the same or
substantially identical property, a. The position unconditionally entitles theStocks, stock rights, and bonds (other than
holder to receive a specified principalthose held for sale by a securities dealer) that • Enter into an offsetting notional principal
amount,became completely worthless during the tax contract relating to the same or substan-
year are treated as though they were sold on the tially identical property, b. The interest payments (or other similarlast day of the tax year. This affects whether amounts) with respect to the position• Enter into a futures or forward contract toyour capital loss is long term or short term. See are payable at a fixed rate or a variabledeliver the same or substantially identicalHolding Period, later. rate described in Regulations sectionproperty (including a forward contract thatWorthless securities also include securities 1.860G-1(a)(3), andprovides for cash settlement), orthat you abandon after March 12, 2008. To
c. The position is not convertible, eitherabandon a security, you must permanently sur- • Acquire the same or substantially identical
directly or indirectly, into stock of therender and relinquish all rights in the security property (if the appreciated financial posi-
issuer (or any related person).and receive no consideration in exchange for it. tion is a short sale, an offsetting notional
All the facts and circumstances determine principal contract, or a futures or forward 3. Any hedge with respect to a position de-whether the transaction is properly character- contract). scribed in (2).ized as an abandonment or other type of trans-
action, such as an actual sale or exchange, You are also treated as having made a con- Certain trust instruments treated as stock.contribution to capital, dividend, or gift. structive sale of an appreciated financial posi- For the constructive sale rules, an interest in anIf you are a cash basis taxpayer and make tion if a person related to you enters into a actively traded trust is treated as stock unlesspayments on a negotiable promissory note that transaction described above with a view toward substantially all of the value of the property heldyou issued for stock that became worthless, you avoiding the constructive sale treatment. For by the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep-can deduct these payments as losses in the this purpose, a related person is any related tion to the definition of an appreciated financialyears you actually make the payments. Do not party described under Related Party Transac- position (explained in (2) above).deduct them in the year the stock became worth- tions, later in this chapter.
less.
Exception for nonmarketable securities. Sale of appreciated financial position. A
You are not treated as having made a construc-How to report loss. Report worthless securi- transaction treated as a constructive sale of an
tive sale solely because you entered into a con-ties on Form 8949, Part I, line 1, or Part II, line 3, appreciated financial position is not treated as a
tract for sale of any stock, debt instrument, orwhichever applies. constructive sale of any other appreciated finan-
partnership interest that is not a marketable se- cial position, as long as you continue to hold theReport your worthless securities trans- curity if it settles within 1 year of the date you original position. However, if you hold anotheractions on Form 8949 with the correct enter into it. appreciated financial position and dispose of thebox (A, B, or C) checked for these
CAUTION
! original position before closing the transactionException for certain closed transactions.transactions. See Form 8949 and the 2011 In- that resulted in the constructive sale, you areDo not treat a transaction as a constructive salestructions for Schedule D. treated as if, at the same time, you construc-if all of the following are true.
tively sold the other appreciated financial posi-Filing a claim for refund. If you do not claim a 1. You closed the transaction on or before tion.loss for a worthless security on your original the 30th day after the end of your tax year.return for the year it becomes worthless, you can
Section 1256 Contractsfile a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss. 2. You held the appreciated financial position
You must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi- throughout the 60-day period beginning on Marked to Market
vidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return the date you closed the transaction.
If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end offor the year the security became worthless. You 3. Your risk of loss was not reduced at any the tax year, you generally must treat it as soldmust file it within 7 years from the date your time during that 60-day period by holding at its fair market value on the last business dayoriginal return for that year had to be filed, or 2 certain other positions. of the tax year.years from the date you paid the tax, whichever
is later. (Claims not due to worthless securities If a closed transaction is reestablished in a
or bad debts generally must be filed within 3 substantially similar position during the 60-day
Section 1256 Contractyears from the date a return is filed, or 2 years period beginning on the date the first transaction
from the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) was closed, this exception still applies if the A section 1256 contract is any:For more information about filing a claim, see reestablished position is closed before the 30th
Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Ap- • Regulated futures contract,day after the end of your tax year in which the
peal Rights, and Claims for Refund. first transaction was closed and, after that clos- • Foreign currency contract,ing, (2) and (3) above are true.
• Nonequity option,Constructive Sales This exception also applies to successive
short sales of an entire appreciated financialof Appreciated • Dealer equity option, or
position. For more information, see RevenueFinancial Positions • Dealer securities futures contract.Ruling 2003-1 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
2003-3. This bulletin is available at www.irs.gov/You are treated as having made a constructive Exceptions. For tax years beginning afterpub/irs-irbs/irb03-03.pdf.sale when you enter into certain transactions July 21, 2010, a section 1256 contract does notinvolving an appreciated financial position (de- include:Appreciated financial position. This is anyfined later) in stock, a partnership interest, or
interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debtcertain debt instruments. You must recognize • Interest rate swaps,
instrument (including a futures or forward con-gain as if the position were disposed of at its fair • Currency swaps,tract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing ofmarket value on the date of the constructive
the interest would result in a gain.sale. This gives you a new holding period for the • Basis swaps,
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Interest rate caps, and Exchange Commission (SEC) determines or loss. This is true regardless of how long you
that the stock index is broad based. actually held the property.• Interest rate floors, This rule does not apply to options estab-
Example. On June 22, 2010, you bought a• Commodity swaps, lished before the SEC determines that the stock
regulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-index is broad based.• Equity swaps, cember 31, 2010 (the last business day of yourListed option. This is any option traded on, tax year), the fair market value of the contract• Equity index swaps, or subject to the rules of, a qualified board or was $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain on• Credit default swaps, or exchange (as discussed earlier under Regu- your 2010 tax return, treated as 60% long-termlated futures contract). A listed option, however, and 40% short-term capital gain.• Similar agreements. does not include an option that is a right to On February 1, 2011, you sold the contractFor more details, including definitions of these acquire stock from the issuer. for $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000terms, see section 1256.
gain on your 2010 return, you recognize aDealer equity option. This is any listed option
$1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2011that, for an options dealer:Regulated futures contract. This is a con-
tax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%tract that: • Is an equity option, short-term capital loss.
• Provides that amounts that must be de- • Is bought or granted by that dealer in the Limited partners or entrepreneurs. Theposited to, or can be withdrawn from, your normal course of the dealer's business ac- 60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op-margin account depend on daily market tivity of dealing in options, and tions or dealer securities futures contracts thatconditions (a system of marking to mar-
result in capital gain or loss allocable to limited• Is listed on the qualified board of ex-ket), and
partners or limited entrepreneurs (defined laterchange where that dealer is registered.
• Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, a under Hedging Transactions ). Instead, these
qualified board of exchange. A qualified gains or losses are treated as short term.An ªoptions dealerº is any person registered
board of exchange is a domestic board of with an appropriate national securities ex-
trade designated as a contract market by Terminations and transfers. The marked tochange as a market maker or specialist in listed
the Commodity Futures Trading Commis- market rules also apply if your obligation oroptions.
sion, any board of trade or exchange ap- rights under section 1256 contracts are termi-
Equity option. This is any option:proved by the Secretary of the Treasury, nated or transferred during the tax year. In this
or a national securities exchange regis- case, use the fair market value of each section• To buy or sell stock, ortered with the Securities and Exchange 1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-
• That is valued directly or indirectly by ref-Commission. fer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations or
erence to any stock or narrow-based se- transfers may result from any offsetting, deliv-
curity index. ery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli-Foreign currency contract. This is a contract
gation or rights under section 1256 contracts.that:
Equity options include options on a group of• Requires delivery of a foreign currency Loss carryback election. An individual hav-stocks only if the group is a narrow-based stockthat has positions traded through regu- ing a net section 1256 contracts loss (definedindex.lated futures contracts (or settlement of later) for 2011 can elect to carry this loss back 3
which depends on the value of that type of Dealer securities futures contract. For years, instead of carrying it over to the next year.
foreign currency), any dealer in securities futures contracts or op- See How To Report, later, for information about
tions on those contracts, this is a securities fu- reporting this election on your return.• Is traded in the interbank market, and tures contract (or option on such a contract) that: The loss carried back to any year under this• Is entered into at arm's length at a price election cannot be more than the net section• Is entered into by the dealer (or, in thedetermined by reference to the price in the 1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, thecase of an option, is purchased or grantedinterbank market. amount of loss carried back to an earlier tax yearby the dealer) in the normal course of the
cannot increase or produce a net operating lossdealer's activity of dealing in this type ofBank forward contracts with maturity dates for that year.contract (or option), andlonger than the maturities ordinarily available for The loss is carried to the earliest carrybackregulated futures contracts are considered to • Is traded on a qualified board or exchange year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount canmeet the definition of a foreign currency contract (as defined under Regulated futures con- then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. Inif the above three conditions are satisfied. tract, earlier). each carryback year, treat 60% of the carrybackSpecial rules apply to certain foreign cur- A securities futures contract that is not a dealer amount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as arency transactions. These transactions may re- securities futures contract is treated as de- short-term capital loss from section 1256 con-sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. For scribed later under Securities Futures Con- tracts.details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988 tracts. If only a portion of the net section 1256 con-and Regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) and tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back,1.988-3. Marked to Market Rules the unabsorbed portion can be carried forward,
under the capital loss carryover rules, to the yearNonequity option. This is any listed option A section 1256 contract that you hold at the end following the loss. (See Capital Losses  under(defined later) that is not an equity option. None- of the tax year will generally be treated as sold at Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig-quity options include debt options, commodity its fair market value on the last business day of ure your capital loss carryover as if, for the lossfutures options, currency options, and the tax year, and you must recognize any gain or year, you had an additional short-term capitalbroad-based stock index options. A loss that results. That gain or loss is taken into gain of 40% of the amount of net section 1256broad-based stock index is based on the value account in figuring your gain or loss when you contracts loss absorbed in the carryback yearsof a group of diversified stocks or securities later dispose of the contract, as shown in the and an additional long-term capital gain of 60%(such as the Standard and Poor's 500 index). example under 60/40 rule, below. of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treatWarrants based on a stock index that are any capital loss carryover from losses on sectionHedging exception. The marked to marketeconomically, substantially identical in all mate- 1256 contracts as if it were a loss from sectionrules do not apply to hedging transactions. Seerial respects to options based on a stock index 1256 contracts for that year.Hedging Transactions, later.are treated as options based on a stock index.
Net section 1256 contracts loss. This lossCash-settled options. Cash-settled op- 60/40 rule. Under the marked to market sys- is the lesser of:tions based on a stock index and either traded tem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will be
on or subject to the rules of a qualified board of treated as a long-term capital gain or loss, and • The net capital loss for your tax year de-
exchange are nonequity options if the Securities 40% will be treated as a short-term capital gain termined by taking into account only the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 41

Page 42 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gains and losses from section 1256 con- 1. You entered into the transaction in the nor- Self-Employment Income
tracts, or mal course of your trade or business pri-
Gains and losses derived in the ordinary coursemarily to manage the risk of:• The capital loss carryover to the next tax of a commodity or option dealer's trading inyear determined without this election. a. Price changes or currency fluctuations section 1256 contracts and property related to
on ordinary property you hold (or will these contracts are included in net earningsNet section 1256 contracts gain. This gain hold), or from self-employment. See the Instructions foris the lesser of: Schedule SE (Form 1040). In addition, the rulesb. Interest rate or price changes, or cur-• The capital gain net income for the car- relating to contributions to self-employment re-rency fluctuations, on your current orryback year determined by taking into ac- tirement plans apply. For information on retire-future borrowings or ordinary obliga-count only gains and losses from section ment plan contributions, see Publication 560,tions.1256 contracts, or Retirement Plans for Small Business, and Publi-
cation 590, Individual Retirement Arrangements• The capital gain net income for that year. 2. You clearly identified the transaction as
(IRAs).being a hedging transaction before the
close of the day on which you enteredFigure your net section 1256 contracts gain for
into it.any carryback year without regard to the net
section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year or This hedging transaction exception does not
any later tax year. Basis ofapply to transactions entered into by or for any
syndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor-Traders in section 1256 contracts. Gain or Investment Propertyporation, or other entity (other than a regularloss from the trading of section 1256 contracts is corporation) that allocates more than 35% of itscapital gain or loss subject to the marked to Terms you may need to knowlosses to limited partners or limited entrepre-market rules. However, this does not apply to (see Glossary):neurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person whocontracts held for purposes of hedging property
has an interest in an enterprise (but not as aif any loss from the property would be an ordi- Basislimited partner) and who does not actively par-nary loss.
ticipate in its management. However, an inter- Fair market valueTreatment of underlying property. The est is not considered held by a limited partner Original issue discount (OID)determination of whether an individual's gain or or entrepreneur if the interest holder activelyloss from any property is ordinary or capital gain participates (or did so for at least 5 full years)or loss is made without regard to the fact that the in the management of the entity, or is the Basis is a way of measuring your investment inindividual is actively engaged in dealing in or spouse, child (including a legally adopted property for tax purposes. You must know thetrading section 1256 contracts related to that child), grandchild, or parent of an individual basis of your property to determine whether youproperty. who actively participates in the management of have a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-
the entity. tion.
How To Report Investment property you buy normally has anHedging loss limit. If you are a limited partner original basis equal to its cost. If you get propertyIf you disposed of regulated futures or foreign or entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a in some way other than buying it, such as by giftcurrency contracts in 2011 (or had unrealized hedging loss you can claim is limited. A ªhedging or inheritance, its fair market value may be im-profit or loss on these contracts that were open lossº is the amount by which the allowable de- portant in figuring the basis.at the end of 2010 or 2011), you should receive ductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg-
Form 1099-B, or substitute statement, from your ing transaction (determined without regard to
Cost Basisbroker. the limit) are more than the income received or
accrued during the tax year from this transac-Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781 to report The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.tion.your gains and losses from all section 1256 The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debt
Any hedging loss allocated to you for the taxcontracts that are open at the end of the year or obligations, or other property or services.
year is limited to your taxable income for thatthat were closed out during the year. This in-
cludes the amount shown in box 11 of Form year from the trade or business in which the
Unstated interest. If you buy property on a1099-B. Then enter the net amount of these hedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg-
time-payment plan that charges little or no inter-gains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040), ing transaction items in determining this taxable
est, the basis of your property is your statedline 4 or line 11, as appropriate. Include a copy income. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-
purchase price, minus the amount considered toof Form 6781 with your income tax return. lowed because of this limit, you can carry it over
If the Form 1099-B you receive includes a be unstated interest. You generally have un-to the next tax year as a deduction resulting from
straddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it stated interest if your interest rate is less thana hedging transaction.
may be necessary to show certain adjustments the applicable federal rate. For more informa-If the hedging transaction relates to propertyon Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc- tion, see Unstated Interest and  Original Issueother than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-tions for completing Part I. Discount (OID) in Publication 537.ing losses applies if the limited partner or entre-
preneur is an individual.Loss carryback election. To carry back your
Basis Other Than Costloss under the election procedures described The limit on hedging losses does not apply to
earlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica- any hedging loss to the extent that it is more There are times when you must use a basistion for Tentative Refund, for the year to which than all your unrecognized gains from hedging other than cost. In these cases, you may need toyou are carrying the loss with an amended Form transactions at the end of the tax year that are know the property's fair market value or the6781 and an amended Schedule D attached. from the trade or business in which the hedging adjusted basis of the previous owner.Follow the instructions for completing Form transaction occurred. The term ªunrecognized6781 for the loss year to make this election. gainº has the same meaning as defined under
Fair market value. This is the price at whichLoss Deferral Rules in Straddles, later.
the property would change hands between aHedging Transactions buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy orSale of property used in a hedge. Once you
sell and both having reasonable knowledge ofidentify personal property as being part of aThe marked to market rules, described earlier,
all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,hedging transaction, you must treat gain from itsdo not apply to hedging transactions. A transac-
around the same date, may be helpful in figuringsale or exchange as ordinary income, not capitaltion is a hedging transaction if both of the follow-
fair market value.gain.ing conditions are met.
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recordkeeping. The transferor must Gift received after 1976. If you receivedProperty Received for Services
give you the records necessary to de- property as a gift after 1976, your basis is the
If you receive investment property for services, termine the adjusted basis and holding donor's adjusted basis increased by the part of
RECORDS
you must include the property's fair market value period of the property as of the date of the the gift tax paid that was for the net increase in
in income. The amount you include in income transfer. value of the gift. You figure this part by multiply-
then becomes your basis in the property. If the ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The
services were performed for a price that was numerator (top part) is the net increase in value
agreed to beforehand, this price will be accepted of the gift and the denominator (bottom part) isProperty Received as a Giftas the fair market value of the property if there is the amount of the gift.
no evidence to the contrary. To figure your basis in property that you re- The net increase in value of the gift is the fair
ceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted market value of the gift minus the donor's ad-Restricted property. If you receive, as pay- basis to the donor just before it was given to you, justed basis. The amount of the gift is its valuement for services, property that is subject to its fair market value at the time it was given to for gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-certain restrictions, your basis in the property you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and the nual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc-generally is its fair market value when it be-
date it was given to you. tion that applies to the gift.comes substantially vested. Property becomes
substantially vested when it is transferable or is
Fair market value less than donor's adjusted Example. In 2011, you received a gift ofno longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture,
basis. If the fair market value of the property at property from your mother. At the time of the gift,whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-
the time of the gift was less than the donor's the property had a fair market value of $101,000erty in Publication 525 for more information.
adjusted basis just before the gift, your basis for and an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. TheBargain purchases. If you buy investment gain on its sale or other disposition is the same amount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasproperty at less than fair market value, as pay- as the donor's adjusted basis plus or minus any $88,000 ($101,000 minus the $13,000 annualment for services, you must include the differ- required adjustments to basis during the period exclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax ofence in income. Your basis in the property is the you hold the property. Your basis for loss is its $21,000. You figure your basis in the followingprice you pay plus the amount you include in fair market value at the time of the gift plus or way:income. minus any required adjustments to basis during
the period you hold the property. Fair market value ............ . $101,000
Minus: Adjusted basis ......... .  40,000No gain or loss. If you use the basis forProperty Received Net increase in value of gift ..... . $ 61,000figuring a gain and the result is a loss, and thenin Taxable Trades
use the basis for figuring a loss and the result is Gift tax paid ............... . $ 21,000If you received investment property in trade for a gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss. Multiplied by .693 ($61,000 ÷other property, the basis of the new property is $88,000) ................. . .693its fair market value at the time of the trade Example. You receive a gift of investment Gift tax due to net increase in value $ 14,553unless you received the property in a nontaxable property having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at Plus: Adjusted basis of property to 
trade. the time of the gift. The fair market value at the your mother ............... . 40,000
time of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the Your basis in the property $ 54,553
Example. You trade A Company stock for B property for $9,500. You have neither gain nor
Company stock having a fair market value of loss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, and
$1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Company Part sale, part gift. If you get property in a$9,500 minus $10,000 results in a $500 loss.
stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxable transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, yourYour basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and
gain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the A basis is the larger of the amount you paid for the$9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain.
Company stock is more than $1,200, you have a property or the transferor's adjusted basis in the
deductible loss on the trade. The basis of your B property at the time of the transfer. Add to thatFair market value equal to or more than do-
Company stock is $1,200. If you later sell the B amount the amount of any gift tax paid on thenor's adjusted basis. If the fair market value
Company stock for $1,300, you will have a gain gift, as described in the preceding discussion.of the property at the time of the gift was equal to
of $100. For figuring loss, your basis is limited to theor more than the donor's adjusted basis just
property's fair market value at the time of thebefore the gift, your basis for gain or loss on its
transfer.sale or other disposition is the donor's adjusted
Property Received basis plus or minus any required adjustments to
in Nontaxable Trades basis during the period you hold the property. Gift tax information. For information on gift
Also, you may be allowed to add to the donor's tax, see Publication 950, Introduction to EstateIf you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec- adjusted basis all or part of any gift tax paid, and Gift Taxes. For information on figuring theognize gain or loss until you dispose of the depending on the date of the gift. amount of gift tax to add to your basis, seeproperty you received in the trade. See Nontax- Property Received as a Gift  in Publication 551,Gift received before 1977. If you receivedable Trades, later. Basis of Assets.property as a gift before 1977, your basis in theThe basis of property you received in a non-
property is the donor's adjusted basis increasedtaxable or partly nontaxable trade is generally
by the total gift tax paid on the gift. However,the same as the adjusted basis of the property Property Received as Inheritanceyour basis cannot be more than the fair marketyou gave up. Increase this amount by any cash
value of the gift at the time it was given to you.you paid, additional costs you had, and any gain Before or after 2010. If you inherited propertyrecognized. Reduce this amount by any cash or from a decedent who died before or after 2010,Example 1. You were given XYZ Companyunlike property you received, any loss recog- or who died in 2010 and the executor of thestock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stocknized, and any liability of yours that was as-
decedent's estate elected not to file Form 8939,had a fair market value of $21,000. The donor'ssumed or treated as assumed.
Allocation of Increase in Basis for Property Ac-adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a
quired From a Decedent, your basis in that prop-gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain or
erty generally is its fair market value (itsloss is $20,500, the donor's adjusted basis plusProperty Received
appraised value on Form 706, United Statesthe amount of gift tax paid.From Your Spouse
Estate (and Generation-Skipping Transfer) Tax
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Return) on:If property is transferred to you from your spouse
Example 1  except that the gift tax paid was(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident to • The date of the decedent's death, or$1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor's ad-your divorce), your basis is the same as your
justed basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited to • The later alternate valuation date if thespouse's or former spouse's adjusted basis just
the fair market value of the stock at the time of estate qualifies for, and elects to use, al-before the transfer. See Transfers Between
the gift.Spouses, later. ternate valuation.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 43

Page 44 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
50 shares (50 ×  $10) balance ofIf no Form 706 was filed, use the appraised securities. To find out more, go to www.irs.gov/
stock bought in 1996 ......... . $ 500value on the date of death for state inheritance efile/topic/index.html.
80 shares (80 ×  $11) stock bought inor transmission taxes. For stocks and bonds, if Identifying stock or bonds sold. If you can January 1997 .............. . 880no Form 706 was filed and there are no state adequately identify the shares of stock or the Total basis of stock sold in 2011 $1,380inheritance or transmission taxes, see the Form bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other
706 instructions for figuring the fair market value basis of the particular shares of stock or bonds.
Shares in a mutual fund or REIT. The basisof the stocks and bonds on the date of the
Adequate identification. You will make an of shares in a mutual fund (or other regulateddecedent's death.
adequate identification if you show that certifi- investment company) or a real estate invest-
cates representing shares of stock from a lot thatAppreciated property you gave the dece- ment trust (REIT) is generally figured in the
you bought on a certain date or for a certaindent. Your basis in certain appreciated prop- same way as the basis of other stock and usu-
price were delivered to your broker or othererty that you inherited is the decedent's adjusted ally includes any commissions or load charges
agent.basis in the property immediately before death paid for the purchase.
rather than its fair market value. This applies to Broker holds stock. If you have left theappreciated property that you or your spouse Example. You bought 100 shares of Fund Astock certificates with your broker or othergave the decedent as a gift during the 1-year for $10 a share. You paid a $50 commission toagent, you will make an adequate identification ifperiod ending on the date of death. Appreciated the broker for the purchase. Your cost basis foryou:property is any property whose fair market value each share is $10.50 ($1,050 ÷  100).
• Tell your broker or other agent the particu-on the day you gave it to the decedent was more Commissions and load charges. The feeslar stock to be sold or transferred at thethan its adjusted basis. and charges you pay to acquire or redeemtime of the sale or transfer, and
shares of a mutual fund are not deductible. YouMore information. See Publication 551, Ba- • Receive a written confirmation of this from can usually add acquisition fees and charges tosis of Assets, for more information on the basis your broker or other agent within a reason- your cost of the shares and thereby increaseof inherited property, including community prop- able time. your basis. A fee paid to redeem the shares iserty, property held by a surviving tenant in a joint
usually a reduction in the redemption pricetenancy or tenancy by the entirety, a qualified
(sales price).joint interest, and a farm or closely held busi- Stock identified this way is the stock sold or
You cannot add your entire acquisition fee orness. transferred even if stock certificates from a dif-
load charge to the cost of the mutual fund sharesferent lot are delivered to the broker or other
acquired if all of the following conditions apply. In 2010 and executor elects to file Form 8939. agent.
If you inherited property from a decedent who
1. You get a reinvestment right because ofSingle stock certificate. If you boughtdied in 2010 and the executor made the election
the purchase of the shares or the paymentstock in different lots at different times and youto file Form 8939, see Publication 4895, Tax
of the fee or charge.hold a single stock certificate for this stock, youTreatment of Property Acquired From a Dece-
will make an adequate identification if you:dent Dying in 2010, to figure your basis. 2. You dispose of the shares within 90 days
of the purchase date.• Tell your broker or other agent the particu-
Adjusted Basis lar stock to be sold or transferred when 3. You acquire new shares in the same mu-you deliver the certificate to your broker or tual fund or another mutual fund, for whichBefore you can figure any gain or loss on a sale, other agent, and the fee or charge is reduced or waivedexchange, or other disposition of property or because of the reinvestment right you got• Receive a written confirmation of this fromfigure allowable depreciation, depletion, or when you acquired the original shares.your broker or other agent within a reason-amortization, you usually must make certain ad-
able time.justments (increases and decreases) to the ba- The amount of the original fee or charge in
sis of the property. The result of these excess of the reduction in (3) is added to theIf you sell part of the stock represented by aadjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis. cost of the original shares. The rest of the origi-single certificate directly to the buyer instead ofAdjustments to the basis of stocks and nal fee or charge is added to the cost basis of thethrough a broker, you will make an adequatebonds are explained in the following discussion. new shares (unless all three conditions aboveidentification if you keep a written record of theFor information about other adjustments to ba- also apply to the purchase of the new shares).particular stock that you intend to sell.sis, see Publication 551. Choosing average basis for mutual fundBonds. These methods of identification shares. You can choose to use the averagealso apply to bonds sold or transferred.Stocks and Bonds basis of mutual fund shares if you acquired the
identical shares at various times and prices, orIdentification not possible. If you buy andThe basis of stocks or bonds you own generally you acquired the shares after December 31,sell securities at various times in varying quanti-is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase, 2010 in connection with a dividend reinvestmentties and you cannot adequately identify thesuch as commissions and recording or transfer plan, and left them on deposit in an account keptshares you sell, the basis of the securities youfees. If you acquired stock or bonds other than by a custodian or agent. The methods you cansell is the basis of the securities you acquiredby purchase, your basis is usually determined use to figure average basis are explained later.first. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis-by fair market value or the previous owner's cussed later, you cannot use the average priceadjusted basis as discussed earlier under Basis Undistributed capital gains. If you had toper share to figure gain or loss on the sale of theOther Than Cost. include in your income any undistributed capitalshares.The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer- gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase your
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam- basis in the stock by the difference between theExample. You bought 100 shares of stockple, if you receive more stock from nontaxable amount you included and the amount of tax paidof XYZ Corporation in 1996 for $10 a share. Instock dividends or stock splits, you must reduce for you by the fund or REIT. See UndistributedJanuary 1997 you bought another 200 sharesthe basis of your original stock. You must also capital gains of mutual funds and REITs  underfor $11 a share. In July 1997 you gave your sonreduce your basis when you receive nondivi- Capital Gain Distributions in chapter 1.50 shares. In December 1999 you bought 100dend distributions (discussed in chapter 1). Reinvestment right. This is the right to ac-shares for $9 a share. In April 2011 you sold 130These distributions, up to the amount of your quire mutual fund shares in the same or anothershares. You cannot identify the shares you dis-basis, are a nontaxable return of capital. mutual fund without paying a fee or load charge,posed of, so you must use the stock you ac-
The IRS partners with companies that or by paying a reduced fee or load charge.quired first to figure the basis. The shares of
offer Form 8949 and Schedule D The original cost basis of mutual fund sharesstock you gave your son had a basis of $500 (50
software that can import trades from you acquire by reinvesting your distributions is×  $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares of
TIP
many brokerage firms and accounting software the amount of the distributions used to purchasestock you sold in 2011 as follows:
to help you keep track of your adjusted basis in each full or fractional share. This rule applies
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
100 shares ×  $22 = $2,200, basis of oldeven if the distribution is an exempt-interest divi- common stock held. At the date of distribution,
stockdend that you do not report as income. your common stock had a fair market value of
$150 and the preferred stock had a fair marketTable 4-1. This is a worksheet you can 100 shares ×  $30 = $3,000, market value ofvalue of $50. You figure the basis of the old anduse to keep track of the adjusted basis old stocknew stock by dividing your $100 basis betweenof your mutual fund shares. Enter the
RECORDS them. The basis of your common stock is $75cost per share when you acquire new shares 10 rights ×  $3 = $30, market value of rights($150/$200 ×  $100), and the basis of the newand any adjustments to their basis when the preferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 ×  $100).adjustment occurs. This worksheet will help you ($3,000 ÷  $3,030) ×  $2,200 = $2,178.22,
figure the adjusted basis when you sell or re- new basis of old stockStock bought at various times. Figure the
deem shares. basis of stock dividends received on stock you
($30 ÷  $3,030) ×  $2,200 = $21.78, basis ofbought at various times and at different prices by
rightsallocating to each lot of stock the share of theAutomatic investment service. If you partici-
stock dividends due to it.pate in an automatic investment service, your If you sell the rights, the basis for figuringbasis for each share of stock, including frac- Taxable stock dividends. If your stock divi- gain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷  10) per right. Iftional shares, bought by the bank or other agent dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis of you exercise the rights, the basis of the stockis the purchase price plus a share of the broker's your new stock is its fair market value on the you acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus thecommission. date of distribution. The basis of your old stock basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18
does not change. per share. The remaining basis of the old stockDividend reinvestment plans. If you partici- is $21.78 per share.pate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receive Stock splits. Figure the basis of stock splits instock from the corporation at a discount, your the same way as stock dividends if identical Investment property received in liquidation.basis is the full fair market value of the stock on stock is distributed on the stock held. In general, if you receive investment property asthe dividend payment date. You must include a distribution in partial or complete liquidation ofthe amount of the discount in your income. Stock rights. A stock right is a right to acquire a corporation and if you recognize gain or loss
Public utilities. If, before 1986, you ex- a corporation's stock. It may be exercised, it may when you acquire the property, your basis in the
cluded from income the value of stock you had be sold if it has a market value, or it may expire. property is its fair market value at the time of the
received under a qualified public utility reinvest- Stock rights are rarely taxable when you receive distribution.
ment plan, your basis in that stock is zero. them. See Distributions of Stock and Stock
Rights under Dividends and Other Distributions S corporation stock. You must increase your
Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distri- in chapter 1. basis in stock of an S corporation by your pro
butions made by a corporation of its own stock. rata share of the following items.Taxable stock rights. If you receive stockGenerally, stock dividends are not taxable to rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights is • All income items of the S corporation, in-you. However, see Distributions of Stock and their fair market value at the time of distribution. cluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa-Stock Rights under Dividends and Other Distri- The basis of the old stock does not change. rately stated and passed through to you asbutions in chapter 1 for some exceptions. If the
a shareholder.stock dividends are not taxable, you must divide Nontaxable stock rights. If you receive
your basis for the old stock between the old and nontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex- • The nonseparately stated income of the S
new stock. pire, they have no basis. corporation.
If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stockNew and old stock identical. If the new • The amount of the deduction for depletionrights and if, at the time of distribution, the stockstock you received as a nontaxable dividend is (other than oil and gas depletion) that isrights had a fair market value of 15% or more ofidentical to the old stock on which the dividend more than the basis of the property beingthe fair market value of the old stock, you mustwas declared, divide the adjusted basis of the depleted.divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be-old stock by the number of shares of old and
tween the old stock and the stock rights. Use anew stock. The result is your basis for each You must decrease your basis in stock of an Sratio of the fair market value of each to the totalshare of stock. corporation by your pro rata share of the follow-fair market value of both at the time of distribu- ing items.tion.Example 1. You owned one share of com-
• Distributions by the S corporation thatIf the fair market value of the stock rights wasmon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora-
were not included in your income.less than 15%, their basis is zero. However, yoution distributed two new shares of common
can choose to divide the basis of the old stockstock for each share held. You then had three • All loss and deduction items of the S cor-between the old stock and the stock rights. Toshares of common stock. Your basis in each poration that are separately stated andmake the choice, attach a statement to yourshare is $15 ($45 ÷  3). passed through to you.return for the year in which you received the
• Any nonseparately stated loss of the SExample 2. You owned two shares of com- rights, stating that you choose to divide the basis
corporation.mon stock. You bought one for $30 and the of the stock.
other for $45. The corporation distributed two • Any expense of the S corporation that isBasis of new stock. If you exercise thenew shares of common stock for each share not deductible in figuring its taxable in-stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its costheld. You had six shares after the distributionÐ come and not properly chargeable to aplus the basis of the stock rights exercised.three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷  3) and capital account.three with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷  3). Example. You own 100 shares of ABC • The amount of your deduction for deple-Company stock, which cost you $22 per share.New and old stock not identical. If the tion of oil and gas wells to the extent theThe ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxablenew stock you received as a nontaxable divi- deduction is not more than your share ofstock rights that would allow you to buy 10 moredend is not identical to the old stock on which it the adjusted basis of the wells.shares at $26 per share. At the time the stockwas declared, the basis of the new stock is
rights were distributed, the stock had a marketcalculated differently. Divide the adjusted basis However, your basis in the stock cannot be
value of $30, not including the stock rights. Eachof the old stock between the old and the new reduced below zero.
stock right had a market value of $3. The marketstock in the ratio of the fair market value of each
Specialized small business investment com-value of the stock rights was less than 15% oflot of stock to the total fair market value of both
pany stock or partnership interest. If youthe market value of the stock, but you chose tolots on the date of distribution of the new stock.
bought this stock or interest as replacementdivide the basis of your stock between the stock
property for publicly traded securities you sold atExample. You bought a share of common and the rights. You figure the basis of the rights
a gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock orstock for $100. Later, the corporation distributed and the basis of the old stock as follows:
interest by the amount of any postponed gain ona share of preferred stock for each share of
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 45

Page 46 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that sale. See Rollover of Gain From Publicly must reduce the basis of the bond by the pre- your income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-
Traded Securities, later. mium you amortized for the period you held the gations in chapter 1 for more information.
bond.
Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-Qualified small business stock. If you See Bond Premium Amortization in chapter ments. Increase the basis of a debt instrumentbought this stock as replacement property for 3 for more information. by the OID you include in your income. Seeother qualified small business stock you sold at
Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1.a gain, you must reduce the basis of this re- Market discount on bonds. If you include
placement stock by the amount of any post- market discount on a bond in income currently, Discounted tax-exempt obligations. OIDponed gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on increase the basis of your bond by the amount of on tax-exempt obligations is generally not tax-Qualified Small Business Stock, later. market discount you include in your income. See able. However, when you dispose of a
Market Discount Bonds  in chapter 1 for more tax-exempt obligation issued after September 3,Short sales. If you cannot deduct payments information. 1982, that you acquired after March 1, 1984, youyou make to a lender in lieu of dividends on must accrue OID on the obligation to determinestock used in a short sale, the amount you pay to Bonds purchased at par value. A bond pur- its adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added tothe lender is a capital expense, and you must chased at par value (face amount) has no pre- the basis of the obligation to determine your gainadd it to the basis of the stock used to close the mium or discount. When you sell or otherwise or loss.short sale. dispose of the bond, you figure the gain or loss For information on determining OID on aSee Payments in lieu of dividends , later, for by comparing the bond proceeds to the long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is-information about deducting payments in lieu of purchase price of the bond. sued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985  ordividends. Debt Instruments Issued After 1984 , whicheverExample. You purchased a bond several applies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OIDPremiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at a years ago for its par value of $10,000. You sold on Long-Term Debt Instruments.premium, the premium is treated as part of your the bond this year for $10,100. You have a gain If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity ofbasis in the bond. If you choose to amortize the of $100. However, if you had sold the bond for 1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules forpremium paid on a taxable bond, you must re- $9,900, you would have a loss of $100. acquisition discount on short-term obligations.duce the basis of the bond by the amortized part See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  inof the premium each year over the life of the Acquisition discount on short-term obliga- chapter 1.bond. tions. If you include acquisition discount on a
Although you cannot deduct the premium on short-term obligation in your income currently, Stripped tax-exempt obligation. If you ac-
a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de- increase the basis of the obligation by the quired a stripped tax-exempt bond or coupon
termine your adjusted basis in the bond. You amount of acquisition discount you include in after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on
Table 4-1. Mutual Fund Record
Acquired1 Sold or redeemed
Adjusted2
Number Cost NumberMutual Fund Adjustment to Basis Per Share Basis Per
Date of Per Date ofShare
Shares Share Shares
1 Include share received from reinvestment of distributions.
2 Cost plus or minus adjustments.
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
it to determine its adjusted basis when you dis- transaction or that is assumed by the buyer must 1. Specify to your broker or other agent the
pose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds or particular shares to be sold or transferredbe included in the amount realized. This is true
coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part of at the time of the sale or transfer, andeven if neither you nor the buyer is personally
this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID on liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or 2. Receive confirmation in writing from yourthese obligations in the manner described in trade property that is subject to a nonrecourse broker or other agent within a reasonablechapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons. loan, the amount you realize generally includes time of your specification of the particularIncrease your basis in the stripped the full amount of the note assumed by the buyer shares sold or transferred.tax-exempt bond or coupon by the taxable and even if the amount of the note is more than the
You continue to have the burden of provingnontaxable accrued OID. Also increase your ba- fair market value of the property. your basis in the specified shares at the time ofsis by the interest that accrued (but was not paid
sale or transfer.and was not previously reflected in your basis) Example. You sell stock that you had
before the date you sold the bond or coupon. In pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000. First-in first-out (FIFO).  If your shares wereaddition, for bonds acquired after June 10, 1987, Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer acquired at different times or at different pricesadd to your basis any accrued market discount pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in and you cannot identify which shares you sold,not previously reflected in basis. cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000 use the basis of the shares you acquired first as
the basis of the shares sold. In other words, the+ $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 ±
oldest shares you own are considered sold first.$6,000).
You should keep a separate record of eachPayment of cash. If you trade property andHow To Figure purchase and any dispositions of the sharescash for other property, the amount you realize until all shares purchased at the same time haveGain or Loss is the fair market value of the property you re- been disposed of completely.ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- Table 4-2 illustrates the use of the FIFOYou figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of tracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basis method to figure the cost basis of shares sold,property by comparing the amount you realize of the property you trade in from the amount you compared with the use of the average basiswith the adjusted basis of the property. realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a method (discussed next).
gain. If the result is a negative number, it is aGain. If the amount you realize from a sale or loss.trade is more than the adjusted basis of the
Average Basisproperty you transfer, the difference is a gain.
No gain or loss. You may have to use a basis You can figure your gain or loss using an aver-Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property you for figuring gain that is different from the basis age basis only if you acquired identical shares attransfer is more than the amount you realize, the used for figuring loss. In this case, you may have various times and prices, or you acquired thedifference is a loss. neither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in shares after December 31, 2010 in connection
the discussion on the basis of property you re-Amount realized. The amount you realize with a dividend reinvestment plan, and you left
ceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost ,from a sale or trade of property is everything you the shares on deposit in an account handled by
receive for the property minus your expenses of earlier. a custodian or agent who acquires or redeems
sale (such as redemption fees, sales commis- those shares.
sions, sales charges, or exit fees). Amount real- Average basis is determined by averagingSpecial Rules for Mutual
ized includes the money you receive plus the fair the basis of all shares of identical stock in anFundsmarket value of any property or services you account regardless of how long you have held
receive. the stock. However, shares of stock in a divi-To figure your gain or loss when you dispose ofIf you finance the buyer's purchase of your dend reinvestment plan are not identical tomutual fund shares, you need to determineproperty and the debt instrument does not pro- shares of stock with the same CUSIP numberwhich shares were sold and the basis of thosevide for adequate stated interest, the unstated that are not in a dividend reinvestment plan. Theshares. If your shares in a mutual fund wereinterest that you must report as ordinary income basis of each share of identical stock in theacquired all on the same day and for the samewill reduce the amount realized from the sale. account is the aggregate basis of all shares ofprice, figuring their basis is not difficult. How-For more information, see Publication 537. that stock in the account divided by the aggre-ever, shares are generally acquired at variousIf a buyer of property issues a debt instru- gate number of shares.times, in various quantities, and at variousment to the seller of the property, the amount Transition rule from double-categoryprices. Therefore, figuring your basis can berealized is determined by reference to the issue method. You may no longer use themore difficult. You can choose to use either aprice of the debt instrument, which may or may double-category method for figuring your aver-cost basis or an average basis to figure yournot be the fair market value of the debt instru- age basis. If you were using the double-categorygain or loss.ment. See Regulations section 1.1001-1(g). method for stock you acquired before April 1,However, if the debt instrument was previously 2011 and you sell, exchange or otherwise dis-issued by a third party (one not part of the sale pose of that stock on or after April 1, 2011, youCost Basistransaction), the fair market value of the debt must figure the average basis of this stock byinstrument is used to determine the amount real- averaging together all identical shares of stockYou can figure your gain or loss using a costized. in the account on April 1, 2011, regardless of thebasis only if you did not previously use an aver-
Fair market value. Fair market value is the holding period.age basis for a sale, exchange, or redemption of
price at which property would change hands other shares in the same mutual fund. Election of average basis method for cov-between a buyer and a seller, neither being ered securities. To make the election to useTo figure cost basis, you can choose one offorced to buy or sell and both having reasonable the average basis method for your covered se-the following methods.knowledge of all the relevant facts. curities, you must send written notice to the• Specific share identification. custodian or agent who keeps the account. TheExample. You trade A Company stock with written notice can be made electronically. You• First-in first-out (FIFO).an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company must also notify your broker that you have madestock with a fair market value of $10,000, which the election. Generally, a covered security is ais your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 Specific share identification. If you ade- security you acquired after 2010, with certain($10,000 ± $7,000). If you also receive a note quately identify the shares you sold, you can use exceptions explained in the 2011 Instructions forfor $6,000 that has an issue price of $6,000, the adjusted basis of those particular shares to Schedule D.your gain is $9,000 ($10,000 + $6,000 ± figure your gain or loss. You can make the election to use the aver-$7,000). You will adequately identify your mutual fund age basis method at any time. The election will
shares, even if you bought the shares in differentDebt paid off. A debt against the property, be effective for sales or other dispositions of
lots at various prices and times, if you:or against you, that is paid off as a part of the stocks that occur after you notify the custodian
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 47

Page 48 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. Enter the number of shares youTable 4-2. Example of How To Figure Basis of Shares Sold
sold .................... .
5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by theThis is an example showing two different ways to figure basis. It compares the cost basis using amount on line 4. This is the basisthe FIFO method with the average basis method. of the shares you sold ...... . $
Date Action Share Price No. of Shares Total Shares
Owned
Example 1. You bought 300 identical
2/6/10 Invest $4,000 $25 160 160 shares in the LJP Mutual Fund: 100 shares in
2008 for $1,000 ($10 per share); 100 shares in8/7/10 Invest $4,800 $20 240 400
2009 for $1,200 ($12 per share); and 100 shares
12/18/10 Reinvest $300 in 2010 for $2,600 ($26 per share). Thus, the
dividend $30 10 410 total cost of your shares was $4,800 ($1,000 +
$1,200 + $2,600). On May 11, 2011, you sold10/1/11 Sell 210 shares $32 210 200 150 shares. The basis of the shares you sold isfor $6,720 $2,400 ($16 per share), figured as follows.
1. Enter the total adjusted basis of allCOST BASIS To figure the basis of the 210 shares sold on 10/1/11, use the share
the shares you owned in the fund(FIFO) price of the first 210 shares you bought, namely the 160 shares you
just before the sale. (If you madepurchased on 2/6/10 and 50 of those purchased on 8/7/10.
an earlier sale of shares in this$4,000 (cost of 160 shares on 2/6/10)
fund, add the adjusted basis of any+ $1,000 (cost of 50 shares on 8/7/10) shares you still owned after theBasis = $5,000 last sale and the adjusted basis of
any shares you acquired after that
sale.) ................... . $4,800AVERAGE BASIS To figure the basis of the 210 shares sold on 10/1/11, use the
average basis of all 410 shares owned on 10/1/11. 2. Enter the total number of shares
$9,100 (cost of 410 shares) you owned in the fund just before
÷ 410 (number of shares) the sale ................. . 300
$22.20 (average basis per share) 3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the
amount on line 2. This is your$22.20 average basis per share ..... . $ 16× 210
4. Enter the number of shares youBasis = $4,662
sold .................... . 150
5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by
the amount on line 4. This is theor agent of your election. Your election must sold, compared with the use of the FIFO method
basis of the shares you sold .. . $2,400to figure cost basis (discussed earlier).identify each account with that custodian or
agent and each stock in that account to which Even though you include all unsold shares of
the election applies. The election can also indi- Remaining shares. The average basis ofidentical stock in an account to compute aver-
cate that it applies to all accounts with a custo- the shares you still hold after a sale of some ofage basis, you may have both short-term and
dian or agent, including accounts you later your shares is the same as the average basis oflong-term gains or losses when you sell these
establish with the custodian or agent. the shares sold. The next time you make a sale,shares. To determine your holding period, the
your average basis will still be the same, unlessshares disposed of are considered to be those
Election of average basis method for non- you have acquired additional shares (or haveacquired first.
made a subsequent adjustment to basis).covered securities. For noncovered securi-
ties, you elect to use the average basis method Example. You bought 400 identical shares
Example 2. The facts are the same as inon your income tax return for the first taxable in the LJO Mutual Fund: 200 shares on May 14,
Example 1, except that you sold an additional 502010, and 200 shares on May 13, 2011. Onyear that the election applies. You make the
shares on December 15, 2011. You do not needNovember 10, 2011, you sold 300 shares. Theelection by showing on your return that you used
to recompute the average basis of the 150basis of all 300 shares sold is the same, but youthe average basis method in reporting gain or
shares you owned at that time because youheld 200 shares for more than 1 year, so yourloss on the sale or other disposition.
acquired or sold no shares, and had no othergain or loss on those shares is long term. You
adjustments to basis, since the last sale. Yourheld 100 shares for 1 year or less, so your gainRevoking the average basis method elec-
basis is the $16 per share figured earlier.or loss on those shares is short term.tion. You can revoke an election to use the
average basis method for your covered securi- How to figure the basis of shares sold. To Example 3. The facts are the same as inties by sending written notice to the custodian or figure the basis of shares you sell, use the steps Example 1, except that you bought an additionalagent holding the stock for which you want to in the following worksheet. 150 identical shares at $14 a share on Septem-revoke the election. The election must generally ber 15, 2011, and then sold 50 shares on De-1. Enter the total adjusted basis of allbe revoked by the earlier of 1 year after you cember 20, 2011. The total adjusted basis of allthe shares you owned in the fundmake the election or the date of the first sale, the shares you owned just before the sale isjust before the sale. (If you madetransfer, or disposition of the stock following the $4,500, figured as follows.an earlier sale of shares in thiselection. The revocation applies to all the stock fund, add the adjusted basis of anyyou hold in an account that is identical to the 1. Basis of remaining shares ($16 xshares you still owned after the lastshares of stock for which you are revoking the 150) .................. . $2,400sale and the adjusted basis of anyelection. After revoking your election, your basis 2. Cost of shares acquired 9/15/11shares you acquired after thatin the shares of stock to which the revocation ($14 x 150) .............. . $2,100sale.) ................... . $applies is the basis before averaging. 3. Total adjusted basis of all shares2. Enter the total number of shares owned ($2,400 + $2,100) .... . $4,500You may be able to find the average you owned in the fund just before
basis of your shares from information the sale ................. .
provided by the fund.
TIP The basis of the shares sold is $750 ($15 a3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the
Average basis method illustrated. Table 4-2 amount on line 2. This is your share), figured as follows.
illustrates the average basis method of shares average basis per share ..... . $
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Enter the total adjusted basis of all business or for investment. Neither prop- or loss on the unlike property you give up. The
the shares you owned in the fund gain or loss is the difference between the ad-erty may be property used for personal
just before the sale. (If you made justed basis of the unlike property and its fairpurposes, such as your home or family
an earlier sale of shares in this market value.car.
fund, add the adjusted basis of any
2. The property must not be held primarily for Like property and money transferred. Ifshares you still owned after the
sale. The property you trade and the prop- conditions (1) ± (6) are met, you have a nontax-last sale and the adjusted basis of
erty you receive must not be property you able trade even if you pay money in addition toany shares you acquired after that
sell to customers, such as merchandise.sale.) ................... . $4,500 the like property.
2. Enter the total number of shares 3. The property must not be stocks, bonds, Basis of property received. You figure your
you owned in the fund just before notes, choses in action, certificates of trust basis in property received in a nontaxable or
the sale ................. . 300 or beneficial interest, or other securities or partly nontaxable trade as explained under Ba-
evidences of indebtedness or interest, in- sis Other Than Cost, earlier.3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the
cluding partnership interests. However,amount on line 2. This is your Special rules for mutual ditch, reservoir, orsee Special rules for mutual ditch, reser-average basis per share ..... . $ 15 irrigation company stock. For purposes ofvoir, or irrigation company stock, later. item 3 above, stock does not include shares in a4. Enter the number of shares you Also, you can have a nontaxable trade ofsold .................... . 50 mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation company ifcorporate stocks under a different rule, as all of the following conditions are met at the time5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by discussed later under Corporate Stocks. of the trade.the amount on line 4. This is the 4. There must be a trade of like property. Thebasis of the shares you sold .. . $ 750 • The mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigationtrade of real estate for real estate, or per- company is an organization described insonal property for similar personal prop-Shares received as gift. If your account section 501(c)(12)(A) of the Internal Reve-erty, is a trade of like property. The tradeincludes shares that you received by gift, and nue Code (determined without regard toof an apartment house for a store building,the fair market value of the shares at the time of the percentage of its income that is col-or a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a lected from its members for the purpose ofthe gift was not more than the donor's basis, trade of like property. The trade of a piece meeting losses and expenses).special rules apply. You cannot choose to use of machinery for a store building is not a
the average basis for the account unless you trade of like property. Real property lo- • The shares in the company have beenstate in writing that you will treat the basis of the cated in the United States and real prop- recognized by the highest court of thegift shares as the FMV at the time you acquire erty located outside the United States are state in which the company was organized
the shares. You must provide this written state- not like property. Also, personal property or by applicable state statute as constitut-
ment when you make the election to use the used predominantly within the United ing or representing real property or an in-
average basis method, as described under Elec- States and personal property used terest in real property.
tion of average basis method for covered securi- predominantly outside the United States • The trade occurred after May 22, 2008.ties and Election for average basis method for are not like property.
noncovered securities , earlier, or when you 5. The property to be received must be identi-transfer the gift shares to an account for which How to report. You must report the trade offied in writing within 45 days after the dateyou have made the average basis method elec- like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-you transfer the property given up in thetion, whichever is later. The statement must be nized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it ontrade. If you received the replacement Schedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797,effective for any gift shares identical to the gift property before the end of the 45-day pe- Sales of Business Property, whichever applies.shares to which the average basis method elec- riod, you automatically are treated as hav- For information on using Form 4797, seetion applies that you acquire at any time and ing met the 45-day written notice chapter 4 of Publication 544.must remain in effect as long as the election requirement.
remains in effect.
6. The property to be received must be re- Corporate StocksWhen there is a sale, exchange, or ceived by the earlier of:
redemption of your shares in a fund, The following trades of corporate stocks gener-a. The 180th day after the date on whichkeep the confirmation statement you
RECORDS ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductibleyou transfer the property given up in thereceive. The statement shows the price you re- loss.trade, orceived for the shares and other information you
Corporate reorganizations. In some in-need to report gain or loss on your return. b. The due date, including extensions, for stances, a company will give you common stockyour tax return for the year in which the for preferred stock, preferred stock for commontransfer of the property given up occurs. stock, or stock in one corporation for stock in
another corporation. If this is a result of aIf you trade property with a related party in aNontaxable Trades merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledlike-kind exchange, a special rule may apply. corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-See Related Party Transactions , later in thisThis section discusses trades that generally do porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544not result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss. zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.for more information on exchanges of businessFor more information on nontaxable trades, see
property and special rules for exchanges usingchapter 1 of Publication 544. Example 1. On April 19, 2011, KP1 Corpo-qualified intermediaries or involving multiple ration was acquired by KP2 Corporation. Youproperties. held 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis ofLike-Kind Exchanges
$3,500. As a result of the acquisition, you re-Partly nontaxable exchange. If you receiveIf you trade business or investment property for ceived 70 shares of KP2 stock in exchange formoney or unlike property in addition to the like your KP1 stock. You do not recognize gain orother business or investment property of a like property, and the preceding six conditions are loss on the transaction. Your basis in the 70kind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deduct met, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You are shares of the new stock is still $3,500.any loss until you sell or dispose of the property taxed on any gain you realize, but only up to theyou receive. To be nontaxable, a trade must amount of the money and the fair market value Example 2. On July 26, 2011, RGB Corpo-meet all six of the following conditions. of the unlike property you receive. You cannot ration divests itself of SFH Corporation. Youdeduct a loss.1. The property must be business or invest- hold 75 shares of RGB stock with a basis of
ment property. You must hold both the Like property and unlike property trans- $5,400. You receive 25 shares of SFH stock as
property you trade and the property you ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi- a result of the spin-off. You do not recognize any
receive for productive use in your trade or tion to the like property, you must recognize gain gain or loss on the transaction. You receive
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 49

Page 50 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
information from RGB Corporation that your ba- stock on surrender of one bond and the payment property, the taxable gain may have to be re-
sis in SFH stock is equal to 10.9624% of your ported as ordinary income because of deprecia-of $50.
basis in RGB stock ($5,400). Thus, your basis in tion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No lossLater, you presented the bond and $50 and
SFH stock is $592.00. Your basis in RGB stock is recognized.received one share of XYZ Corporation common
(after the spin-off) is $4,808 ($5,400 ± $592). Nonqualified preferred stock (described ear-stock. You did not have a recognized gain or
lier under Stock for stock of the same corpora-loss. This is true whether the fair market value of
Note. In the case of a spin-off, the divesting tion) received is generally treated as propertythe stock was more or less than $150 on the
corporation should send you information that other than stock.date of the conversion.
includes details on how to allocate basis be- The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 + Basis of stock or other property received.tween the old and new stock. Keep this informa- $99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Your The basis of the stock you receive is generallytion until the period of limitations expires for the holding period for the part based on your owner- the adjusted basis of the property you transfer.year in which you dispose of the stock in a ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem- Increase this amount by any amount that wastaxable disposition. Usually, this is 3 years from ber 2. Your holding period for the part based on treated as a dividend, plus any gain recognizedthe date the return was due or filed, or 2 years your cash investment ($50 basis) begins on the on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cashfrom the date the tax was paid, whichever is day after you acquired the share of stock. you received and the fair market value of anylater. other property you received.
Bonds for stock of another corporation. The basis of any other property you receiveStock for stock of the same corporation.
Generally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo- is its fair market value on the date of the trade.You can exchange common stock for common
ration into common stock of another corporation,stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the
according to the terms of the bond issue, yousame corporation without having a recognized Exchange of Shares In Onemust recognize gain or loss up to the differencegain or loss. This is true for a trade between two Mutual Fund For Shares Inbetween the fair market value of the stock re-stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-
Another Mutual Fundceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex-holder and the corporation.
changed. In some instances, however, such asIf you receive cash for fractional shares, see Any exchange of shares in one fund for sharestrades that are part of mergers or other corpo-Fractional shares  under Distributions of stock in another fund is a taxable exchange. This israte reorganizations, you will have no recog-and stock rights in chapter 1. true even if you exchange shares in one fund fornized gain or loss if certain requirements areMoney or other property received. If in an shares in another fund within the same family ofmet. For more information about the tax conse-otherwise nontaxable trade you receive money funds. Report any gain or loss on the shares youquences of converting securities of one corpora-or other property in addition to stock, then your gave up as a capital gain or loss in the year intion into common stock of another corporation,gain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up to which the exchange occurs. Usually, you canunder circumstances such as those just de-the amount of the money or other property. Any add any service charge or fee paid in connectionscribed, consult the respective corporations andloss is not recognized. with an exchange to the cost of the shares ac-the terms of the bond issue. This information isIf you received cash for fractional shares, quired. For an exception, see Commissions andalso available on the prospectus of the bondsee Fractional shares  under Distributions of load charges under Shares in a mutual fund orissue.Stock and Stock Rights in chapter 1. REIT, earlier.
Nonqualified preferred stock. Nonquali- Property for stock of a controlled corpora-
Insurance Policiesfied preferred stock is generally treated as prop- tion. If you transfer property to a corporation
erty other than stock. Generally, this applies to solely in exchange for stock in that corporation, and Annuities
preferred stock with one or more of the following and immediately after the trade you are in con-
You will not have a recognized gain or loss if thefeatures. trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not
insured or annuitant is the same under bothrecognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both• The holder has the right to require the contracts and you trade:to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-issuer or a related person to redeem or erty to a corporation. It does not apply if the • A life insurance contract for another lifepurchase the stock. corporation is an investment company. insurance contract or for an endowment or• The issuer or a related person is required If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro- annuity contract or for a qualifiedto redeem or purchase the stock. ceeding and you transfer property to a controlled long-term care insurance contract,
corporation under a plan, other than a reorgani-• The issuer or a related person has the • An endowment contract for another en-zation, you must recognize gain to the extent theright to redeem the stock, and on the issue dowment contract that provides for regularstock you receive in the exchange is used to paydate, it is more likely than not that the right payments beginning at a date no lateroff your debts.will be exercised. than the beginning date under the old con-For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo- tract or for annuity contract or for a quali-• The dividend rate on the stock varies with ration, you or your group of transferors must fied long-term insurance contract,reference to interest rates, commodity own, immediately after the exchange, at leastprices, or similar indices. • An annuity contract for annuity contract or80% of the total combined voting power of all
for a qualified long-term care insuranceFor a detailed definition of nonqualified pre- classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%
contract, orferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter- of the outstanding shares of each class of non-
nal Revenue Code. voting stock of the corporation. • A qualified long-term care insurance con-
If this provision applies to you, you may have tract for a qualified long-term care insur-Convertible stocks and bonds. You gener- to attach to your return a complete statement of ance contract.ally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details,convert bonds into stock or preferred stock into see Regulations section 1.351-3. You also may not have to recognize gain or losscommon stock of the same corporation accord-
Money or other property received. If, in an from an exchange of a portion of an annuitying to a conversion privilege in the terms of the
otherwise nontaxable trade of property for cor- contract for another annuity contract. For trans-bond or the preferred stock certificate.
porate stock, you also receive money or prop- fers completed before October 24, 2011, see
erty other than stock, you may have a taxableExample. In November, you bought for $1 a Revenue Ruling 2003-76 and Revenue Proce-
gain. However, you are taxed only up to theright issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, on dure 2008-24 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
amount of money plus the fair market value ofpayment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issued 2008-13. Revenue Ruling 2003-76 is available
the other property you receive. The rules forby that corporation. at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-33_IRB/ar11.html .
figuring taxable gain in this situation generallyOn December 2, you subscribed to the bond, Revenue Procedure 2008-24 is available at
follow those for a partly nontaxable exchangewhich was issued on December 9. The bond www.irs.gov/irb/2008-13_IRB/ar13.html . For
discussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. Ifcontained a clause stating that you would re- transfers completed on or after October 24,
ceive one share of XYZ Corporation common the property you give up includes depreciable 2011, see Revenue Ruling 2003-76, above, and
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Revenue Procedure 2011-38, in Internal Reve- on the property, exceed the adjusted basis • Trades and later dispositions whose main
nue Bulletin 2011-30. Revenue Procedure of the property. purpose is not the avoidance of federal
2011-38 is available at www.irs.gov/irb/ income tax.• An installment obligation is transferred in2011-30_IRB/ar09.html. For information on how trust. For information on the disposition ofto treat amounts received as an annuity for a If a property holder's risk of loss on the prop-an installment obligation, see Publicationperiod of 10 years or more or during one or more erty is substantially diminished during any pe-537, Installment Sales.lives under any portion of an annuity, endow- riod, that period is not counted in determining
ment, or life insurance contract after December • Certain stock redemptions, which are tax- whether the property was disposed of within 2
31, 2010, see Partial annuitization, section able to a spouse under the tax law, a di- years. The property holder's risk of loss is sub-
72(a)(2). vorce or separation instrument, or a valid stantially diminished by:
written agreement, discussed in Regula-Exchanges of contracts not included in this • The holding of a put on the property,tions section 1.1041-2.list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-
• The holding by another person of a right toment contract, or an annuity or endowment con- Any transfer of property to a spouse or former acquire the property, ortract for a life insurance contract, are taxable. spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is
• A short sale or any other transaction.treated by the recipient as a gift and is not
considered a sale or exchange. The recipient'sDemutualization of Life basis in the property will be the same as the Losses on Sales orInsurance Companies adjusted basis of the giver immediately before Trades of Propertythe transfer. This carryover basis rule appliesA life insurance company may change from a
whether the adjusted basis of the transferred You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade ofmutual company to a stock company. This is
property is less than, equal to, or greater thancommonly called demutualization. If you were a property, other than a distribution in complete
either its fair market value at the time of transferpolicyholder or annuitant of the mutual com- liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is
or any consideration paid by the recipient. Thispany, you may have received either stock in the directly or indirectly between you and the follow-
rule applies for purposes of determining loss asstock company or cash in exchange for your ing related parties.
well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transferequity interest in the mutual company. • Members of your family. This includes onlyin trust increases the basis.If the demutualization transaction qualifies your brothers and sisters, half-brothersas a tax-free reorganization under section A transfer of property is incident to a divorce and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gain if the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date ents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-or loss is recognized on the exchange. Your on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).holding period for the new stock includes the related to the ending of the marriage. For more
period you held an equity interest in the mutual information, see Property Settlements in Publi- • A partnership in which you directly or indi-
company as a policyholder or annuitant. cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. rectly own more than 50% of the capital
If the demutualization transaction does not interest or the profits interest.
qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec- • A corporation in which you directly or indi-tion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, you
rectly own more than 50% in value of themust recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold- Related Party outstanding stock (see Constructive own-ing period for the stock does not include the
ership of stock, later).period you held an equity interest in the mutual Transactions
company. • A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-
If you received cash in exchange for your Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- ganization directly or indirectly controlled,
equity interest, you must recognize a capital erty between related parties. in any manner or by any method, by you
gain. If you held an equity interest for more than or by a member of your family, whether or1 year, your gain is long term. Gain on Sale or Trade not this control is legally enforceable.
of Depreciable PropertyU.S. Treasury In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of propertyYour gain from the sale or trade of property to aNotes or Bonds is not deductible if the transaction is directly orrelated party may be ordinary income, rather indirectly between the following related parties.You can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasury than capital gain, if the property can be depreci-
obligations for other issues, designated by the ated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 in • A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary
Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or loss Publication 544 for more information. and beneficiary, of any trust.
recognized on the trade.
• Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or theSee the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S. fiduciary and beneficiary of two differentLike-Kind ExchangesTreasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for information
trusts, if the same person is the grantor ofabout income from these investments.
both trusts.Generally, if you trade business or investment
property for other business or investment prop- • A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whicherty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized. more than 50% in value of the outstandingSee Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non-Transfers Between stock is directly or indirectly owned by ortaxable Trades. for the trust, or by or for the grantor of theThis rule also applies to trades of propertySpouses trust.between related parties, defined next under
• A corporation and a partnership if theLosses on Sales or Trades of Property . How-Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a
same persons own more than 50% inever, if either you or the related party disposes oftransfer of property from an individual to (or in
the like property within 2 years after the trade, value of the outstanding stock of the cor-trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident to
you both must report any gain or loss not recog- poration and more than 50% of the capitala divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition
nized on the original trade on your return for the interest, or the profits interest, in the part-rule does not apply in the following situations.
year in which the later disposition occurs. nership.• The recipient spouse or former spouse is This rule generally does not apply to: • Two S corporations if the same personsa nonresident alien.
own more than 50% in value of the out-• Dispositions due to the death of either re-• Property is transferred in trust and liability standing stock of each corporation.lated party,exceeds basis. Gain must be recognized
• Two corporations, one of which is an S• Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 ofto the extent the amount of the liabilities
Publication 544), orassumed by the trust, plus any liabilities corporation, if the same persons own
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 51

Page 52 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
more than 50% in value of the outstanding If you sell or trade at a loss property you Capital or Ordinary
stock of each corporation. acquired from a related party, you cannot recog- Gain or Lossnize the loss that was not allowed to the related• An executor and a beneficiary of an estate
party. If you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss(except in the case of a sale or trade to
from a transaction, it may be either a capital gainsatisfy a pecuniary bequest). Example 1. Your brother sells you stock for or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on
• Two corporations that are members of the $7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of
same controlled group (under certain con- cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell a capital asset (defined next) results in a capital
ditions, however, these losses are not dis- gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital assetthe same stock to an unrelated party for
allowed but must be deferred). generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-
pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss onable gain is $500 (the $2,900 gain minus the• Two partnerships if the same persons a sale or trade of property used in a trade or$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother).own, directly or indirectly, more than 50% business may be treated as either capital orof the capital interests or the profit inter- ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. InExample 2. If, in Example 1, you sold theests in both partnerships. some situations, part of your gain or loss may bestock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-
a capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi-nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minusMultiple property sales or trades. If you sell nary gain or loss.$6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that wasor trade to a related party a number of blocks of not allowed to your brother.stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, you
Capital Assets andmust figure the gain or loss separately for each
block of stock or piece of property. The gain on Noncapital Assets
each item may be taxable. However, you cannot
For the most part, everything you own and useCapital Gainsdeduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannot
for personal purposes, pleasure, or investmentreduce gains from the sales of any of these
is a capital asset. Some examples are:and Lossesitems by losses on the sales of any of the other
items. • Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-
count,Terms you may need to know
Indirect transactions. You cannot deduct (see Glossary): • A house owned and used by you and youryour loss on the sale of stock through your family,broker if, under a prearranged plan, a related Call
• Household furnishings,party buys the same stock you had owned. This Commodity futuredoes not apply to a trade between related par- • A car used for pleasure or commuting,Conversion transactionties through an exchange that is purely coinci-
• Coin or stamp collections,dental and is not prearranged. Forward contract
• Gems and jewelry, andLimited partnerConstructive ownership of stock. In deter-
• Gold, silver, or any other metal.mining whether a person directly or indirectly Listed option
owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-
Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-Nonequity optiontion, the following rules apply.
cept the following noncapital assets. Options dealerRule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by
1. Property held mainly for sale to customersor for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust Put
or property that will physically become ais considered owned proportionately by or for its
Regulated futures contract part of the merchandise for sale to custom-shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
ers. For an exception see Capital assetSection 1256 contractRule 2. An individual is considered to own treatment for self-created musical works,the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for his Straddle later.or her family. Family includes only brothers and Wash sale 2. Depreciable property used in your trade orsisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse,
business, even if fully depreciated.ancestors, and lineal descendants.
3. Real property used in your trade or busi-This section discusses the tax treatment ofRule 3. An individual owning, other than by
ness.gains and losses from different types of invest-applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is
considered to own the stock directly or indirectly ment transactions. 4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artistic
owned by or for his or her partner. composition, a letter or memorandum, or
similar property that is:Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock Character of gain or loss. You need to clas-
constructively owned by a person under rule 1 is sify your gains and losses as either ordinary or a. Created by your personal efforts,treated as actually owned by that person. But capital gains or losses. You then need to classify
b. Prepared or produced for you (in thestock constructively owned by an individual your capital gains and losses as either short
case of a letter, memorandum, or simi-under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by term or long term. If you have long-term gains lar property), orthat individual for again applying either rule 2 or and losses, you must identify your 28% rate
rule 3 to make another person the constructive gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain, c. Acquired under circumstances (for ex-owner of the stock. ample, by gift) entitling you to the basisyou must also identify any unrecaptured section
of the person who created the property1250 gain.Property received from a related party. If or for whom it was prepared or pro-The correct classification and identificationyou sell or trade at a gain property you acquired duced.helps you figure the limit on capital losses andfrom a related party, you recognize the gain only
For an exception to this rule, see Capitalthe correct tax on capital gains. For informationto the extent that it is more than the loss previ- asset treatment for self-created musicalabout determining whether your capital gain orously disallowed to the related party. This rule works, later.loss is short term or long term, see Holdingapplies only if you are the original transferee and
Period, later. For information about 28% rateyou acquired the property by purchase or ex- 5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in
gain or loss and unrecaptured section 1250change. This rule does not apply if the related the ordinary course of a trade or business
gain, see Capital Gain Tax Rates under Report-party's loss was disallowed because of the wash for services rendered or from the sale of
ing Capital Gains and Losses, later.sale rules, described later under Wash Sales. property described in (1).
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. U.S. Government publications that you re- IRS revenue procedure. See, for example, Rev- A loss on the sale or other disposition of a
enue Procedure 2011-1, 2011-1 I.R.B. 1, avail-ceived from the government free or for less tax-exempt state or local government bond is
able at www.irs.gov/irb/2011-01_IRB/ar06.html.than the normal sales price, or that you deductible as a capital loss.
Alternatively, you are granted an automaticacquired under circumstances entitling you Redeemed before maturity. If a state or6-month extension from the due date of yourto the basis of someone who received the local bond issued before June 9, 1980, is re-income tax return (excluding extensions) to re-publications free or for less than the nor- deemed before it matures, the OID is not taxablevoke the election, provided you timely file yourmal sales price. to you.income tax return, and within this 6-month ex-7. Certain commodities derivative financial in- If a state or local bond issued after June 8,tension period, you file Form 1040X that treatsstruments held by commodities derivatives 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part ofthe sale or exchange as the sale or exchange ofdealers. For more information, see section OID earned while you hold the bond is not tax-property that is not a capital asset.1221 of the Internal Revenue Code. able to you. However, you must report the
unearned part of OID as a capital gain.8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-
Discounted Debt Instrumentsaction is clearly identified as a hedging Example. On June 30, 2000, the date oftransaction before the close of the day on Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption, issue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bondwhich it was acquired, originated, or en- or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument for $800. The face amount of the bond wastered into. For more information, see the originally issued at a discount or bought at a $1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the timedefinition of hedging transaction earlier, discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex- the bond was issued, the issuer had no intentionand the discussion of hedging transactions plained in the following discussions. of redeeming it before it matured. The bond wasunder Commodity Futures, later. callable at its face amount beginning 10 yearsShort-term government obligations. Treat9. Supplies of a type you regularly use or after the issue date.gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-consume in the ordinary course of your The issuer redeemed the bond at the end ofernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-trade or business. 11 years (June 30, 2011) for its face amount ofgations) as ordinary income up to your ratable
$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. Theshare of the acquisition discount. This treatment
OID earned during the time you held the bond,Investment property. Investment property is applies to obligations with a fixed maturity date
$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annuala capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale or not more than 1 year from the date of issue.
interest also is not taxable. However, you musttrade generally is a capital gain or loss. Acquisition discount is the stated redemption
report the unearned part of OID ($127) as aprice at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc. capital gain.tion.These are capital assets except when they are However, do not treat these gains as incomeheld for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from Long-term debt instruments issued afterto the extent you previously included the dis-their sale or trade generally is a capital gain or 1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before Julycount in income. See Discount on Short-Termloss. 2, 1982, if a government instrument). If youObligations in chapter 1 for more information.
sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of theseStocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of Short-term nongovernment obligations. debt instruments, the part of your gain that is notthese, including stock received as a dividend, Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli- more than your ratable share of OID at the timeare capital assets except when they are held for gations as ordinary income up to your ratable of sale or redemption is ordinary income. Thesale by a securities dealer. However, see share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga- rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however, thereLosses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock tions with a fixed maturity date of not more than was an intention to call the debt instrumentand Losses on Small Business Investment 1 year from the date of issue. before maturity, all of your gain that is not moreCompany Stock, later. However, to the extent you previously in- than the entire OID is treated as ordinary incomecluded the discount in income, you do not havePersonal use property. Property held for per- at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxableto include it in income again. See Discount onsonal use only, rather than for investment, is a gain also applies to corporate instruments is-Short-Term Obligations  in chapter 1 for morecapital asset, and you must report a gain from its sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com-information.sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot mitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, and
Tax-exempt state and local governmentdeduct a loss from selling personal use property. at all times thereafter.
bonds. If these bonds were originally issued
Capital asset treatment for self-created mu- Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov-at a discount before September 4, 1982, or you
sical works. You can elect to treat musical ernment bond for $700 at original issue on Aprilacquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your
compositions and copyrights in musical works 1, 1983, and sold it for $900 on April 21, 2011,part of OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure
as capital assets when you sell or exchange for a $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000.your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these
them if: At the time of original issue, there was no inten-bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part
tion to call the bond before maturity. You haveof OID.• Your personal efforts created the property, held the bond for 336 full months. Do not countIf the bonds were issued after September 3,or the additional days that are less than a full1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-
• You acquired the property under circum- month. The number of complete months fromcrease the adjusted basis by your part of OID to
stances (for example, by gift) entitling you date of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30figure gain or loss. For more information on the
to the basis of the person who created the years). The fraction 336/360 multiplied by thebasis of these bonds, see Discounted
property or for whom it was prepared or discount of $300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal totax-exempt obligations  under Stocks and
produced. $280. This is your ratable share of OID for theBonds, earlier in this chapter.
period you owned the bond. You must treat anyAny gain from market discount is usually
You must make a separate election for each part of the gain up to $280 as ordinary income.taxable on disposition or redemption of
musical composition (or copyright in a musical As a result, the entire $200 gain is treated astax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bonds
work) sold or exchanged during the tax year. ordinary income.before May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis-
You must make the election on or before the due count is capital gain. If you bought the bonds
date (including extensions) of the income tax after April 30, 1993, the gain from market dis- Long-term debt instruments issued after
return for the tax year of the sale or exchange. May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-count is ordinary income.
You must make the election on Form 8949 by ernment instrument). If you hold one of theseYou figure market discount by subtracting
treating the sale or exchange as the sale or debt instruments, you must include a part of OIDthe price you paid for the bond from the sum of
exchange of a capital asset, according to the in your gross income each year you own thethe original issue price of the bond and the
2011 Schedule D instructions. instrument. Your basis in that debt instrument isamount of accumulated OID from the date of
increased by the amount of OID that you haveYou can revoke the election if you have IRS issue that represented interest to any earlier
included in your gross income. See Original Is-approval. To get IRS approval, you must submit holders. For more information, see Market Dis-
sue Discount (OID) in chapter 1.a request for a letter ruling under the appropriate count Bonds in chapter 1.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 53

Page 54 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you sell or trade the debt instrument before Report the sale or trade of a market discount Deposit in Insolvent or 
maturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if bond on Form 8949, Part I, line 1, or Part II, line Bankrupt Financial Institution
at the time the instrument was originally issued 3, whichever is appropriate. If the sale or trade
If you lose money you have on deposit in a bank,there was an intention to call it before its matur- results in a gain and you did not choose to
credit union, or other financial institution thatity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the include market discount in income currently,
becomes insolvent or bankrupt, you may be ableextent of the entire OID reduced by any amounts enter ªOº in column (b) and in column (g) enter to deduct your loss in one of three ways.of OID previously includible in your income. In the amount of the accrued market discount as a
this case, the rest of the gain is capital gain. negative number. Also report the amount of ac- • Ordinary loss.
crued market discount in column (g) as interestAn intention to call a debt instrument before • Casualty loss.maturity means there is a written or oral agree- income on Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040),
ment or understanding not provided for in the • Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capitalline 1, and identify it as ªAccrued Market Dis-
debt instrument between the issuer and original loss).count.º
holder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru- Report your sales or trades of a marketment before maturity. In the case of debt instru- Ordinary loss or casualty loss. If you candiscount bond on Form 8949 with thements that are part of an issue, the agreement or reasonably estimate your loss, you can choosecorrect box (A, B, or C) checked for
TIPunderstanding must be between the issuer and to treat the estimated loss as either an ordinarythese transactions. See Form 8949 and thethe original holders of a substantial amount of loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Either2011 Instructions for Schedule D.the debt instruments in the issue. way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-
tion.Example 1. On February 2, 2009, you Retirement of debt instrument. Any amount If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as abought at original issue for $7,600, Jones Cor- you receive on the retirement of a debt instru- miscellaneous itemized deduction on Scheduleporation's 10-year, 5% bond which has a stated ment is treated in the same way as if you had A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum amountredemption price at maturity of $10,000. On sold or traded that instrument. you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you areFebruary 4, 2011, you sold the bond for $9,040.
married filing separately) reduced by any ex-Assume you have included $334 of OID in your
pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss isgross income (including the amount accrued for Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligation subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income2011) and increased your basis in the bond by of an individual issued with OID after March 1, limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinarythat amount. Your basis is now $7,934. If at the 1984, you generally must include the OID in your loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.time of the original issue there was no intention income currently, and your gain or loss on its
to call the bond before maturity, your gain of If you claim a casualty loss, attach Formsale or retirement is generally capital gain or
$1,106 ($9,040 amount realized minus $7,934 4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.loss. An exception to this treatment applies if theadjusted basis) is capital gain. Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your totalobligation is a loan between individuals and all
casualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%the following requirements are met.Example 2. If, in Example 1, at the time of of your adjusted gross income.
• The lender is not in the business of lend-original issue there was an intention to call the You cannot choose either of these methodsbond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinary ing money. if:income. You figure this as follows: • The amount of the loan, plus the amount • You own at least 1% of the financial insti-of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,0001) Entire OID ($10,000 stated tution,or less.redemption price at maturity minus • You are an officer of the institution, or$7,600 issue price) ......... . $2,400 • Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-
2) Minus: Amount previously included • You are related to such an owner or of-cipal purposes of the loan.in income ............... . 334 ficer. You are related if you and the owner
3) Maximum amount of ordinary or officer are ªrelated parties,º as definedIf the exception applies, or the obligation wasincome ................. . $2,066 earlier under Related Party Transactions,issued before March 2, 1984, you do not include
or if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, orthe OID in your income currently. When you sellBecause the amount in (3) is more than your niece of the owner or officer.or redeem the obligation, the part of your gaingain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in- that is not more than your accrued share of OIDcome. If the actual loss that is finally determined isat that time is ordinary income. The rest of the more than the amount you deducted as an esti-gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the sale mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as aMarket discount bonds. If the debt instru- or redemption is capital loss. bad debt. If the actual loss is less than thement has market discount and you chose to
amount deducted as an estimated loss, youinclude the discount in income as it accrued,
must include in income (in the final determina-increase your basis in the debt instrument by the Bearer Obligations tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov-accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on
eries  in Publication 525, Taxable andits disposition. If you did not choose to include You cannot deduct any loss on an obligation
Nontaxable Income.the discount in income as it accrued, you must required to be in registered form that is instead
report gain as ordinary interest income up to the held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on the
instrument's accrued market discount. See Mar- sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi- Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choose
ket Discount Bonds in chapter 1. The rest of the to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty lossnary income. However, if the issuer was subject
gain is capital gain. or an ordinary loss, you wait until the year theto a tax when the obligation was issued, then
amount of the actual loss is determined andyou can deduct any loss, and any gain mayHowever, a different rule applies if you dis-
deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.qualify for capital gain treatment.pose of a market discount bond that was:
Report it as a short-term capital loss on Form
• Issued before July 19, 1984, and 8949, Part I, line 1, as explained under How toObligations required to be in registered report bad debts  in Nonbusiness Bad Debts ,• Purchased by you before May 1, 1993. form. Any obligation must be in registered later.form unless:
In that case, any gain is treated as interest • It is issued by a natural person,income up to the amount of your deferred inter- Sale of Annuity• It is not of a type offered to the public,est deduction for the year you dispose of the
bond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (The The part of any gain on the sale of an annuity• It has a maturity at the date of issue of notlimit on the interest deduction for market dis- contract before its maturity date that is based onmore than 1 year, orcount bonds is discussed in chapter 3 under interest accumulated on the contract is ordinary
• It was issued before 1983.When To Deduct Investment Interest.) income.
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can contact the IRS to get these rates. See or currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinaryConversion Transactions
chapter 5 for information on contacting the IRS. property, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or-
Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversion dinary property or obligations are those that can-Net investment. To determine your net in-transaction is treated as ordinary income. This not produce capital gain or loss under anyvestment in a conversion transaction, includeapplies to gain on the disposition or other termi- circumstances.) For example, the offset or exer-the fair market value of any position at the time itnation of any position you held as part of a cise of a futures contract that protects againstbecomes part of the transaction. This meansconversion transaction you entered into after price changes in your business inventory resultsyour net investment generally will be the totalApril 30, 1993. in an ordinary gain or loss.amount you invested, less any amount you re-A conversion transaction is any transaction For more information about hedging transac-ceived for entering into the position (for exam-that meets both of these tests. tions, see Regulations section 1.1221-2. Also,ple, a premium you received for writing a call). see Hedging Transactions under Section 12561. Substantially all of your expected return Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.Position with built-in loss. A special rule ap-from the transaction is due to the time
plies when a position with a built-in loss be- If you have multiple transactions in thevalue of your net investment. In other
comes part of a conversion transaction. A commodity futures market during thewords, the return on your investment is, in
built-in loss is any loss you would have realized year, the burden of proof is on you tosubstance, like interest on a loan.
RECORDS
if you had disposed of or otherwise terminated show which transactions are hedging transac-2. The transaction is one of the following. the position at its fair market value at the time it tions. Clearly identify any hedging transactions
became part of the conversion transaction. on your books and records before the end of thea. A straddle as defined under Straddles, When applying the conversion transaction day you entered into the transaction. It may belater, but including any set of offsetting rules to a position with a built-in loss, use the helpful to have separate brokerage accounts forpositions on stock established before position's fair market value at the time it became your hedging and nonhedging transactions. ForOctober 22, 2004. part of the transaction. But, when you dispose of specific requirements concerning identification
or otherwise terminate the position in a transac-b. Any transaction in which you acquire of hedging transactions and the underlying item,
tion in which you recognize gain or loss, youproperty (whether or not actively traded) items, or aggregate risk being hedged, see Reg-
must recognize the built-in loss. The conversionat substantially the same time that you ulations section 1.1221-2(f).
transaction rules do not affect whether thecontract to sell the same property, or
built-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capitalsubstantially identical property, at a
loss.price set in the contract. Gains From Certain Constructive
Ownership Transactionsc. Any other transaction that is marketed Netting rule for certain conversion transac-
or sold as producing capital gains from tions. Before determining the amount of gain
If you have a gain from a constructive ownershipa transaction described in (1). treated as ordinary income, you can net certain
transaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in-gains and losses from positions of the same
volving a financial asset (discussed later) andconversion transaction. To do this, you have to
the gain normally would be treated as long-termAmount treated as ordinary income. The dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe-
capital gain, all or part of the gain may be treatedamount of gain treated as ordinary income is the riod that is within a single tax year. You cannot
instead as ordinary income. In addition, if anysmaller of: net the built-in loss against the gain.
gain is treated as ordinary income, your tax is• The gain recognized on the disposition or You can net gains and losses only if increased by an interest charge.other termination of the position, or you identify the conversion transaction
Constructive ownership transactions. Theas an identified netting transaction on
RECORDS• The ªapplicable imputed income amount.º following are constructive ownership transac-your books and records. Each position of the
tions.conversion transaction must be identified before
Applicable imputed income amount. Figure the end of the day on which the position be- • A notional principal contract in which youthis amount as follows. comes part of the conversion transaction. For have the right to receive all or substantiallyconversion transactions entered into before all of the investment yield on a financial1. Figure the amount of interest that would February 20, 1996, this requirement is met if the asset and you are obligated to reimbursehave accrued on your net investment in identification was made by that date. all or substantially all of any decline inthe conversion transaction for the period
value of the financial asset.ending on the earlier of: Options dealers and commodities traders.
These rules do not apply to options dealers and • A forward or futures contract to acquire aa. The date you dispose of the position, or commodities traders. financial asset.
b. The date the transaction stops being a How to report. Use Form 6781 to report con- • The holding of a call option and writing ofconversion transaction. version transactions. See the instructions for a put option on a financial asset at sub-
To figure this amount, use an interest rate lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781. stantially the same strike price and matur-
equal to 120% of the ªapplicable rate,º de- ity date.
fined later.
Commodity Futures This provision does not apply if all the posi-2. Subtract from (1) the amount treated as
tions are marked to market. Marked to marketordinary income from any earlier disposi- A commodity futures contract is a standardized, rules for section 1256 contracts are discussed intion or other termination of a position held exchange-traded contract for the sale or detail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked toas part of the same conversion transac- purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at a Market, earlier.tion. future date for a fixed price.
Financial asset. A financial asset, for thisIf the contract is a regulated futures contract,Applicable rate. If the term of the conver- purpose, is any equity interest in a pass-throughthe rules described earlier under Section 1256sion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rate entity. Pass-through entities include partner-Contracts Marked to Market apply to it.is the federal short-term rate in effect under ships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest-The termination of a commodity futures con-section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code ment companies, and real estate investmenttract generally results in capital gain or lossduring the period of the conversion transaction, trusts.unless the contract is a hedging transaction.compounded daily.
In all other cases, the applicable rate is the Hedging transaction.  A futures contract that Amount of ordinary income. Long-term cap-
ªapplicable federal rateº determined as if the is a hedging transaction generally produces or- ital gain is treated as ordinary income to the
conversion transaction were a debt instrument dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg- extent it is more than the net underlying
and compounded semi-annually. ing transaction if you enter into the contract in long-term capital gain. The net underlying
The rates discussed above are published by the ordinary course of your business primarily to long-term capital gain is the net capital gain you
the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, you manage the risk of interest rate or price changes would have realized if you acquired the asset for
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 55

Page 56 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
its fair market value on the date the constructive of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat- $250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock.
ownership transaction was opened and sold the ment. To claim a deductible loss on stock issued The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figure
asset for its fair market value on the date the to your partnership, you must have been a part- the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis of
transaction was closed. If you do not establish ner when the stock was issued and have re- your stock is $250 ($1,000 minus $750). If you
the amount of net underlying long-term capital mained so until the time of the loss. You add later sell the section 1244 stock for $200, your
gain by clear and convincing evidence, it is your distributive share of the partnership loss to $800 loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capital
treated as zero. any individual section 1244 stock loss you may loss of $750.
have before applying the ordinary loss limit.More information. For more information Contributions to capital. If the basis of yourStock distributed by partnership. If yourabout constructive ownership transactions, see section 1244 stock has increased, through con-partnership distributes the stock to you, you can-section 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code. tributions to capital or otherwise, you must treatnot treat any later loss on that stock as an this increase as applying to stock that is notordinary loss. section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinaryLosses on Section 1244 loss on its sale.Stock sold through underwriter. Stock(Small Business) Stock sold through an underwriter is not section 1244
Example. You buy 100 shares of sectionstock unless the underwriter only acted as aSubject to the limitations discussed under Ordi- 1244 stock for $10,000. You are the originalselling agent for the corporation.nary loss limit, later, you can deduct as an ordi- owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution tonary loss, rather than as a capital loss, a loss on capital that increases the total basis of the 100Stock dividends and reorganizations. Stockthe sale, trade, or worthlessness of section 1244 shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 sharesyou receive as a stock dividend qualifies asstock. Report the loss on Form 4797, Sales of for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You cansection 1244 stock if:Business Property, line 10. Any loss in excess of deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 ×  $10,000/$12,000)• You receive it from a small business cor-the amounts described in Ordinary loss limit , as an ordinary loss under these rules. The re-poration in which you own stock, andshould be reported on Form 8949. maining $500 is a capital loss.Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capital • The stock you own meets the require- Recordkeeping. You must keep rec-gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands. ments when the stock dividend is distrib- ords sufficient to show your stock quali-Do not offset gains against losses that are within uted. fies as section 1244 stock. Yourthe ordinary loss limit, explained later in this
RECORDS
records must also distinguish your section 1244discussion, even if the transactions are in stock If you trade your section 1244 stock for new stock from any other stock you own in the corpo-of the same company. Report the gain on Form stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza- ration.8949. tion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that isIf you must figure a net operating loss, any only a change in identity, form, or place of organ-ordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stock ization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if theis a business loss. Losses on Small Businessstock you trade meets the requirements when
Investment Company Stockthe trade occurs.Ordinary loss limit. The amount you can de-
If you hold section 1244 stock and otherduct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000 A small business investment company (SBIC) isstock in the same corporation, not all of the stockeach year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000, one that is licensed and operated under theyou receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani-even if only one spouse has this type of loss. If Small Business Investment Act of 1958.zation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Onlyyour loss is $110,000 and your spouse has no If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you canthat part based on the section 1244 stock youloss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinary deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capitalhold will qualify.loss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is a loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless-capital loss. ness of that stock. A gain from the sale or tradeExample. Your basis for 100 shares of X of that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset yourSection 1244 (small business) stock. This is common stock is $1,000. These shares qualify gains and losses, even if they are on stock of thestock issued for money or property (other than as section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stock same company.stock and securities) in a domestic small busi- dividend, you receive 50 more shares of com-
ness corporation. During its 5 most recent tax mon stock, the basis of which is determined from How to report. You report this type of ordinaryyears before the loss, this corporation must the 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are also loss on Form 4797, Part II, line 10. In addition tohave derived more than 50% of its gross re- section 1244 stock. the information required by the form, you mustceipts from other than royalties, rents, divi- If you also own stock in the corporation that include the name and address of the companydends, interest, annuities, and gains from sales is not section 1244 stock when you receive the that issued the stock. If applicable, also includeand trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora- stock dividend, you must divide the shares you the reason the stock is worthless and the ap-tion was in existence for at least 1 year, but less receive as a dividend between the section 1244 proximate date it became worthless. Report athan 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax stock and the other stock. Only the shares from capital gain from the sale of SBIC stock on Formyears ending before the loss. If the corporation the former can be section 1244 stock. 8949.was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% test
applies to the entire period the corporation was Contributed property. To determine ordinary Short sale. If you close a short sale of SBICin existence before the day of the loss. However, loss on section 1244 stock you receive in a trade stock with other SBIC stock you bought only forif the corporation's deductions (other than the for property, you have to reduce the basis of the that purpose, any loss you have on the sale is anet operating loss and dividends received de- stock if: capital loss. See Short Sales, later in this chap-ductions) were more than its gross income dur- ter, for more information.• The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of theing this period, this 50% test does not apply. property, immediately before the trade,The corporation must have been largely an was more than its fair market value, and Holding Periodoperating company for ordinary loss treatment
to apply. • The basis of the stock is determined by If you sold or traded investment property, youIf the stock was issued before July 19, 1984, the basis of the property. must determine your holding period for the prop-the stock must be common stock. If issued after Reduce the basis of the stock by the difference erty. Your holding period determines whetherJuly 18, 1984, the stock may be either common between the adjusted basis of the property and any capital gain or loss was a short-term or aor preferred. For more information about the its fair market value at the time of the trade. You long-term capital gain or loss.requirements of a small business corporation or reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss.the qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec- Long-term or short-term. If you hold invest-Do not reduce the basis of the stock for anytion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and its ment property more than 1 year, any capital gainother purpose.regulations. or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If you
The stock must be issued to the person tak- Example. You transfer property with an ad- hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gain
ing the loss. You must be the original owner justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value of or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To determine how long you held the invest- Inherited property. If you inherited property Commodity futures. Futures transactions in
ment property, begin counting on the date after from someone who died before or after 2010, or any commodity subject to the rules of a board of
the day you acquired the property. The day you from someone who died in 2010 and the execu- trade or commodity exchange are long term if
disposed of the property is part of your holding tor of the decedent's estate did not elect to file the contract was held for more than 6 months.
period. Form 8939, your capital gain or loss on any later Your holding period for a commodity re-
disposition of that property is treated as ceived in satisfaction of a commodity futures
Example. If you bought investment property long-term gain or loss, regardless of how long contract, other than a regulated futures contract
on February 3, 2010, and sold it on February 3, you held the property. If you acquired the prop- subject to Internal Revenue Code section 1256,
2011, your holding period is not more than 1 erty from someone who died in 2010 and the includes your holding period for the futures con-
year and you have a short-term capital gain or executor made the election to file Form 8939, tract if you held the contract as a capital asset.
loss. If you sold it on February 4, 2011, your see Publication 4895 to determine your holding
Securities futures contract. Your holding pe-holding period is more than 1 year and you have period.
riod for a security received in satisfaction of aa long-term capital gain or loss.
Real property bought. To figure how long securities futures contract, other than one that isSecurities traded on an established market. you have held real property bought under an a section 1256 contract, includes your holdingFor securities traded on an established securi- unconditional contract, begin counting on the period for the futures contract if you held theties market, your holding period begins the day day after you received title to it or on the day contract as a capital asset.after the trade date you bought the securities, after you took possession of it and assumed the Your holding period for a security received inand ends on the trade date you sold them. burdens and privileges of ownership, whichever satisfaction of a securities futures contract to
happened first. However, taking delivery or pos-Do not confuse the trade date with the sell, other than one that is a section 1256 con-
session of real property under an option agree-settlement date, which is the date by tract, is determined by the rules that apply to
ment is not enough to start the holding period.which the stock must be delivered and short sales, discussed later under Short Sales.
CAUTION
!
The holding period cannot start until there is anpayment must be made.
actual contract of sale. The holding period of the Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6
seller cannot end before that time. months or less. If you hold stock in a mutualExample. You are a cash method, calendar
fund (or other regulated investment company) oryear taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De- Real property repossessed. If you sell real real estate investment trust (REIT) for 6 monthscember 29, 2011. According to the rules of the property but keep a security interest in it, and or less and then sell it at a loss (other than understock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery then later repossess the property under the a periodic liquidation plan), special rules mayof the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on terms of the sales contract, your holding period apply.January 4, 2012. You received payment of the for a later sale includes the period you held the
sale price on that same day. Report your gain on property before the original sale and the period Capital gain distributions received. The
your 2011 return, even though you received the after the repossession. Your holding period loss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi-
payment in 2012. The gain is long term or short does not include the time between the original dends you received, as explained later) is
term depending on whether you held the stock sale and the repossession. That is, it does not treated as a long-term capital loss up to the total
more than 1 year. Your holding period ended on include the period during which the first buyer of any capital gain distributions you received
December 29. If you had sold the stock at a loss, held the property. and your share of any undistributed capital
you would also report it on your 2011 return. gains. Any remaining loss is short-term capitalStock dividends. The holding period for stock loss.U.S. Treasury notes and bonds. The holding you received as a taxable stock dividend beginsperiod of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold at on the date of distribution. Reinvested distributions. If your dividendsauction on the basis of yield starts the day after The holding period for new stock you re- and capital gain distributions are reinvested inthe Secretary of the Treasury, through news ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins on new shares, the holding period of each newreleases, gives notification of acceptance to the same day as the holding period of the old share begins the day after that share was pur-successful bidders. The holding period of U.S. stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired in chased. Therefore, if you sell both the newTreasury notes and bonds sold through an offer- a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock or shares and the original shares, you might haveing on a subscription basis at a specified yield securities in a controlled corporation. both short-term and long-term gains and losses.starts the day after the subscription is submitted.
Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding periodAutomatic investment service.  In determin- Example. On April 8, 2011, you bought afor nontaxable stock rights includes the holdinging your holding period for shares bought by the mutual fund share for $20. On June 24, 2011,period of the underlying stock. The holding pe-bank or other agent, full shares are considered the mutual fund paid a capital gain distribution ofriod for stock acquired through the exercise ofbought first and any fractional shares are con- $2 a share, which is taxed as a long-term capitalstock rights begins on the date the right wassidered bought last. Your holding period starts gain. On July 14, 2011, you sold the share forexercised.on the day after the bank's purchase date. If a $17.50. If it were not for the capital gain distribu-
share was bought over more than one purchase tion, your loss would be a short-term loss ofSection 1256 contracts. Gains or losses on
date, your holding period for that share is a split $2.50 ($20 − $17.50). However, the part of thesection 1256 contracts open at the end of the
holding period. A part of the share is considered loss that is not more than the capital gain distri-year, or terminated during the year, are treated
to have been bought on each date that stock bution ($2) must be reported as a long-termas 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-
was bought by the bank with the proceeds of capital loss. The remaining $0.50 of the loss canless of how long the contracts were held. See
available funds. be reported as a short-term capital loss.Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , ear-
lier.Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investment Exempt-interest dividends on mutual fund
property in a trade for other investment property stock. If you received exempt-interest divi-Option exercised. Your holding period for
and your basis for the new property is deter- dends on the stock, at least part of your loss isproperty you acquire when you exercise an op-
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the disallowed. You can deduct only the amount oftion begins the day after you exercise the option.
old property, your holding period for the new loss that is more than the exempt-interest divi-
Wash sales. Your holding period for substan-property begins on the day following the date dends. Report the loss as a short-term capital
tially identical stock or securities you acquire in ayou acquired the old property. loss. On Form 8949, Part I, line 1, column (e),
wash sale includes the period you held the old increase the sales price by the amount of ex-Property received as a gift. If you receive a stock or securities. empt-interest dividends, but do not increase it togift of property and your basis is determined by more than the cost or other basis shown inthe donor's adjusted basis, your holding period Qualified small business stock. Your hold- column (f).is considered to have started on the same day ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-free
the donor's holding period started. rollover of gain from a sale of qualified small For more information on Form 8949
If your basis is determined by the fair market business stock, described later under Gains on and Schedule D, see Schedule D,
value of the property, your holding period starts Qualified Small Business Stock , includes the Form 8949, and the 2011 Instructions
TIP
on the day after the date of the gift. period you held the old stock. for Schedule D.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 57

Page 58 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. On January 7, 2011, you bought Basis in bad debt required. To deduct a Deductible in year paid. Unless you have
a mutual fund share for $40. On February 4, rights against the borrower, discussed next, abad debt, you must have a basis in it Ðthat is,
2011, the mutual fund paid a $5 dividend from payment you make on a loan you guaranteed isyou must have already included the amount in
tax-exempt interest, which is not taxable to you. deductible in the year you make the payment.your income or loaned out your cash. For exam-
On February 11, 2011, you sold the share for ple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for Rights against the borrower. When you$34. If it were not for the tax-exempt dividend, court-ordered child support not paid to you by make payment on a loan you guaranteed, youyour loss would be $6 ($40 − $34). However, your former spouse. If you are a cash method may have the right to take the place of the lenderyou must increase the sales price from $34 to taxpayer (most individuals are), you generally (the right of subrogation). The debt is then owed$39 (to account for the $5 portion of the loss that cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid to you. If you have this right or some other rightis not deductible). You can deduct only $1 as a salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends, to demand payment from the borrower, you can-short-term capital loss. and similar items. not take a bad debt deduction until these rights
become totally worthless.Loss on stock that paid qualified dividends. When deductible. You can take a bad debt
Any loss on the sale or trade of stock must be deduction only in the year the debt becomes Debts owed by political parties. You cannot
treated as a long-term capital loss to the extent worthless. You do not have to wait until a debt is take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for any
you received, from that stock, qualified divi- due to determine whether it is worthless. A debt worthless debt owed to you by:
dends (defined in chapter 1) that are extraordi- becomes worthless when there is no longer any • A political party;nary dividends. This is true regardless of how chance that the amount owed will be paid.
long you actually held the stock. Generally, an • A national, state, or local committee of aIt is not necessary to go to court if you canextraordinary dividend is a dividend that equals political party; orshow that a judgment from the court would beor exceeds 10% (5% in the case of preferred uncollectible. You must only show that you have • A committee, association, or organizationstock) of your adjusted basis in the stock. taken reasonable steps to collect the debt. that either accepts contributions or spendsBankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi- money to influence elections.Nonbusiness Bad Debts dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of
an unsecured and unpreferred debt.If someone owes you money that you cannot Mechanics' and suppliers' liens. WorkersIf your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in acollect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to and material suppliers may file liens againstfinancial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent ordeduct the amount owed to you when you figure property because of debts owed by a builder orBankrupt Financial Institution, earlier.your tax for the year the debt becomes worth- contractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo-
less. Filing a claim for refund. If you do not sure and loss of your property, you are entitled
deduct a bad debt on your original return for theThere are two kinds of bad debtsÐbusiness to repayment from the builder or contractor. If
year it becomes worthless, you can file a claimand nonbusiness. A business bad debt, gener- the debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debt
for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To doally, is one that comes from operating your trade deduction.
this, use Form 1040X to amend your return foror business and is deductible as a business loss.
Insolvency of contractor. You can take athe year the debt became worthless. You mustAll other bad debts are nonbusiness bad debts
bad debt deduction for the amount you depositfile it within 7 years from the date your originaland are deductible as short-term capital losses.
with a contractor if the contractor becomes insol-return for that year had to be filed, or 2 years
vent and you are unable to recover your deposit.Example. An architect made personal loans from the date you paid the tax, whichever is
If the deposit is for work unrelated to your tradeto several friends who were not clients. She later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthless
or business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc-could not collect on some of these loans. They securities generally must be filed within 3 years
tion.are deductible only as nonbusiness bad debts from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from the
because the architect was not in the business of date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) For more
Secondary liability on home mortgage. Iflending money and the loans do not have any information about filing a claim, see Publication
the buyer of your home assumes your mort-relationship to her business. 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re-and Claims for Refund.
payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyerBusiness bad debts. For information on busi-
defaults on the loan and the house is then soldness bad debts of an employee, see Publication Loan guarantees. If you guarantee a debt for less than the amount outstanding on the529. For information on other business bad that becomes worthless, you cannot take a bad mortgage, you may have to make up the differ-debts, see chapter 10 of Publication 535. debt deduction for your payments on the debt ence. You can take a bad debt deduction for theunless you can show either that your reason for amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if youDeductible nonbusiness bad debts. To be making the guarantee was to protect your in- cannot collect it from the buyer.deductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to- vestment or that you entered the guarantee
tally worthless. You cannot deduct a partly transaction with a profit motive. If you make the Worthless securities. If you own securitiesworthless nonbusiness debt. guarantee as a favor to friends and do not re- that become totally worthless, you can take aceive any consideration in return, your pay-Genuine debt required. A debt must be deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. Seements are considered a gift and you cannot takegenuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is Worthless Securities  under What Is a Sale ora deduction.genuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela- Trade, earlier in this chapter.
tionship based on a valid and enforceable obli- Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin- Recovery of a bad debt. If you deducted agation to repay a fixed or determinable sum of cipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation, bad debt and in a later tax year you recovermoney. guaranteed payment of a bank loan the corpora- (collect) all or part of it, you may have to include
Loan or gift. For a bad debt, you must show tion received. The corporation defaulted on the the amount you recover in your gross income.
there was an intention at the time of the transac- loan and Henry made full payment. Because he However, you can exclude from gross income
tion to make a loan and not a gift. If you lend guaranteed the loan to protect his investment in the amount recovered up to the amount of the
money to a relative or friend with the under- the corporation, Henry can take a nonbusiness deduction that did not reduce your tax in the year
standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid- bad debt deduction. deducted. See Recoveries in Publication 525.
ered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a bad
debt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a bad Example 2. Milt and John are co-workers. How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi-
debt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela- Milt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note at ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on
tionship between you and the person or organi- their local credit union. John does not pay the Form 8949.
zation that owes you the money. note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off the On Form 8949, Part I, line 1, enter the name
note. However, since he did not enter into theWhen minor children borrow from their par- of the debtor and ªbad debt statement attachedº
guarantee agreement to protect an investmentents to pay for their basic needs, there is no in column (a). Enter your basis in the bad debt in
or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debtgenuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deducted column (f) and enter zero in column (e). Use a
deduction.for such a loan. separate line for each bad debt.
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Make sure you report your bad debt(s) Example. On May 6, 2011, you bought 100 Mixed Straddle Elections , later, for more infor-
(and any other short-term transactions shares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000. mation about these elections.
for which you did not receive a Form On September 7, 2011, you sold short 100
CAUTION
!
1099-B or substitute statement) on Form 8949 shares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. You
Reporting Substitute Paymentswith box C checked. made no other transactions involving Baker
stock for the rest of 2011 and the first 30 days ofFor each bad debt, attach a statement to If any broker transferred your securities for use2012. Your short sale is treated as a construc-your return that contains: in a short sale or similar transaction and re-tive sale of an appreciated financial position
ceived certain substitute dividend payments on• A description of the debt, including the because a sale of your Baker stock on the date
your behalf while the short sale was open, thatamount, and the date it became due; of the short sale would have resulted in a gain.
broker must give you a Form 1099-MISC or aYou recognize a $600 short-term capital gain• The name of the debtor, and any business similar statement reporting the amount of thesefrom the constructive sale and your new holdingor family relationship between you and the payments. Form 1099-MISC must be used forperiod in the Baker stock begins on Septemberdebtor; those substitute payments totaling $10 or more7.
that are known on the payment's record date to• The efforts you made to collect the debt;
be in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi-and
tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution,Short-Term or Long-Term• Why you decided the debt was worthless. or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, orCapital Gain or LossFor example, you could show that the bor- that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do notrower has declared bankruptcy, or that le- treat these substitute payments as dividends orAs a general rule, you determine whether yougal action to collect would probably not interest. Instead, report the substitute paymentshave short-term or long-term capital gain or lossresult in payment of any part of the debt. shown on Form 1099-MISC as ªOther incomeºon a short sale by the amount of time you actu-
on line 21 of Form 1040.ally hold the property eventually delivered to the
lender to close the short sale.Short Sales Substitute payment. A substitute payment
means a payment in lieu of:Example. Even though you do not own anyA short sale occurs when you agree to sell
stock of Ace Corporation, you contract to sellproperty you do not own (or own but do not wish • Tax-exempt interest (including OID) ac-
100 shares of it, which you borrow from yourto sell). You make this type of sale in two steps. crued while the short sale was open, and
broker. After 13 months, when the price of the• You sell short. You borrow property and • A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is afterstock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Acedeliver it to a buyer. the transfer of stock for use in a short saleCorporation stock and immediately deliver them
and before the closing of the short sale.to your broker to close out the short sale. Your• You close the sale. At a later date, you
loss is a short-term capital loss because youreither buy substantially identical property
holding period for the delivered property is lessand deliver it to the lender or make deliv- Payments in lieu of dividends. If you borrow
than 1 day.ery out of property you held at the time of stock to make a short sale, you may have to
the sale. Delivery of property borrowed remit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi-Special rules. Special rules may apply tofrom another lender does not satisfy this dends distributed while you maintain your shortgains and losses from short sales of stocks,requirement. position. You can deduct these payments only ifsecurities, and commodity and securities futures you hold the short sale open at least 46 days(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac- (more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinaryYou do not realize gain or loss until delivery of quired property substantially identical to prop- dividend as defined later) and you itemize yourproperty to close the short sale. You will have a erty that sold short. But if the amount of property deductions.capital gain or loss if the property used to close you sold short is more than the amount of that You deduct these payments as investmentthe short sale is a capital asset. substantially identical property, the special rules interest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter-do not apply to the gain or loss on the excess.As a general rule, if you enter into a short sale est Expenses in chapter 3 for more information.
on or after January 2011, your short sale will be Gains and holding period. If you held the If you close the short sale by the 45th day
reported on Form 1099-B for the year in which substantially identical property for 1 year or less after the date of the short sale (1 year or less in
you deliver the security to satisfy the short sale on the date of the short sale, or if you acquired the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can-
obligation. For short sales entered into before the substantially identical property after the not deduct the payment in lieu of the dividend
2011, your broker should have reported your short sale and by the date of closing the short you make to the lender. Instead, you must in-
short sale on a Form 1099-B in the year in which sale, then: crease the basis of the stock used to close the
the short sale was opened. short sale by that amount.
Rule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close To determine how long a short sale is kept
Reporting a short sale. Report any short sale the short sale is a short-term capital gain, open, do not include any period during which
on Form 8949 in the year it closes. If a short sale and you hold, have an option to buy, or are under a
closed in 2011 but you did not get Form 1099-B contractual obligation to buy substantially identi-Rule 2. The holding period of the substan-(or substitute statement) for it because you en- cal stock or securities.tially identical property begins on the datetered into it before 2011, report it on a Form If your payment is made for a liquidatingof the closing of the short sale or on the8949 with box C checked. In column (a), enter distribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or ifdate of the sale of this property, whichever(for example) ª100 sh. XYZ Co. Ð 2010 short you buy more shares equal to a stock distribu-comes first.sale closed.º tion issued on the borrowed stock during your
short position, you have a capital expense. YouException if property becomes worthless. Losses. If, on the date of the short sale, you must add the payment to the cost of the stockA different rule applies if the property sold short held substantially identical property for more sold short.becomes substantially worthless. In that case, than 1 year, any loss you realize on the short
you must recognize gain as if the short sale were Exception. If you close the short sale withinsale is a long-term capital loss, even if you held
closed when the property became substantially 45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay inthe property used to close the sale for 1 year or
worthless. lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to theless. Certain losses on short sales of stock or
extent the payments are more than the amountsecurities are also subject to wash sale treat-Exception for constructive sales. Entering you receive as ordinary income from the lenderment. For information, see Wash Sales, later.into a short sale may cause you to be treated as of the stock for the use of collateral with the short
having made a constructive sale of property. In Mixed straddles. Under certain elections, sale. This exception does not apply to payments
that case, you will have to recognize gain on the you can avoid the treatment of loss from a short in place of extraordinary dividends.
date of the constructive sale. For details, see sale as long term under the special rule. These
Constructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po- elections are for positions that are part of a Extraordinary dividends. If the amount of
sitions, earlier. mixed straddle. See Other elections  under any dividend you receive on a share of preferred
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 59

Page 60 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case of closing of a short sale, discussed later in this is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25
other stock) of the amount realized on the short section under Short sales. shares bought on December 28, 2010, is in-
sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi- creased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if younary dividend. + $250).sell common stock at a loss and, at the same
time, buy warrants for common stock of the Example 2. You bought 100 shares of MWash Sales same corporation. But if you sell warrants at a stock on September 24, 2010. On February 3,loss and, at the same time, buy common stock in 2011, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss.You cannot deduct losses from sales or trades the same corporation, the wash sale rules apply On each of the 4 days from February 8, 2011, toof stock or securities in a wash sale unless the only if the warrants and stock are considered February 11, 2011, you bought 50 shares ofloss was incurred in the ordinary course of your substantially identical, as discussed next. substantially identical stock. You cannot deductbusiness as a dealer in stock or securities.
your $1,000 loss. You must add half the disal-A wash sale occurs when you sell or trade Substantially identical. In determining
lowed loss ($500) to the basis of the 50 sharesstock or securities at a loss and within 30 days whether stock or securities are substantially
bought on February 8. Add the other half ($500)before or after the sale you: identical, you must consider all the facts and
to the basis of the shares bought on February 9.circumstances in your particular case. Ordinar-1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi- ily, stocks or securities of one corporation are Loss and gain on same day. Loss from aties, not considered substantially identical to stocks wash sale of one block of stock or securitiesor securities of another corporation. However,2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se- cannot be used to reduce any gains on identicalthey may be substantially identical in somecurities in a fully taxable trade, blocks sold the same day.cases. For example, in a reorganization, the3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub- stocks and securities of the predecessor and Example. During 2005, you bought 100stantially identical stock or securities, or successor corporations may be substantially shares of X stock on each of three occasions.identical.4. Acquire substantially identical stock for You paid $158 a share for the first block of 100Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor-your individual retirement account (IRA) or shares, $100 a share for the second block, andporation are not ordinarily considered substan-Roth IRA. $95 a share for the third block. On December 23,tially identical to the common stock of the same 2011, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 acorporation. However, where the bonds or pre- share. On January 6, 2012, you bought 250If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora- ferred stock are convertible into common stock shares of identical X stock. You cannot deducttion you control buys substantially identical of the same corporation, the relative values, the loss of $33 a share on the first block becausestock, you also have a wash sale. price changes, and other circumstances may within 30 days after the date of sale you boughtIf your loss was disallowed because of the make these bonds or preferred stock and the 250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, youwash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to the common stock substantially identical. For exam- cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale ofcost of the new stock or securities (except in (4) ple, preferred stock is substantially identical to the second and third blocks of stock by this loss.above). The result is your basis in the new stock the common stock if the preferred stock:or securities. This adjustment postpones the Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to a• Is convertible into common stock,loss deduction until the disposition of the new dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from astock or securities. Your holding period for the • Has the same voting rights as the com- transaction made in the ordinary course of busi-new stock or securities includes the holding pe- mon stock, ness.riod of the stock or securities sold.
• Is subject to the same dividend restric- Short sales. The wash sale rules apply to ations,Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stock loss realized on a short sale if you sell, or enterfor $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 and into another short sale of, substantially identical• Trades at prices that do not vary signifi-within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 shares stock or securities within a period beginning 30cantly from the conversion ratio, andof the same stock for $800. Because you bought days before the date the short sale is complete• Is unrestricted as to convertibility.substantially identical stock, you cannot deduct and ending 30 days after that date.your loss of $250 on the sale. However, you add For purposes of the wash sale rules, a shortthe disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of the More or less stock bought than sold. If the sale is considered complete on the date thenew stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the new number of shares of substantially identical stock short sale is entered into, if:stock, which is $1,050. or securities you buy within 30 days before or • On that date, you own stock or securitiesafter the sale is either more or less than the identical to those sold short (or by thatExample 2. You are an employee of a cor- number of shares you sold, you must determine date you enter into a contract or option toporation with an incentive pay plan. Under this the particular shares to which the wash sale acquire that stock or those securities), andplan, you are given 10 shares of the corpora- rules apply. You do this by matching the sharestion's stock as a bonus award. You include the bought with an equal number of the shares sold. • You later deliver the stock or securities tofair market value of the stock in your gross Match the shares bought in the same order that close the short sale.income as additional pay. You later sell these you bought them, beginning with the first sharesshares at a loss. If you receive another bonus bought. The shares or securities so matched are Otherwise, a short sale is not consideredaward of substantially identical stock within 30 subject to the wash sale rules. complete until the property is delivered to closedays of the sale, you cannot deduct your loss on the sale.the sale. Example 1. You bought 100 shares of M This treatment also applies to losses from
stock on September 24, 2010, for $5,000. On the sale, exchange, or termination of a securitiesOptions and futures contracts. The wash December 18, 2010, you bought 50 shares of futures contract to sell.sale rules apply to losses from sales or trades of substantially identical stock for $2,750. On De-contracts and options to acquire or sell stock or cember 28, 2010, you bought 25 shares of sub- Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares ofsecurities. They do not apply to losses from stantially identical stock for $1,125. On January stock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares ofsales or trades of commodity futures contracts 7, 2011, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares you the stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7,and foreign currencies. See Coordination of bought in September. You have a $1,000 loss you buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750.Loss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules under on the sale. However, because you bought 75 You close the short sale on November 17 byStraddles, later, for information about the tax shares of substantially identical stock within 30 delivering the shares bought on June 2. Youtreatment of losses on the disposition of posi- days before the sale, you cannot deduct the loss cannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750)tions in a straddle. ($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the loss because the date of entering into the short sale
Securities futures contract to sell. Losses ($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of the (October 6) is considered the date the sale is
from the sale, exchange, or termination of a 50 shares bought on December 18, 2010, is complete for wash sale purposes and you
securities futures contract to sell generally are increased by two-thirds (50 ÷  75) of the $750 bought substantially identical stock within 30
treated in the same manner as losses from the disallowed loss. The new basis of those shares days from that date.
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Residual interests in a REMIC. The wash gain because the stock underlying the option specified future date, a stated number of shares
sale rules generally will apply to the sale of your would have been a capital asset in your hands. of stock at a specified price.
residual interest in a real estate mortgage in- Holders of puts and calls. If you buy a put orExample 2. The facts are the same as investment conduit (REMIC) if, during the period a call, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capitalExample 1, except the stock decreases in valuebeginning 6 months before the sale of the inter- expenditure.and you sell the option for less than you paid forest and ending 6 months after that sale, you If you sell the put or the call before youit. Your loss is a capital loss.acquire any residual interest in any REMIC or exercise it, the difference between its cost andany interest in a taxable mortgage pool that is Option not exercised. If you have a loss be- the amount you receive for it is either acomparable to a residual interest. REMICs are cause you did not exercise an option to buy or long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de-discussed in chapter 1. sell, you are considered to have sold or traded pending on how long you held it.
the option on the date it expired. If the option expires, its cost is either aNondeductible wash sale loss. If you re-
long-term or short-term capital loss, dependingceived a Form 1099-B (or substitute statement), Writer of option. If you write (grant) an option,
on your holding period, which ends on the expi-box 5 of that form will show any nondeductible how you report your gain or loss depends on
ration date.wash sale loss if: whether it was exercised.
If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basisIf you are not in the business of writing op-• The stock or securities sold were covered of the stock you bought. If you exercise a put,tions and an option you write on stocks, securi-securities, and reduce your amount realized on the sale of theties, commodities, or commodity futures is not
• The substantially identical stock or securi- underlying stock by the cost of the put whenexercised (or repurchased), the amount you re-
ties you bought had the same CUSIP figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on theceive is a short-term capital gain.
numbers as the stock or securities you sale of the underlying stock is long term or shortIf an option requiring you to buy or sell prop-
sold and were bought in the same account term depending on your holding period for theerty is exercised, see Writers of puts and calls ,
as the stock or securities you sold. underlying stock.later.
Put option as short sale. Buying a put op-Section 1256 contract options. Gain or lossHowever, you cannot deduct a loss from a tion is generally treated as a short sale, and theis recognized on the exercise of an option on awash sale even if it is not reported on Form exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos-section 1256 contract. Section 1256 contracts1099-B (or substitute statement). ing of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. Ifare defined under Section 1256 Contracts
you have held the underlying stock for 1 year orHow to report. Report a wash sale transac- Marked to Market, earlier.
less at the time you buy the put, any gain on thetion on line 1 or line 3 of Form 8949 with the Cash settlement option. A cash settlement exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is aappropriate box checked. Complete all columns. option is treated as an option to buy or sell short-term capital gain. The same is true if youEnter ªWº in column (b). Enter as a positive property. A cash settlement option is any option buy the underlying stock after you buy the putnumber in column (g) the amount of the loss not that on exercise is settled in, or could be settled but before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Yourallowed. See the 2011 Instructions for Schedule in, cash or property other than the underlying holding period for the underlying stock begins onD. property. the earliest of:
How to report. Report on Form 8949 gain or • The date you dispose of the stock,Securities Futures Contracts loss from the closing or expiration of an option
• The date you exercise the put,that is not a section 1256 contract but is a capital
A securities futures contract is a contract of sale asset in your hands. If an option you purchased • The date you sell the put, orfor future delivery of a single security or of a expired, enter the expiration date in column (d)
narrow-based security index. • The date the put expires.and enter ªExpiredº in column (e). If an option
Gain or loss from the contract generally will that was granted (written) expired, enter the
be treated in a manner similar to gain or loss expiration date in column (c) and enter ªExpiredº Writers of puts and calls. If you write (grant)from transactions in the underlying security. This in column (f). Fill in the other columns as appro- a put or a call, do not include the amount youmeans gain or loss from the sale, exchange, or priate. receive for writing it in your income at the time oftermination of the contract will generally have If a call option you sold was exercised and receipt. Carry it in a deferred account until:the same character as gain or loss from transac- the option premium you received was not re-
tions in the property to which the contract re- • Your obligation expires;flected in the sales price shown on the Form
lates. Any capital gain or loss on a sale, 1099-B (or substitute statement) you received, • You buy, in the case of a put, or sell, in theexchange, or termination of a contract to sell enter the premium as a positive number in col- case of a call, the underlying stock whenproperty will be considered short term, regard- umn (g) of Form 8949 and enter ªOº in column the option is exercised; orless of how long you hold the contract. These (b).
contracts are not section 1256 contracts (unless • You engage in a closing transaction.
they are dealer securities futures contracts).
If your obligation expires, the amount you re-Puts and Calls
ceived for writing the call or put is short-termOptions
Puts and calls are options on securities and are capital gain.
covered by the rules just discussed for options. If a put you write is exercised and you buyOptions are generally subject to the rules de-
The following are specific applications of these the underlying stock, decrease your basis in thescribed in this section. If the option is part of a
rules to holders and writers of options that are stock by the amount you received for the put.straddle, the loss deferral rules  covered later
bought, sold, or ªclosed outº in transactions on a Your holding period for the stock begins on theunder Straddles may also apply. For special
national securities exchange, such as the Chi- date you buy it, not on the date you wrote therules that apply to nonequity options and dealer
cago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section put.equity options, see Section 1256 Contracts
1256 Contracts Marked to Market , earlier, for If a call you write is exercised and you sellMarked to Market, earlier.
special rules that may apply to nonequity op- the underlying stock, increase your amount real-Gain or loss from the sale or trade of an
tions and dealer equity options.) These rules are ized on the sale of the stock by the amount youoption to buy or sell property that is a capital
also presented in Table 4-3. received for the call when figuring your gain orasset in your hands, or would be if you acquired
Puts and calls are issued by writers (grant- loss. The gain or loss is long term or short termit, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not or
ors) to holders for cash premiums. They are depending on your holding period of the stock.would not be a capital asset, the gain or loss is
ended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse. If you enter into a closing transaction byordinary gain or loss.
A ªput optionº is the right to sell to the writer, paying an amount equal to the value of the put or
Example 1. You purchased an option to buy at any time before a specified future date, a call at the time of the payment, the difference
100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stock stated number of shares at a specified price. between the amount you pay and the amount
increases in value, and you sell the option for Conversely, a ªcall optionº is the right to buy you receive for the put or call is a short-term
more than you paid for it. Your gain is capital from the writer of the option, at any time before a capital gain or loss.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 61

Page 62 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Examples of non-dealer transactions. 4. Section 1256 contracts. The facts are the Straddle rules for stock. Although stock is
same as in (1), except the options were generally excluded from the definition of per-
1. Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is- nonequity options, subject to the rules for sonal property when applying the straddle rules,
sued on April 7, 2011, for $4,000. These section 1256 contracts. If you were a buyer it is included in the following two situations. 
equity options expired in December 2011, of the options, you would recognize a
1. The stock is of a type which is activelywithout being exercised. If you were a short-term capital loss of $1,600, and a
traded, and at least one of the offsettinglong-term capital loss of $2,400. If youholder (buyer) of the options, you would
were a writer of the options, you would positions is a position on that stock or sub-recognize a short-term capital loss of
recognize a short-term capital gain of stantially similar or related property.$4,000. If you were a writer of the options,
$1,600, and a long-term capital gain ofyou would recognize a short-term capital 2. The stock is in a corporation formed or$2,400. See Section 1256 Contractsgain of $4,000. availed of to take positions in personalMarked to Market, earlier, for more infor- property that offset positions taken by any2. Closing transaction. The facts are the mation.
shareholder.same as in (1), except that on May 6,
2011, the options were sold for $6,000. If
Straddlesyou were the holder of the options who Note. For positions established before Oc-
sold them, you would recognize a tober 22, 2004, condition (1) earlier does notThis section discusses the loss deferral rulesshort-term capital gain of $2,000. If you apply. Instead, personal property includes stockthat apply to the sale or other disposition ofwere the writer of the options and you if condition (2) above applies or the stock waspositions in a straddle. These rules do not applybought them back, you would recognize a part of a straddle in which at least one of theto the straddles described under Exceptions,
short-term capital loss of $2,000. offsetting positions was:later.
3. Exercise. The facts are the same as in (1), • An option to buy or sell the stock or sub-A straddle is any set of offsetting positions on
except that the options were exercised on personal property. For example, a straddle may stantially identical stock or securities,
consist of a purchased option to buy and aMay 27, 2011. The buyer adds the cost of • A securities futures contract on the stockpurchased option to sell on the same number ofthe options to the basis of the stock bought or substantially identical stock or securi-shares of the security, with the same exercisethrough the exercise of the options. The ties, orprice and period.writer adds the amount received from writ-
• A position on substantially similar or re-ing the options to the amount realized from
lated property (other than stock).selling the stock to figure gain or loss. The Personal property. This is any actively traded
gain or loss is short term or long term de- property. It includes stock options and contracts
pending upon the holding period of the to buy stock but generally does not include Position. A position is an interest in personal
stock. stock. property. A position can be a forward or futures
contract or an option.
An interest in a loan denominated in a foreignTable 4-3. Puts and Calls
currency is treated as a position in that currency.
For the straddle rules, foreign currency for whichPuts there is an active interbank market is considered
to be actively-traded personal property. SeeWhen a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
also Foreign currency contract  under Section
1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from Reduce your basis in the stock you
sale of the underlying stock by the buy by the amount you received for
cost of the put. the put. Offsetting position. This is a position that
substantially reduces any risk of loss you mayExpires Report the cost of the put as a capital Report the amount you received for
have from holding another position. However, ifloss on the date it expires.* the put as a short-term capital gain.
a position is part of a straddle that is not an
identified straddle (described later), do not treatIs sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you
cost of the put and the amount you buy back the put, report the it as offsetting to a position that is part of an
receive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you identified straddle.
pay and the amount you received for
Presumed offsetting positions. Two orthe put as a short-term capital gain
or loss.) more positions will be presumed to be offsetting
if:
• The positions are established in the sameCalls
personal property (or in a contract for this
property), and the value of one or moreWhen a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
positions varies inversely with the value of
one or more of the other positions;Is exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis Increase your amount realized on
in the stock purchased. sale of the stock by the amount you • The positions are in the same personalreceived for the call.
property, even if this property is in a sub-
stantially changed form, and the positions'Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital Report the amount you received for
values vary inversely as described in theloss on the date it expires.* the call as a short-term capital gain.
first condition;
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you • The positions are in debt instruments withcost of the call and the amount you buy back the call, report the a similar maturity, and the positions' val-receive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you
ues vary inversely as described in the firstpay and the amount you received for
condition;the call as a short-term capital gain
or loss.) • The positions are sold or marketed as off-
setting positions, whether or not the posi-*See Holders of puts and calls and Writers of puts and calls in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or loss
is short term or long term. tions are called a straddle, spread,
butterfly, or any similar name; or
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The aggregate margin requirement for the Identified straddle. Any straddle (other Also, the losses from positions are deferred until
positions is lower than the sum of the mar- than a straddle described in (2) or (3) above) is you dispose of all the positions in the straddle.
gin requirements for each position if held an identified straddle if all the following condi- The rule discussed above for increasing the
separately. tions exist. basis of each of the positions does not apply.
Qualified covered call options and op-• You clearly identified the straddle on yourRelated persons. To determine if two or tioned stock. A straddle is not subject to therecords before the close of the day onmore positions are offsetting, you will be treated loss deferral rules for straddles if both of thewhich you acquired it.as holding any position your spouse holds dur- following are true.ing the same period. If you take into account part • For straddles acquired after December 29,
• All the offsetting positions consist of oneor all of the gain or loss for a position held by a 2007, you identified the positions in the
or more qualified covered call options andflowthrough entity, such as a partnership or straddle that are offsetting with respect to
the stock to be purchased from you undertrust, you are also considered to hold that posi- one another (for example, position A off-
the options.tion. sets position D, and position B offsets po-
sition C). • The straddle is not part of a larger strad-
dle.• The straddle is not part of a larger strad-Loss Deferral Rules dle.
Generally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi-  But see Special year-end rule , later, for anIf there is a loss from any position in an identi-tion of one or more positions only to the extent exception.fied straddle, you must increase the basis ofthe loss is more than any unrecognized gain you
A qualified covered call option is any optioneach of the positions that offset the loss positionhave on offsetting positions. Unused losses are
you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stockin the identified straddle. The increase is the losstreated as sustained in the next tax year.
you acquire in connection with granting the op-multiplied by the following fraction:
Unrecognized gain. This is: tion), but only if all the following are true.
Unrecognized gain (if any) on the• The amount of gain you would have had • The option is traded on a national securi-offsetting positionon an open position if you had sold it on ties exchange or other market approved
the last business day of the tax year at its The total unrecognized gain on all by the Secretary of the Treasury.
fair market value, and positions that offset the loss position • The option is granted more than 30 daysin the identified straddle• The amount of gain realized on a position before its expiration date.
if, as of the end of the tax year, gain has For this purpose, your unrecognized gain is For covered call options entered into after
been realized but not recognized. the excess of the fair market value of the posi- July 28, 2002, the option is granted not
tion that is part of an identified straddle at the more than 12 months before its expiration
time you incur a loss on another position in the date or satisfies term limitation and quali-Example. On July 1, 2011, you entered into
identified straddle, over the fair market value of fied benchmark requirements published ina straddle. On December 16, 2011, you closed
that position when you identified it as a position the Internal Revenue Bulletin.one position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000.
in the straddle.On December 31, 2011, the end of your tax • The option is not a deep-in-the-money op-If the application of the above rule does notyear, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750 tion.result in the increase in basis of any offsettingin the offsetting open position. On your 2011
• You are not an options dealer who grantedposition in the identified straddle, you must in-return, your deductible loss on the position you
the option in connection with your activitycrease the basis of each of the offsetting posi-closed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750).
of dealing in options.tions in the straddle in a manner that:You must carry forward to 2012 the unused loss
of $12,750. • Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or• Is reasonable,
loss.• Is consistently applied by you,Note. If you physically settle a position es-
tablished after October 21, 2004, that is part of a  A deep-in-the-money option is an option with• Is consistent with the purposes of thestraddle by delivering property to which the posi- a strike price lower than the lowest qualifiedidentified straddle rules, andtion relates (and you would realize a loss on that benchmark (LQB). The strike price is the price at• Results in a total increase in the basis ofposition if you terminated it), you are treated as which the option is to be exercised. Strike pricesthose offsetting positions equal to the loss.having terminated the position for its fair market are listed in the financial section of many news-
value immediately before the settlement and as papers. The LQB is the highest available strikeIf you adopt an allocation method under thishaving sold the property used to physically settle price that is less than the applicable stock price.rule, you must describe that method in yourthe position at its fair market value. However, the LQB for an option with a term ofbooks and records. more than 90 days and a strike price of moreExceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap- The identified straddle rules also apply to than $50 is the second highest available strikeply to: positions that are or have been a liability or price that is less than the applicable stock price.
obligation to you (for example, a debt obligation1. Positions established after October 21, The availability of strike prices for equity op-you issued, a written option, or a notional princi-2004, comprising an identified straddle, tions with flexible terms does not affect the de-pal contract you entered into). termination of the LQB for an option that is not2. Certain straddles consisting of qualified Neither you nor anyone else can take into an equity option with flexible terms.covered call options and the stock to be account any loss on a position that is part of an The applicable stock price for any stock forpurchased under the options, identified straddle to the extent the loss in- which an option has been granted is:creases the basis of any positions that offset the3. Hedging transactions, described earlier
loss position in the identified straddle. 1. The closing price of the stock on the mostunder Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
recent day on which that stock was tradedMarket, and
Note. For positions established before Oc- before the date on which the option was4. Straddles consisting entirely of section tober 22, 2004, identified straddles have to meet granted; or1256 contracts, as described earlier under two additional conditions.
2. The opening price of the stock on the daySection 1256 Contracts Marked to Market
1. All the original positions that you identify on which the option was granted, but only(but see Identified straddle, next).
were acquired on the same day. if that price is greater than 110% of the
price determined in (1).Note. For positions established before Oc- 2. All the positions included in item (1) were
tober 22, 2004, the loss deferral rules also do disposed of on the same day during the If the applicable stock price is $25 or less, the
not apply to a straddle that is an identified strad- tax year, or none of the positions were LQB will be treated as not less than 85% of the
dle at the end of the tax year. disposed of by the end of the tax year. applicable stock price. If the applicable stock
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 63

Page 64 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
price is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated as acquired substantially identical stock or securi- Example 2. The facts are the same as in
not less than an amount that is $10 below the ties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to the Example 1, except that at year end you have $4
applicable stock price. following tax year, subject to any further applica- of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-
tion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will also tion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsettingExample. On May 13, 2011, you held XYZ apply if you entered into a contract or option to short position. Under these circumstances, thestock and you wrote an XYZ/September call acquire the stock or securities within the time entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2011 be-option with a strike price of $120. The closing period described above. See Loss carryover , cause there is a total of $10 of unrecognizedprice of one share of XYZ stock on May 12, later, for more information about how to treat the gain in the successor long position and offset-2011, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/ loss in the following tax year. ting short position.September call options offered on May 13,
2011, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125, Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se- Example 3. The facts are the same as in$130, and $135. Because the option has a term curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any Example 1, except that at year end you have $8of more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, the losses you sustained in the ordinary course of of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-second highest strike price that is less than your business. tion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsetting$130.25, the applicable stock price. The call short position. Under these circumstances, $8 ofExample. You are not a dealer in stock oroption is a deep-in-the-money option because the total $10 realized loss will be disallowed forsecurities. On December 1, 2011, you boughtits strike price is lower than the LQB. As a result, 2011 because there is $8 of unrecognized gainstock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off-the option is not a qualified covered call option, in the successor long position.setting put option. On December 9, 2011, thereand the loss deferral rules apply if you closed out
Loss carryover. If you have a disallowed losswas $20 of unrealized gain in the put option andthe option or the stock at a loss during the year.
that resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2,you sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem-Capital loss on qualified covered call op- you must carry it over to the next tax year andber 16, the value of the put option had declined,tions. If you hold stock and you write a quali- apply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss.eliminating all unrealized gain in the position. Onfied covered call option on that stock with a For example, a loss disallowed in 2010 underDecember 16, you bought a second XX stockstrike price less than the applicable stock price, Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2011, unless theposition that is substantially identical to the XXtreat any loss from the option as long-term capi- substantially identical stock or securities (whichstock you sold on December 9. At the end of thetal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gain caused the loss to be disallowed in 2010) wereyear, there is no unrecognized gain in the puton the sale or exchange of the stock would be disposed of during 2011. In addition, the carry-option or in the XX stock. Under these circum-treated as long-term capital gain. The holding over loss will not be allowed in 2011 if Rule 1 orstances, the $20 loss will be disallowed for 2011period of the stock does not include any period Rule 2 disallows it.under Rule 1 because, within a period beginningduring which you are the writer of the option. 30 days before December 9, and ending 30 days
Example. The facts are the same as in theSpecial year-end rule. The loss deferral after that date, you bought stock substantially
example under Rule 1. On December 28, 2012,rules for straddles apply if all the following are identical to the XX stock you sold.
you sell the second XX stock at a $20 loss andtrue. Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo- there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the putsition of less than all the positions of a straddle• The qualified covered call options are option. Under these circumstances, you cannot(your loss position) to the extent that any unrec-closed, or the stock is disposed of at a deduct in 2012 either the $20 loss disallowed inognized gain at the close of the tax year in one orloss during any tax year. 2011 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De-more of the following positions is more than any cember 28, 2012, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 does• Gain on disposition of the stock or gain on loss disallowed under Rule 1. not apply because the substantially identical XXthe options is includible in gross income in
stock was sold during the year and no substan-• Successor positions.a later tax year.
tially identical stock or securities were bought• Offsetting positions to the loss position.• The stock or options were held less than within the 61-day period. However, Rule 2 does30 days after the closing of the options or apply because there is $40 of unrecognized gain• Offsetting positions to any successor posi-the disposition of the stock. in the put option, an offsetting position to the losstion.
positions.
Successor position. A successor positionHow To Report Gains Capital loss carryover. If the sale of a lossis a position that is or was at any time offsettingand Losses (Form 6781) position would have resulted in a capital loss,to a second position, if both the following condi- you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss onAs a general rule, report each position (whether tions are met. the date it is allowed, even if you would treat theor not it is part of a straddle) on which you have gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi-• The second position was offsetting to theunrecognized gain at the end of the tax year and nary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of aloss position that was sold.the amount of this unrecognized gain in Part III loss position (in the case of section 1256 con-of Form 6781. Use Part II of Form 6781 to figure • The successor position is entered into dur- tracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-termyour gains and losses on straddles. See the ing a period beginning 30 days before, capital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss,Form 6781 instructions for how to report these and ending 30 days after, the sale of the you treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule,gains and losses. loss position. even if you would treat any gain or loss on any
successor positions as 100% long-term or
Example 1. On November 3, 2011, you en- short-term capital gain or loss.Coordination of Loss Deferral tered into offsetting long and short positions inRules and Wash Sale Rules Exceptions. The rules for coordinating strad-non-section 1256 contracts. On November 10, dle losses and wash sales do not apply to the2011, you disposed of the long position at a $10Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to any following loss situations.loss. On November 16, you entered into a newdisposition of a position or positions of a strad-
long position (successor position) that is offset- • Loss on the sale of one or more positionsdle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, then
ting to the retained short position, but not sub- in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans-apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only if
stantially identical to the long position disposed actions are described under Section 1256stocks or securities make up a position that is
of on November 10. You held both positions Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.)part of the straddle. If a position in the straddle
through year end, at which time there was $10 ofdoes not include stock or securities, use Rule 2. • Loss on the sale of a loss position in aunrecognized gain in the successor long posi- mixed straddle account. (See Mixed strad-Rule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo- tion and no unrecognized gain in the offsetting dle account (Election C), later.)sition of shares of stock or securities that make short position. Under these circumstances, the
up the positions of a straddle if, within a period entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2011 be- • Loss on the sale of a position that is part
beginning 30 days before the date of that dispo- cause there is $10 of unrecognized gain in the of a straddle consisting only of section
sition and ending 30 days after that date, you successor long position. 1256 contracts.
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
regulated futures contract. You did not make an • Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac-Holding Period and
count for a class of activities for whichelection to offset gains and losses from positionsLoss Treatment Rules
gains and losses will be recognized andin a mixed straddle. On August 4, 2011, you
The holding period of a position in a straddle offset on a periodic basis.disposed of the long forward contract at a loss.
generally begins no earlier than the date on Because the gold forward contract was part of a
which the straddle ends (the date you no longer mixed straddle and the disposition of this These two elections are alternatives to thehold an offsetting position). This rule does not non-section 1256 position would not result in mixed straddle election. You can choose onlyapply to any position you held more than 1 year long-term capital loss, the loss recognized on one of the three elections. Use Form 6781 tobefore you established the straddle. But see the termination of the gold forward contract will indicate your election choice by checking box A,Exceptions, later. be treated as a 60% long-term and 40% B, or C, whichever applies.short-term capital loss.
Example. On March 6, 2010, you acquired Straddle-by-straddle identification elec-
gold. On January 5, 2011, you entered into an tion (Election B). Under this election, youExceptions. The special holding period andoffsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu- must clearly identify each position that is part ofloss treatment for straddle positions does notlated futures contract). On April 1, 2011, you the identified mixed straddle by the earlier of:apply to positions that:disposed of the short gold forward contract at no • The close of the day the identified mixed• Constitute part of a hedging transaction,gain or loss. On April 8, 2011, you sold the gold straddle is established, orat a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1 • Are included in a straddle consisting onlyyear or less before the offsetting short position • The time the position is disposed of.of section 1256 contracts, orwas entered into, the holding period for the gold
• Are included in a mixed straddle accountbegins on April 1, 2011, the date the straddle If you dispose of a position in the mixed straddle(Election C), discussed later.ended. Gain recognized on the sale of the gold before the end of the day on which the straddlewill be treated as short-term capital gain. is established, this identification must be made
Mixed Straddle Elections by the time you dispose of the position. You areLoss treatment. Treat the loss on the sale of
presumed to have properly identified a mixedone or more positions (the loss position) of a If you disposed of a position in a mixed straddle straddle if independent verification is used.straddle as a long-term capital loss if both the and make one of the elections described in thefollowing are true. The basic tax treatment of gain or loss underfollowing discussions, report your gain or loss as
this election depends on which side of the strad-indicated in those discussions. If you do not• You held (directly or indirectly) one or
dle produced the total net gain or loss. If the netmake any of the elections, report your gain ormore offsetting positions to the loss posi-
gain or loss from the straddle is due to theloss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed oftion on the date you entered into the loss
section 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated asthe section 1256 component of the straddle,position.
60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40%enter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or• You would have treated all gain or loss on short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gainyour gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Formone or more of the straddle positions as or loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify the6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 13long-term capital gain or loss if you had election by checking box B.(Part II).sold these positions on the day you en- If the net gain or loss is due to thetered into the loss position. non-section 1256 positions, gain or loss isMixed straddle election (Election A). You
short-term capital gain or loss. See the Formcan elect out of the marked to market rules,Mixed straddles. Special rules apply to a 6781 instructions for how to report the net gaindiscussed under Section 1256 Contractsloss position that is part of a mixed straddle and or loss.Marked to Market , earlier, for all section 1256that is a non-section 1256 position. A mixed contracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In- For the specific application of the rules of thisstraddle is a straddle: stead, the gain and loss rules for straddles will election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-3T.
• That is not part of a larger straddle, apply to these contracts. However, if you make
Example. On April 1, you entered into athis election for an option on a section 1256• In which all positions are held as capital non-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec-contract, the gain or loss treatment discussedassets, tion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec-earlier under Options will apply, subject to the
• In which at least one (but not all) of the tion to treat this straddle as an identified mixedgain and loss rules for straddles.
positions is a section 1256 contract, and straddle. On April 8, you disposed of theYou can make this election if:
non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and the• For which the mixed straddle election • At least one (but not all) of the positions is section 1256 contract at an $800 gain. Under(Election A, discussed later) has not been a section 1256 contract, and these circumstances, the $600 loss on themade. non-section 1256 position will be offset against• Each position forming part of the straddle
the $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. Theis clearly identified as being part of that
Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss and net gain of $200 from the straddle will be treatedstraddle on the day the first section 1256
40% short-term capital loss, if all the following as 60% long-term capital gain and 40%contract forming part of the straddle is ac-
conditions apply. short-term capital gain because it is due to thequired.
section 1256 contract.• Gain or loss from the sale of one or more
If you make this election, it will apply for allof the straddle positions that are section Mixed straddle account (Election C). You
later years as well. It cannot be revoked without1256 contracts would be considered gain may elect to establish one or more accounts for
the consent of the IRS. If you made this election,or loss from the sale or exchange of a determining gains and losses from all positions
check box A of Form 6781. Do not report thecapital asset. in a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa-
section 1256 component in Part I. rate mixed straddle account for each separate• The sale of no position in the straddle, designated class of activities.other than a section 1256 contract, would Other elections. You can avoid the 60% Generally, you must determine gain or lossresult in a long-term capital gain or loss. long-term capital loss treatment required for a for each position in a mixed straddle account asnon-section 1256 loss position that is part of a• You have not made a straddle-by-straddle of the close of each business day of the tax year.mixed straddle, described earlier, if you chooseidentification election (Election B) or mixed You offset the net section 1256 contractseither of the two following elections to offsetstraddle account election (Election C), against the net non-section 1256 positions togains and losses for these positions.both discussed later. determine the ªdaily account net gain or loss.º
• Election B. Make a separate identification If the daily account amount is due to
of the positions of each mixed straddle forExample. On March 3, 2011, you entered non-section 1256 positions, the amount is
which you are electing this treatment (theinto a long gold forward contract. On July 15, treated as short-term capital gain or loss. If the
straddle-by-straddle identification method).2011, you entered into an offsetting short gold daily account amount is due to section 1256
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 65

Page 66 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
contracts, the amount is treated as 60% the period that began 3 months before the sale after the purchase. If you have not yet pur-
long-term and 40% short-term capital gain or and ended 12 months after the sale. If you make chased the qualified replacement property,
loss. the election, you must recognize gain on the you must attach the notarized ªstatement
sale only to the extent the proceeds from the of purchaseº to your income tax return forOn the last business day of the tax year, you
determine the ªannual account net gain or lossº sale exceed the cost of the qualified replace- the year following the election year (or the
for each account by netting the daily account ment property. election will not be valid).
amounts for that account for the tax year. The You must reduce the basis of the replace- 3. A verified written statement of the domes-ªtotal annual account net gain or lossº is deter- ment property by any postponed gain. If you tic corporation whose employees are cov-mined by netting the annual account amounts dispose of any replacement property, you may ered by the ESOP acquiring the securities,for all mixed straddle accounts that you had have to recognize all of the postponed gain. or of any authorized officer of the coopera-established. Generally, to qualify for the election the tive, consenting to the taxes under sec-The net amounts keep their long-term or ESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internalshort-term classification. However, no more the outstanding stock of the corporation that Revenue Code on certain dispositions, andthan 50% of the total annual account net gain for issued the qualified securities. Also, the quali- prohibited allocations of the stock pur-the tax year can be treated as long-term capital fied replacement property must have been is- chased by the ESOP or cooperative.gain. Any remaining gain is treated as sued by a domestic operating corporation.short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40%
of the total annual account net loss can be More information. For details, see sectionHow to make the election. You must maketreated as short-term capital loss. Any remaining 1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Regula-the election no later than the due date (includingloss is treated as long-term capital loss. tions section 1.1042-1T.extensions) for filing your tax return for the yearThe election to establish one or more mixed in which you sold the stock. If your original returnstraddle accounts for each tax year must be Rollover of Gainwas filed on time, you may make the election onmade by the due date (without extensions) of an amended return filed no later than 6 months From Publiclyyour income tax return for the immediately pre- after the due date of your return (excluding ex- Traded Securitiesceding tax year. If you begin trading in a new tensions). Enter ªFiled pursuant to sectionclass of activities during a tax year, you must 301.9100-2(b)º at the top of the amended return You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certainmake the election for the new class of activities and file it at the same address you used for your gains from the sale of publicly traded securities.by the later of either:
original return. This means that if you buy certain replacement
• The due date of your return for the imme- property and make the choice described in thisHow to report and postpone gain. Reportdiately preceding tax year (without exten- section, you postpone part or all of your gain.the sale on line 3 of Form 8949 as you would ifsions), or You postpone the gain by adjusting the basisyou were not making the election. Then enter
of the replacement property as described in Ba-• 60 days after you entered into the first ªRº in column (b). Enter the amount of the post-
sis of replacement property , later. Thismixed straddle in the new class of activi- poned gain as a negative number in column (g).
postpones your gain until the year you disposeties. Put it in parentheses to show it is negative.
of the replacement property.Complete all remaining columns. If the actualYou make the election on Form 6781 by You qualify to make this choice if you meetpostponed gain is different from the amount youchecking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in- all the following tests.report, file an amended return.come tax return for the immediately preceding • You sell publicly traded securities at aReport your sales of stock to ESOPs ortax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies. gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-certain cooperatives on Form 8949Report the annual account net gain or loss from
ties traded on an established securitieswith the correct box (A, B, or C)a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781.
CAUTION
!
market.checked for these transactions. See Form 8949In addition, you must attach a statement to Form
and the 2011 Instructions for Schedule D.6781 specifically designating the class of activi- • Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.
ties for which a mixed straddle account is estab- Also attach the following statements. • During the 60-day period beginning on thelished.
date of the sale, you buy replacement1. A ªstatement of electionº that indicates youFor the specific application of the rules of this property. This replacement property mustare making an election under sectionelection, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-4T. be either common stock of, or a partner-1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code andInterest expense and carrying charges re- ship interest in a specialized small busi-that includes the following information.lating to mixed straddle account positions. ness investment company (SSBIC). This
You cannot deduct interest and carrying a. A description of the securities sold, the is any partnership or corporation licensed
charges that are allocable to any positions held date of the sale, the amount realized on by the Small Business Administration
in a mixed straddle account. Treat these the sale, and the adjusted basis of the under section 301(d) of the Small Busi-
charges as an adjustment to the annual account securities. ness Investment Act of 1958, as in effectnet gain or loss and allocate them proportion- on May 13, 1993.b. The name of the ESOP or cooperativeately between the net short-term and the net
to which the qualified securities werelong-term capital gains or losses.
sold. Amount of gain recognized. If you make theTo find the amount of interest and carrying
choice described in this section, you must rec-charges that is not deductible and that must be c. For a sale that was part of a single, ognize gain only up to the following amount:added to the annual account net gain or loss, interrelated transaction under a prear-
apply the rules described earlier to the positions ranged agreement between taxpayers • The amount realized on the sale, minus
held in the mixed straddle account. See Interest involving other sales of qualified securi- • The cost of any common stock or partner-expense and carrying charges on straddles  in ties, the names and identifying numbers ship interest in an SSBIC that you boughtchapter 3 under Nondeductible Expenses. of the other taxpayers under the agree- during the 60-day period beginning on thement and the number of shares sold by date of sale (and did not previously takethe other taxpayers.Sales of Stock to ESOPs into account on an earlier sale of publicly
or Certain Cooperatives traded securities).2. A notarized ªstatement of purchaseº
describing the qualified replacement prop-If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3
erty, date of purchase, and the cost of the If this amount is less than the amount of youryears to an employee stock ownership plan
property and declaring the property to be gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,(ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative,
qualified replacement property for the qual- subject to the limit described next. If this amountyou may be able to elect to postpone all or part
ified stock you sold. The statement must is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,of the gain on the sale if you bought qualified
have been notarized no later than 30 days you must recognize the full amount of your gain.replacement property (certain securities) within
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limit on gain postponed. The amount of In addition, you must treat all corporations • One involving services performed in the
gain you can postpone each year is limited to the that are members of the same par- fields of health, law, engineering, architec-
smaller of: ent-subsidiary controlled group as one cor- ture, accounting, actuarial science, per-
poration. forming arts, consulting, athletics, financial• $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and services, or brokerage services;file a separate return), or 4. You must have acquired the stock at its
original issue, directly or through an under- • One whose principal asset is the reputa-• $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married writer, in exchange for money or other tion or skill of one or more employees;and file a separate return), minus the property (not including stock), or as pay foramount of gain you postponed for all ear- • Any banking, insurance, financing, leas-services provided to the corporation (otherlier years. ing, investing, or similar business;than services performed as an underwriter
• Any farming business (including the busi-of the stock). In certain cases, your stock
Basis of replacement property. You must ness of raising or harvesting trees);may also meet this test if you acquired it
subtract the amount of postponed gain from the from another person who met this test, or • Any business involving the production orbasis of your replacement property. through a conversion or trade of qualified extraction of products for which percent-small business stock that you held. age depletion can be claimed; orHow to report and postpone gain. Report 5. The corporation must have met the activethe entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 or • Any business of operating a hotel, motel,business test, defined next, and must haveline 3 of Form 8949. To make the election to restaurant, or similar business.been a C corporation during substantiallypostpone gain, report the gain as you would if all the time you held the stock.you were not making the election. Enter ªRº in
Rollover of Gaincolumn (b). Enter the amount of the postponed 6. Within the period beginning 2 years before
gain as a negative number in column (g). Put it in and ending 2 years after the stock was You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capitalparentheses to show it is negative. Complete all issued, the corporation cannot have gain from the sale of qualified small businessremaining columns. bought more than a de minimis amount of stock held more than 6 months. This means that,
its stock from you or a related party. if you buy certain replacement stock and makeReport these transactions on Form
the choice described in this section, you post-8949 with the correct box (A, B, or C). 7. Within the period beginning 1 year before
pone part or all of your gain.See Form 8949 and the 2011 Instruc- and ending 1 year after the stock was is-
CAUTION
!
You postpone the gain by adjusting the basistions for Schedule D. sued, the corporation cannot have bought
of the replacement stock as described in Basismore than a de minimis amount of its stockAlso attach a schedule showing how you
of replacement stock, later. This postpones yourfrom anyone, unless the total value of thefigured the postponed gain, the name of the
gain until the year you dispose of the replace-stock it bought is 5% or less of the totalSSBIC in which you purchased common stock
ment stock.value of all its stock.or a partnership interest, the date of that
You can make this choice if you meet all thepurchase, and your new basis in that SSBIC For more information about tests 6 and 7, see following tests.stock or partnership interest. the regulations under section 1202 of the Inter-You must make the choice to postpone gain • You buy replacement stock during thenal Revenue Code.no later than the due date (including extensions) 60-day period beginning on the date of the
for filing your tax return for the year in which you Active business test. A corporation meets sale.
sold the securities. If your original return was this test for any period of time if, during that • The replacement stock is qualified smallfiled on time, you may make the choice on an period, both the following are true. business stock.amended return filed no later than 6 months • It was an eligible corporation, defined be-after the due date of your return (excluding ex- • The replacement stock continues to meetlow.tensions). Enter ªFiled pursuant to section the active business requirement for small
301.9100-2º at the top of the amended return • It used at least 80% (by value) of its as- business stock for at least the first 6
and file it at the same address you used for your sets in the active conduct of at least one months after you buy it.
original return. qualified trade or business, defined below.
Your choice is revocable with the consent of Amount of gain recognized. If you make thethe IRS. Exception for SSBIC. Any specialized choice described in this section, you must rec-small business investment company (SSBIC) is ognize the capital gain only up to the followingtreated as meeting the active business test. AnGains on Qualified amount:SSBIC is an eligible corporation licensed to op-Small Business Stock erate under section 301(d) of the Small Busi- • The amount realized on the sale, minus
ness Investment Act of 1958 as in effect on MayThis section discusses two provisions of the law • The cost of any qualified small business13, 1993.that may apply to gain from the sale or trade of stock you bought during the 60-day period
qualified small business stock. You may qualify Eligible corporation. This is any U.S. cor- beginning on the date of sale (and did not
for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain. poration other than: previously take into account on an earlier
You may be able to exclude part of the gain from sale of qualified small business stock).• A Domestic International Sales Corpora-your income. tion (DISC) or a former DISC,
If this amount is less than the amount of yourQualified small business stock. This is • A corporation that has made, or whose capital gain, you can postpone the rest of thatstock that meets all the following tests. subsidiary has made, an election under gain. If this amount equals or is more than thesection 936 of the Internal Revenue Code,1. It must be stock in a C corporation. amount of your capital gain, you must recognize
• A regulated investment company, the full amount of your gain.2. It must have been originally issued after
August 10, 1993. • A real estate investment trust (REIT), Basis of replacement stock. You must sub-
3. The corporation must have total gross as- • A real estate mortgage investment conduit tract the amount of postponed gain from the
sets of $50 million or less at all times after (REMIC), basis of your replacement stock.
August 9, 1993, and before it issued the • A financial asset securitization investmentstock. Its total gross assets immediately af- Holding period of replacement stock. Yourtrust (FASIT), orter it issued the stock must also be $50 holding period for the replacement stock in-
million or less. cludes your holding period for the stock sold,• A cooperative.
When figuring the corporation's total except for the purpose of applying the 6-month
gross assets, you must also count the as- Qualified trade or business. This is any holding period requirement for choosing to roll
sets of any predecessor of the corporation. trade or business other than: over the gain on its sale.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 67

Page 68 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Pass-through entity. A pass-through entity (a • $10 million ($5 million for married individu- Qualified empowerment zone asset. This
partnership, S corporation, or mutual fund or als filing separately) minus the amount of means certain stock or partnership interests in
other regulated investment company) also may gain from the stock of the same issuer you an enterprise zone business. It also includes
make the choice to postpone gain. The benefit of used to figure your exclusion in earlier certain tangible property used in an enterprise
the postponed gain applies to your share of the years. zone business. You must have acquired the
entity's postponed gain if you held an interest in asset after December 21, 2000 and before
the entity for the entire period the entity held the 2010.How to report gain. Report the sale or ex-stock. change on Form 8949, Part II, line 3, with the Amount of gain recognized. If you make theIf a pass-through entity sold qualified small appropriate box checked, as you would if you choice described in this section, you must rec-business stock held for more than 6 months and were not taking the exclusion. Then enter ªSº in ognize gain only up to the following amount:you held an interest in the entity for the entire column (b) and enter the amount of the excludedperiod the entity held the stock, you also may • The amount realized on the sale, minusgain as a negative number in column (g). Put it inchoose to postpone gain if you, rather than the parentheses to show it is negative. Complete all • The cost of any qualified empowermentpass-through entity, buy the replacement stock remaining columns. If you are completing line 18 zone asset that you bought during thewithin the 60-day period. of Schedule D, enter as a positive number the 60-day period beginning on the date of
amount of the exclusion on line 2 of the 28% sale (and did not previously take into ac-How to report gain. Report the entire gain
Rate Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc- count in rolling over gain on an earlier salerealized from the sale on line 1 or line 3 of Form
tions. But if you exclude 60% of the gain, enter 2/3 of qualified empowerment zone assets).8949. To make the election to postpone gain,
of the exclusion.report the gain as you would if you were not If this amount is equal to or more than themaking the election. Enter ªRº in column (b). Report these transactions on Form amount of your gain, you must recognize the fullEnter the amount of the postponed gain as a 8949 with the correct box (A, B, or C). amount of your gain. If this amount is less thannegative number in column (g). Put it in paren- See Form 8949 and the 2011 Instruc- the amount of your gain, you can postpone the
CAUTION
!theses to show it is negative. Complete all re- tions for Schedule D. rest of your gain by adjusting the basis of yourmaining columns. replacement property as described next.
More information. For information about ad-Report these transactions on Form ditional requirements that may apply, see sec- Basis of replacement property. You must8949 with the correct box (A, B, or C). tion 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code. subtract the amount of postponed gain from theSee Form 8949 and the 2011 Instruc-
CAUTION
!
basis of the qualified empowerment zone assetstions for Schedule D. Empowerment zone business stock. You you bought as replacement property.You must make the choice to postpone gain can exclude up to 60% of your gain if you meet
no later than the due date (including extensions) all the following additional requirements. How to report and postpone capital gain.
for filing your tax return for the year in which you Report the entire gain realized from the sale on
1. You sell or trade stock in a corporation thatsold the stock. If your original return was filed on line 3 of Form 8949. To make the election to
qualifies as an empowerment zone busi-time, you may make the choice on an amended postpone gain, report the gain as you would if
ness during substantially all of the time youreturn filed no later than 6 months after the due you were not making the election. Enter ªRº in
held the stock, anddate of your return (excluding extensions). Enter column (b). Enter the amount of the postponed
ªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2º at the top gain as a negative number in column (g). Put it in2. You acquired the stock after December 21,
of the amended return and file it at the same parentheses to show it is negative. Complete all2000, and before February 18, 2009.
address you used for your original return. remaining columns.
More information. For more informationCondition (1) will still be met if the corporation
about this rollover of gain, see section 1397B ofceased to qualify after the 5-year period thatSection 1202 Exclusion
the Internal Revenue Code.begins on the date you acquired the stock. How-
You generally can exclude from your income up ever, the gain that qualifies for the 60% exclu-
to 50% of your gain from the sale or trade of sion cannot be more than the gain you would
qualified small business stock held by you for have had if you had sold the stock on the date
more than 5 years. The exclusion can be up to the corporation ceased to qualify. Reporting Capital
75% for stock acquired after February 17, 2009,
Gains and Lossesand no later than September 27, 2010, and up to Rollover of Gain100% for stock acquired after September 27, From Sale of Report capital gains and losses on Form 8949.2010, and before January 1, 2012. The exclu-
Empowerment Zone Assets Form 8949 is new. Many transactions that, insion can be up to 60% for certain empowerment
previous years, would have been reported onzone business stock. See Empowerment zone
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain Schedule D (Form 1040) or D-1 must be re-business stock , later.The eligible gain minus
gains from the sale of qualified empowerment ported on Form 8949 if they occur in 2011.your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain.
zone assets. This means that if you buy certain Complete Form 8949 before you complete lineSee Capital Gain Tax Rates, later.
replacement property and make the choice de- 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, or 10 of Schedule D (Form 1040).
scribed in this section, you postpone part or all ofSSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized small Use Form 8949 to report:
the recognition of your gain.business investment company (SSBIC) stock
• The sale or exchange of a capital assetYou qualify to make this choice if you meetyou bought as replacement property for publicly
not reported on another form or schedule,all the following tests.traded securities you sold at a gain, you must
reduce the basis of the stock by the amount of • Gains from involuntary conversions (other• You hold a qualified empowerment zoneany postponed gain on that earlier sale, as ex- than from casualty or theft) of capital as-asset for more than 1 year and sell it at aplained earlier under Rollover of Gain From sets not held for business or profit, andgain.Publicly Traded Securities . But do not reduce
• Nonbusiness bad debts.• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.your basis by that amount when figuring your
section 1202 exclusion. • During the 60-day period beginning on the Use Schedule D (Form 1040):
date of the sale, you buy a replacementLimit on eligible gain. The amount of your • To figure the overall gain or loss fromqualified empowerment zone asset in thegain from the stock of any one issuer that is transactions reported on Form 8949,same zone as the asset sold.eligible for the exclusion in 2011 is limited to the
greater of: • To report a gain from Form 2439 or 6252
or Part I of Form 4797,Any part of the gain that is ordinary• Ten times your basis in all qualified stock
income cannot be postponed and mustof the issuer you sold or exchanged during • To report a gain or loss from Form 4684,
be recognized.the year, or
CAUTION
! 6781, or 8824,
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• To report a gain or loss from a partner- may also have to report them on Form 8582. In Report the aggregate amount received
ship, S corporation, estate or trust, shown in box 2 of Form 1099-CAP as the salessome cases, the loss may be limited under the
price in column (e) of either Part I, line 1, or Partpassive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its• To report capital gain distributions not re- II, line 3, of Form 8949, whichever applies.separate instructions for more information aboutported directly on Form 1040, line 13 (or reporting capital gains and losses from a pas-effectively connected capital gain distribu- Form 1099-S transactions. If you sold orsive activity.tions not reported directly on Form traded reportable real estate, you generally
1040NR, line 14), and should receive from the real estate reportingForm 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop- person a Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Realerty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-• To report a capital loss carryover from Estate Transactions, showing the gross pro-ties, through a broker, you should receive Form2010 to 2011. ceeds.1099-B or substitute statement from the broker. ªReportable real estateº is defined as anyOn Form 8949, enter all sales and exchanges Use the Form 1099-B or substitute statement to present or future ownership interest in any of theof capital assets, including stocks, bonds, etc., complete Form 8949. following:and real estate (if not reported on Form 4684, Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of
4797, 6252, 6781, or 8824). Include these trans- • Improved or unimproved land, including airForm 1099-B as the sales price in column (e) of
actions even if you did not receive a Form space;either Part I, line 1, or Part II, line 3, of Form
1099-B or 1099-S (or substitute statement) for 8949, whichever applies. However, if the broker • Inherently permanent structures, includingthe transaction. Report short-term gains or advises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that gross any residential, commercial, or industriallosses on line 1. Report long-term gains or proceeds (sales price) less commissions and building;losses on line 3. Use as many Forms 8949 as option premiums were reported to the IRS, enter
you need. • A condominium unit and its accessory fix-that net sales price in column (e) of either Part I,
tures and common elements, includingline 1, or Part II, line 3, of Form 8949, whicheverExceptions to filing Form 8949 and Schedule land; andapplies.D (Form 1040). There are certain situations
Include in column (g) any expense of sale,where you may not have to file Form 8949 and/ • Stock in a cooperative housing corporation
such as broker's fees, commissions, state andor Schedule D (Form 1040). (as defined in section 216 of the Internal
local transfer taxes, and option premiums, un- Revenue Code).Exception 1. You do not have to file Form less you reported the net sales price in column8949 or Schedule D (Form 1040) if both of the (e). If you include an expense of sale in column A ªreal estate reporting personº could includefollowing apply. (g), enter ªOº in column (b). the buyer's attorney, your attorney, the title or
escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro-1. You have no capital losses, and your only Example 1. You sold 100 shares of Fund ker, the buyer's broker, or the person acquiringcapital gains are capital gain distributions HIJ for $2,500. You paid a $75 commission to the biggest interest in the property.from Form(s) 1099-DIV, box 2a (or substi- the broker for handling the sale. Your Form Your Form 1099-S will show the gross pro-tute statements). 1099-B shows that the net sales proceeds, ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. See2. None of the Form(s) 1099-DIV (or substi- $2,425 ($2,500 − $75), were reported to the IRS. the 2011 Instructions for Schedule D for how totute statements) have an amount in box 2b Report $2,425 in column (e) of Form 8949. Com- report these transactions and include them on(unrecaptured section 1250 gain), box 2c plete columns (a), (c), (d) and (f). Part I, line 1, or Part II, line 3, of Form 8949 as(section 1202 gain), or box 2d (collectibles appropriate. However, report like-kind ex-(28%) gain). Example 2. You sold 200 shares of Fund changes on Form 8824 instead.KLM for $10,000. You paid a $100 commission It is unlawful for any real estate reportingException 2. You must file Schedule D at the time of the sale. You bought the shares for person to separately charge you for complying(Form 1040), but generally do not have to file $5,000. The broker reported the gross proceeds with the requirement to file Form 1099-S.Form 8949, if Exception 1 does not apply and to the IRS on Form 1099-B, so on Form 8949,
Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as ayour only capital gains and losses are: you enter ªOº in column (b), $10,000 in column
nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your(e) and $100 in column (g). Complete all remain-• Capital gain distributions, name but actually belong to someone else), seeing columns.
the 2011 Instructions for Schedule D for how to• A capital loss carryover from 2010, Section 1256 contracts and straddles. report these amounts on Form 8949.• A gain from Form 2439 or 6252 or Part I of Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses from
File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with theForm 4797, section 1256 contracts and straddles before en-
IRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi-tering these amounts on Schedule D. Include a• A gain or loss from Form 4684, 6781, or nee in 2011, you must file a Form 1099-B orcopy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.8824, or Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS.Market discount bonds. Report the sale or Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with a• A gain or loss from a partnership, S corpo- trade of a market discount bond on Form 8949, Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal ofration, estate, or trust. Part I, line 1, or Part II, line 3, whichever is U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-appropriate. If the sale or trade results in a gain nue Service Center by February 28, 2012 (AprilInstallment sales. You cannot use the install- and you did not choose to include market dis- 2, 2012, if you file Form 1099-B or Form 1099-Sment method to report a gain from the sale of count in income currently, enter ªOº in column electronically). Give the actual owner of the pro-stock or securities traded on an established se- (b) and in column (g) enter the amount of the ceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or Formcurities market. You must report the entire gain accrued market discount as a negative number. 1099-S by February 15, 2012. On Form 1099-B,in the year of sale (the year in which the trade Also report the amount of accrued market dis- you should be listed as the ªPayer.º The otherdate occurs). count as interest income on Schedule B (Form owner should be listed as the ªRecipient.º On1040A or 1040), line 1, and identify it as ªAc- Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the ªFiler.ºAt-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to crued Market Discount.º The other owner should be listed as the ªTrans-most income-producing activities. These rules
feror.º You do not, however, have to file a Formlimit the amount of loss you can deduct to the Form 1099-CAP transactions. If a corpora- 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds foramount you risk losing in the activity. The at-risk tion in which you own stock has had a change in your spouse. For more information about therules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade of control or a substantial change in capital struc- reporting requirements and the penalties for fail-an asset used in an activity to which the at-risk ture, you should receive Form 1099-CAP or sub- ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,rules apply. For more information, see Publica- stitute statement from the corporation. Use the see the General Instructions for Certain Informa-tion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules. Form 1099-CAP or substitute statement to fill in tion Returns.Use Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figure Form 8949. If your computations show that youthe amount of loss you can deduct. would have a loss because of the change, do not Sale of property bought at various times. If
enter any amounts on Form 8949 or Schedule DPassive activity gains and losses. If you you sell a block of stock or other property that
(Form 1040) as a result of this transaction.have gains or losses from a passive activity, you you bought at various times, report the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 69

Page 70 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
short-term gain or loss from the sale on one line The result after combining these items with When you carry over a loss, it remains long
in Part I of Form 8949 and the long-term gain or your other long-term capital gains and losses is term or short term. A long-term capital loss you
loss on one line in Part II of Form 8949. Enter your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 of carry over to the next tax year will reduce that
ªVariousº in column (c) for the ªDate acquired.º Schedule D). year's long-term capital gains before it reduces
See the Comprehensive Example  later in this that year's short-term capital gains.Total net gain or loss. To figure your total netchapter. gain or loss, combine your net short-term capital Figuring your carryover. The amount of
gain or loss (Schedule D, line 7) with your net your capital loss carryover is the amount of yourSale expenses. On Form 8949, include in col- long-term capital gain or loss (Schedule D, line total net loss that is more than the lesser of:umn (g) any expense of sale, such as broker's 15). Enter the result on Schedule D, Part III, linefees, commissions, state and local transfer 1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for16. If your losses are more than your gains, seetaxes, and option premiums, unless you re- the year, orCapital Losses, next. If both lines 15 and 16 areported the net sales price in column (e). If you gains and line 43 of Form 1040 is more than 2. Your taxable income increased by your al-include an expense of sale in column (g), enter zero, see Capital Gain Tax Rates, later. lowable capital loss deduction for the yearªOº in column (b).
and your deduction for personal exemp-
Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain or tions.Capital Losses
loss on the sale or trade of investment property If your deductions are more than your grossIf your capital losses are more than your capitalheld 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or income for the tax year, use your negative tax-gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.loss. You report it in Part I of Form 8949. able income in computing the amount in item (2).Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,You combine your share of short-term capital Complete Worksheet 4-1 to determine theenclosed in parentheses.gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations, part of your capital loss for 2011 that you canand fiduciaries, and any short-term capital loss Limit on deduction. Your allowable capital carry over to 2012.carryover, with your other short-term capital loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is thegains and losses to figure your net short-term lesser of: Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities incapital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D. 2011. The sales resulted in a capital loss of• $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file
$7,000. They had no other capital transactions.Long-term gains and losses. A capital gain a separate return), or
Their taxable income was $26,000. On their jointor loss on the sale or trade of investment prop- • Your total net loss as shown on line 16 of 2011 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital Schedule D. used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000),gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Form 8949.
can be carried over to 2012.You also report the following in Part II of You can use your total net loss to reduce your
If their capital loss had been $2,000, theirSchedule D: income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.
capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.• Undistributed long-term capital gains from They would have no carryover.Capital loss carryover. If you have a total neta mutual fund (or other regulated invest- loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more than Use short-term losses first. When you fig-ment company) or real estate investment the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you ure your capital loss carryover, use yourtrust (REIT); can carry over the unused part to the next year short-term capital losses first, even if you in-and treat it as if you had incurred it in that next• Your share of long-term capital gains or curred them after a long-term capital loss. If youyear. If part of the loss is still unused, you canlosses from partnerships, S corporations, have not reached the limit on the capital losscarry it over to later years until it is completelyand fiduciaries; deduction after using the short-term capitalused up.• All capital gain distributions from mutual losses, use the long-term capital losses until youWhen you figure the amount of any capitalfunds and REITs not reported directly on reach the limit.loss carryover to the next year, you must takeline 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form the current year's allowable deduction into ac- Decedent's capital loss. A capital loss1040; and count, whether or not you claimed it and whether sustained by a decedent during his or her last
• Long-term capital loss carryovers. or not you filed a return for the current year. tax year (or carried over to that year from an
Worksheet 4-1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2011 to 2012 if Schedule D, line 21, is a loss and (a) that loss is a
smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D, line 16, or (b) Form 1040, line 41, is less than zero. Otherwise, you do not have any
carryovers.
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 41. If a loss, enclose the amount in parentheses ............ . 1.
2. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 21, as a positive amount ............................... . 2.
3. Combine lines 1 and 2. If zero or less, enter -0- ......................................... . 3.
4. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 3 .................................................. . 4.
If line 7 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 5; otherwise, enter -0- on line 5 and go to line 9.
5. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 7, as a positive amount ................................ . 5.
6. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 15. If a loss, enter -0- ................... . 6.
7. Add lines 4 and 6 .............................................................. . 7.
8. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2012. Subtract line 7 from line 5. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... . 8.
If line 15 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 9; otherwise, skip lines 9 through 13.
9. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 15, as a positive amount ............................... . 9.
10. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 7 .................................. . 10.
11. Subtract line 5 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................... . 11.
12. Add lines 10 and 11 ............................................................ . 12.
13. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2012. Subtract line 12 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- ..... . 13.
Page 70 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 71 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
earlier year) can be deducted only on the final 28% rate gain. This gain includes gain or loss • Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or line
income tax return filed for the decedent. The from the sale of collectibles and the eligible gain 19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is
capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply in from the sale of qualified small business stock more than zero.
this situation. The decedent's estate cannot de- minus the section 1202 exclusion. See the Comprehensive Example  later for anduct any of the loss or carry it over to following Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain or example of how to figure your tax using theyears. Schedule D Tax Worksheet.loss from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,
Joint and separate returns. If you and your antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati- Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Taxspouse once filed separate returns and are now num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev- Worksheet. If you do not have to use thefiling a joint return, combine your separate capi- erage held more than 1 year. Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explainedtal loss carryovers. However, if you and your Collectibles gain includes gain from the sale above) and any of the following apply, use thespouse once filed a joint return and are now of an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-filing separate returns, any capital loss carryover trust due to unrealized appreciation of col- sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Formfrom the joint return can be deducted only on the lectibles. 1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.return of the spouse who actually had the loss.
Gain on qualified small business stock. If • You received qualified dividends. (See
you realized a gain from qualified small business Qualified Dividends in chapter 1.)Capital Gain Tax Rates stock that you held more than 5 years, you • You do not have to file Schedule D andgenerally can exclude up to 50% of your gainThe tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are you received capital gain distributions.from your income. The exclusion can be up togenerally lower than the tax rates that apply to (See Exceptions to filing Form 8949 and75% for stock acquired after February 17, 2009other income. These lower rates are called the Schedule D (Form 1040), earlier.)(100% for stock acquired after September 27,maximum capital gain rates.
2010, and before January 1, 2012). The exclu-The term ªnet capital gainº means the • Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both
sion can be up to 60% for certain empowermentamount by which your net long-term capital gain more than zero.
zone business stock. The eligible gain minusfor the year is more than your net short-term
your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain.capital loss. Alternative minimum tax. These capital gainFor 2011, the maximum capital gain rates See Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock , rates are also used in figuring alternative mini-are 0%, 15%, 25%, and 28%. See Table 4-4 for earlier in this chapter. mum tax.details.
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Generally,If you figure your tax using the maxi- this is any part of your capital gain from sellingmum capital gain rate and the regular section 1250 property (real property) that is duetax computation results in a lower tax,
TIP Comprehensiveto depreciation (but not more than your net sec-the regular tax computation applies.
tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the Example28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250Example. All of your net capital gain is from Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructionsselling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would For more information on Form 8949to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain.be 28%. Because you are single and your tax- and Schedule D, see Reporting CapitalFor more information about section 1250 prop-able income is $25,000, none of your taxable Gains and Losses  in chapter 4. Seeerty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of
TIPincome will be taxed above the 15% rate. The also Schedule D, Form 8949, and the 2011Publication 544.28% rate does not apply. Instructions for Schedule D.
Emily Jones is single and, in addition toTax computation using maximum capitalInvestment interest deducted. If you claim a
wages from her job, she has income from stocksgains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends anddeduction for investment interest, you may have
and other securities. For the 2011 tax year, sheCapital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule Dto reduce the amount of your net capital gain
had the following capital gains and losses, whichTax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figurethat is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.
she reports on Form 8949 and Schedule D. Heryour tax if you have qualified dividends or netReduce it by the amount of the net capital gain
filled-in Form 8949 and Schedule D are showncapital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-you choose to include in investment income
at the end of this example. She keeps track of allule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains.when figuring the limit on your investment inter-
her basis adjustments to her mutual funds onest deduction. This is done on the Schedule D Schedule D Tax Worksheet. Use the her Mutual Fund Record, shown later.Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends and Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule DCapital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa- Mutual Fund Record. She shows the non-instructions to figure your tax if:tion about the limit on investment interest, see dividend distributions and the undistributed cap-• You have to file Schedule D, andInterest Expenses in chapter 3. ital gains from Mutual Fund S and the reinvested
dividends from Mutual Fund R. She does not
show the exempt-interest dividends from MutualTable 4-4. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
Fund X because those dividends do not change
her basis in the shares. She keeps this record
THEN your maximum with her mutual fund documents and uses it to
IF your net capital gain is from ... capital gain rate is ... reconcile her 2011 sale of Mutual Fund S.
collectibles gain 28%
Capital gains and losses ÐForm 8949 and
eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the Schedule D. Emily sold stock in two different
section 1202 exclusion 28% companies that she held for less than a year. In
June, she sold 100 shares of Trucking Co. stockunrecaptured section 1250 gain 25% that she bought in February. She had an ad-
justed basis of $1,150 in the stock and sold it forother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25%
$400. In July, she sold 25 shares of Computeror higher 15%
Co. stock that she bought in June. She had an
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is lower adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000 and sold it
than 25% 0% for $2,500. She reports these short-term trans-
actions on line 1 in Part I of Form 8949.1ªOther gainº means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Emily had other stock sales that she reports
as long-term transactions on line 3 in Part II of
Form 8949.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 71

Page 72 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co. Schedule D. She enters the amounts from her Form 6781. On June 2, 2011, Emily had a
stock for $5,000. She bought 100 of those short-term transactions from columns (e) and (f) realized loss from a regulated futures contract of
shares in 1999, for $1,000. She bought 100 of line 2 of Form 8949, in columns (e) and (f) of $11,000. She also had an unrealized
more shares in 2001 for $2,200, and an addi- line 1 of Schedule D. She has a short-term marked-to-market gain on open contracts of
tional 300 shares in 2004 for $1,500. Her total capital loss of $250 that she enters in column (h) $27,000 at the end of 2011. She reported an
basis in the stock is $4,700. She reports this of line 1 of Schedule D. She enters the amounts unrealized marked-to-market gain of $1,000 on
transaction on line 3 in Part II of Form 8949. from her long-term transactions from columns her 2010 tax return. (This $1,000 must be sub-
In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co. (e), (f), and (g) of line 4 of Form 8949, in columns tracted from her 2011 profit.) These amounts
stock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi- (e), (f), and (g) of line 8 of Schedule D. She has a are shown in boxes 10, 11, and 12 of the Form
ness stock that she bought in September 2006. long-term capital gain of $3,004 that she enters 1099-B she received from her broker for these
Her basis is $1,100. She enters this information in column (h) of line 8 of Schedule D. transactions. Box 13 shows her combined profit
on line 3 in Part II of Form 8949. of $15,000 ($27,000 − $1,000 − $11,000). SheOther 1099s. In June, Emily investedIn October, Emily sold 200 shares of Mutual reports this gain in Part I of Form 6781 (not$3,800 in Mutual Fund R and received 153.16Fund S for $3,200. She purchased these shares shown). She shows 40% ($6,000) as short-termshares that cost $24.81 per share. She re-in 1997 at $10 each. She received some nondiv- gain on line 4 of Schedule D and 60% ($9,000)quested that all her distributions be reinvested inidend distributions in 1999, 2000, and 2008 that as long-term gain on line 11 of Schedule D.more shares of the Fund. She then receivedreduced her basis in the shares. In 2009 and The Form 1099-B that Emily received from$265 of ordinary dividends, including $250 of2010, Emily reported undistributed capital gains her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.qualified dividends, and $61 of capital gain dis-that increased her basis in her shares. She re- tributions from the Fund. She received Formceived no distributions in 2011 before the sale. Capital loss carryover from 2010. Emily
1099-DIV showing these amounts. On Decem-She reports the sale in Part II on line 3 of her has a capital loss carryover to 2011 of $800, ofber 29, 2011, she acquired an additional 13.03Form 8949. She uses the information from her which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500shares at $25.01 per share from her reinvestedForm 1099-B to complete columns (a) and (c) is long-term capital loss. She enters thesedividends. She reports the ordinary dividends onthrough (f). After adjustment for her nondividend amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. SheForm 1040, line 9a. She reports the qualifieddistributions and her undistributed capital gains, also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-dividends on Form 1040, line 9b. She does nother basis is $1,996 ($9.98 per share). This is the ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-report the ordinary dividends on Schedule Bsame basis shown in her personal records and sheet.(Form 1040A or Form 1040) because her totalon her Form 1099-B. She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-ordinary dividends were not over $1,500. SheShe received a Form 1099-B (not shown) over Worksheet in her 2010 edition of Publica-reports the capital gain distributions on Sched-from her broker for each of these transactions. tion 550 (not shown), so she could properlyule D (Form 1040) because she has other capi-Each Form 1099-B contains the correct informa- report her loss carryover for the 2011 tax yeartal transactions. She enters the $61 capital gaintion for the transaction, including the basis without refiguring it.distribution on line 13.shown in box 3. She will check box A in Part I of
In April 2009, Emily invested $2,600 in Mu-Form 8949 where she reports her short-term Tax computation. Because Emily has gainstual Fund X and received 87.54 shares at $29.70transactions. She will also check box A in Part II on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D, sheper share. She received exempt-interest divi-of Form 8949 where she reports her long-term checks the ªYesº box on line 17 and goes to linedends of $92 in 2009, $107 in 2010, and $101 intransactions. The entries shown in box 2 of 18. On line 18 she enters $1,000 from line 7 of2011. She chose not to reinvest these and in-these forms total $15,200. the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18stead received a cash payment. She receivedEmily held her qualified small business stock is greater than zero, she checks the ªNoº box onForm 1099-INT from Fund X showing this non-for more than 5 years, so she can exclude 50% line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheettaxable amount, which she reports on Form($1,500) of the gain. She takes the exclusion by to figure her tax.1040, line 8b.reporting the gain realized on the sale on Form
After entering the gain from line 16 of Sched-8949, line 3, as if she were not taking the exclu- In 1997, Emily bought 100 shares of com-
ule D on line 13 of her Form 1040, she com-sion. She completes all columns on Form 8949. mon stock in Green Publishing Co. at $10.29 per
pletes the rest of Form 1040 through line 43.She enters ªSº in column (b) and the amount of share. In 2011, she received $237 in ordinary
She enters the amount from that line, $30,000,the excluded gain as a negative number (in dividends, including $220 of qualified dividends,
on line 1 of the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. Afterparentheses) in column (g). She also enters the as a cash payment that was not reinvested. She
filling out the rest of that worksheet, she figuresexclusion as a positive number on line 2 of the received Form 1099-DIV showing this amount.
her tax as $2,421. This is less than the tax she28% Rate Gain Worksheet. She reports the ordinary dividends on Form
would have figured without the capital gain taxEmily completes her Form 8949 and then 1040, line 9a, and the qualified dividends on
rates, $4,079.transfers the amounts from her Form 8949 to Form 1040, line 9b.
Page 72 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 73 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4-5. Mutual Fund Record for Emily Jones
Acquired1 Sold or Redeemed
Adjusted2
Number Cost NumberMutual Fund Adjustment to Basis Per Share Basis Per
Date of Per Date ofShare
Shares Share Shares
12-31-99 12-31-00 12-31-08 12-30-09 8-30-10MUTUAL FUND S 7-12-97 200 10.00 9.98 10-5-11 200(.05) (.02) (.04) .03 .06
MUTUAL FUND X 4-19-09 87.54 29.70
MUTUAL FUND R 6-12-11 153.16 24.81
12-29-11 13.03 25.01
1 Include share received from reinvestment of distributions.
2 Cost plus or minus adjustments.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 73

Page 74 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily's 2011 Form 8949, page 1
Form  8949
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Sales and Other Dispositions of Capital Assets
/uni25B6 See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040). 
/uni25B6 For more information about Form 8949, see www.irs.gov/form8949 
/uni25B6 Attach to Schedule D to list your transactions for lines 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, and 10.
OMB No. 1545-0074
2011
Attachment   
Sequence No. 12A 
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
Note: You must check one of the boxes below. Complete a separate Form 8949, page 1, for each box that is checked.
*Caution. Do not complete column (b) or (g) until you have read the instructions for those columns (see the Instructions for Schedule 
D (Form 1040)). Columns (b) and (g) do not apply for most transactions and should generally be left blank.
(A) Short-term transactions reported on 
Form 1099-B with basis reported to the IRS
(B) Short-term transactions reported on Form 
1099-B but basis not reported to the IRS
(C) Short-term transactions for which 
you cannot check box A or B
1
(a) 
 Description of property 
 (Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(b) 
 Code, if any, 
for column (g)*
(c)  
Date acquired 
 (Mo., day, yr.)
(d) 
 Date sold 
 (Mo., day, yr.)
(e) 
 Sales price 
 (see instructions)
(f)  
Cost or other basis 
 (see instructions)
(g) 
 Adjustments to    
gain or loss, if any*
2 Totals. Add the amounts in columns (e) and (f). Also, combine the 
amounts in column (g). Enter here and include on Schedule D, line 1 (if 
box A above is checked), line 2 (if box B above is checked), or line 3 (if 
box C above is checked) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . /uni25B62
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 37768Z Form 8949 (2011) 
100 sh Trucking Co.
25 sh Computer Co.
02-12-11
06-30-11
06-11-11
07-30-11
400
2,500
1,150
2,000
2,900 3,150
Emily Jones 111-00-1111
/uni2713
Page 74 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 75 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily's 2011 Form 8949, page 2
Form 8949 (2011) Attachment Sequence No. 12A Page 2
Name(s) shown on return. Do not enter name and social security number if shown on other side. Your social security number
Part II Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
Note: You must check one of the boxes below. Complete a separate Form 8949, page 2, for each box that is checked.
*Caution. Do not complete column (b) or (g) until you have read the instructions for those columns (see the Instructions for Schedule 
D (Form 1040)). Columns (b) and (g) do not apply for most transactions and should generally be left blank.
(A) Long-term transactions reported on 
Form 1099-B with basis reported to the IRS
(B) Long-term transactions reported on Form 
1099-B but basis not reported to the IRS
(C) Long-term transactions for which 
you cannot check box A or B
3
(a)  
Description of property 
 (Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(b) 
 Code, if any, 
for column (g)*
(c) 
 Date acquired 
 (Mo., day, yr.)
(d)  
Date sold 
 (Mo., day, yr.)
(e)  
Sales price 
 (see instructions)
(f)  
Cost or other basis 
 (see instructions)
(g)  
Adjustments to     
gain or loss, if any*
4 Totals. Add the amounts in columns (e) and (f). Also, combine the 
amounts in column (g). Enter here and include on Schedule D, line 8 (if 
box A above is checked), line 9 (if box B above is checked), or line 10 
(if box C above is checked) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  /uni25B64
Form 8949 (2011)
500 sh Furniture Co. VARIOUS 06-30-11 5,000 4,700
20 sh Toy Co. 09-29-06 12-15-11 4,100 1,100
200 sh Mutual Fund S 07-12-97 10-05-11 3,200 1,996
(1,500)
(1,500)12,300 7,796
Emily Jones 111-00-1111
S

Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 75

Page 76 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily's 2011 Schedule D (Form 1040), page 1
SCHEDULE D  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99)
Capital Gains and Losses
/uni25B6 Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.   /uni25B6 See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).   
/uni25B6 Use Form 8949 to list your transactions for lines 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, and 10. 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2011
Attachment   
Sequence No. 12 
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less 
(                          )
(                          )
(                          )
Complete Form 8949 before completing line 1, 2, or 3. 
This form may be easier to complete if you round off cents to 
whole dollars.
(e) Sales price from 
Form(s) 8949, line 2, 
column (e)
(f) Cost or other basis 
from Form(s) 8949, 
line 2, column (f)
(g) Adjustments to 
gain or loss from  
Form(s) 8949,  
line 2, column (g) 
(h) Gain or (loss) 
Combine columns (e), 
(f), and (g) 
1 
 
Short-term totals from all Forms 8949 with box A 
checked in Part I . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 
 
Short-term totals from all Forms 8949 with box B 
checked in Part I . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3 
 
Short-term totals from all Forms 8949 with box C 
checked in Part I . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4 Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824 . 4 
5  
 
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from 
Schedule(s) K-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5 
6  
 
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your Capital Loss Carryover 
Worksheet in the instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6 (                          )
7 Net short-term capital gain or (loss).  Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (h). If you have any 
long-term capital gains or losses, go to Part II below. Otherwise, go to Part III on the back  . . . 7 
Part II Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year 
(                          )
(                          )
(                          )
Complete Form 8949 before completing line 8, 9, or 10. 
This form may be easier to complete if you round off cents to 
whole dollars.
(e) Sales price from 
Form(s) 8949, line 4, 
column (e)
(f) Cost or other basis 
from Form(s) 8949, 
line 4, column (f)
(g) Adjustments to 
gain or loss from  
Form(s) 8949,  
line 4, column (g) 
(h) Gain or (loss) 
Combine columns (e), 
(f), and (g) 
8 
 
Long-term totals from all Forms 8949 with box A 
checked in Part II . . . . . . . . . . . .
9 
 
Long-term totals from all Forms 8949 with box B 
checked in Part II . . . . . . . . . . . .
10 
 
Long-term totals from all Forms 8949 with box C 
checked in Part II . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11 
 
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or  (loss) 
from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
12 Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from Schedule(s) K-1 12 
13 Capital gain distributions. See the instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 
14 
 
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 13 of your Capital Loss Carryover 
Worksheet in the instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 (                          )
15 
 
Net long-term capital gain or (loss).  Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (h). Then go to Part III on
the back . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11338H Schedule D (Form 1040) 2011 
2,900 3,150 (250)
6,000
300
5,450
12,300 7,796 (1,500) 3,004
9,000
61
500
11,565
Emily Jones 111-00-1111
Page 76 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 77 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily's 2011 Schedule D (Form 1040), page 2
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2011 Page 2 
Part III Summary
16 Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
• If line 16 is a gain, enter the amount from line 16 on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line
14. Then go to line 17 below. 
• If line 16 is a loss, skip lines 17 through 20 below. Then go to line 21. Also be sure to complete 
line 22.
• If line 16 is zero, skip lines 17 through 21 below and enter -0- on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 
1040NR, line 14. Then go to line 22.
17 Are lines 15 and 16 both gains? 
Yes. Go to line 18. 
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22.
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the instructions . . /uni25B618 
19 
 
Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet in the 
instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . /uni25B619
20 Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank? 
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 41. Then complete 
the Qualiﬁed Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the instructions for Form 1040, 
line 44 (or in the instructions for Form 1040NR, line 42). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 
below. 
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 41. Then complete the
Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below. 
21 If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14, the smaller  of: 
• The loss on line 16 or 
• ($3,000), or if married ﬁling separately, ($1,500) } . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 (                                )
Note.  When ﬁguring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers. 
22 Do you have qualiﬁed dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b? 
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 41. Then complete 
the Qualiﬁed Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the instructions for Form 1040, 
line 44 (or in the instructions for Form 1040NR, line 42). 
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. 
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2011 
17,015
1,000


Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 77

Page 78 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and Capital
Gain Tax Worksheet in the Instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR, line 42) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b); or 
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 41) is zero or less.
 Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 42).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 41). (However, if you are filing Form 2555 or
2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned income), enter instead the amount from line 3 of the Foreign Earned Income Tax
Worksheet in the Instructions for Form 1040, line 44) ............................................. . 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or
Form 1040NR, line 10b) ........................ . 2. 470
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952 (used
to figure investment interest expense
deduction), line 4g ............. . 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line
4e* ....................... . 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ....... . 5. 0
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-** .................. . 6. 470
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ..... . 7. 11,565
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 ................. . 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0-** .................. . 9. 11,565
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ...................................................... . 10. 12,035
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D** ............................. . 11. 1,000
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 .......................................... . 12. 1,000
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 ............................................................. . 13. 11,035
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................................. . 14. 18,965
15. Enter:
• $34,500 if single or married filing separately;
}
• $69,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
• $46,250 if head of household ....... . 15. 34,000
16. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 15 .......................................... . 16. 30,000
17. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 16 ............................ . 17. 18,965
18. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... . 18. 17,965
19. Enter the larger of line 17 or line 18 ......................................... . © 19. 18,965
20. Subtract line 17 from line 16. This amount is taxed at 0%. ........................... . © 20. 11,035
If lines 1 and 16 are the same, skip lines 21 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 21.
21. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 ............................. . 21.
22. Enter the amount from line 20 (if line 20 is blank, enter -0-) .............. . 22.
23. Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. . © 23.
24. Multiply line 23 by 15% (.15) ............................................................. . 24.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 25 through 30 and go to line 31. Otherwise, go to line 25.
25. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 ................ . 25.
26. Add lines 10 and 19 .......................... . 26.
27. Enter the amount from line 1 above ................ . 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- .................. . 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. . © 29.
30. Multiply line 29 by 25% (.25) ............................................................. . 30.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 31 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 31.
31. Add lines 19, 20, 23, and 29 ............................................... . 31.
32. Subtract line 31 from line 1 ................................................ . 32.
33. Multiply line 32 by 28% (.28) ............................................................. . 33.
34. Figure the tax on the amount on line 19. If the amount on line 19 is less than $100,000, use the Tax Table to figure the tax.
If the amount on line 19 is $100,000 or more, use the Tax Computation Worksheet .......................... . 34. 2,421
35. Add lines 24, 30, 33, and 34 ............................................................. . 35. 2,421
36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. If the amount on line 1 is less than $100,000, use the Tax Table to figure the tax. If
the amount on line 1 is $100,000 or more, use the Tax Computation Worksheet ............................ . 36. 4,079
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36.
Also include this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 42). (If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, do not
enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44. Instead, enter it on line 4 of the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet in the
Form 1040 instructions) ................................................................ . 37. 2,421
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
**If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ,
see the footnote in the Foreign Earned
Income Tax Worksheet in the Instructions
for Form 1040, line 44, before completing
this line.
Page 78 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 79 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% Rate Gain WorksheetÐLine 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on Form 8949, line 3 ........ . 1.
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported in column (g) of
Form 8949, line 3, with code ªSº in column (b), for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any
section 1202 exclusion you reported in column (g) of Form 8949, line 3, with code ªSº in column (b), for
which you excluded 60% of the gain ................................................ . 2. 1,500.00
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ........................... . 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
............. . 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. ( 500.00)box 11, code C ............................................................... .
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- .................... . 6. -0-
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on 
Schedule D, line 18 ............................................................ . 7. 1,000.00
Emily's Form 1099-B from XYZ Trading Co.
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
OMB No. 1545-0715PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale or exchange1a Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
TransactionsDate of acquisition1b
2 Reported
to IRS
Sales price
$
Sales price less commissions and option premiums
d e w o l l a s i d  s s o l  e l a s  h s a We m a n  S ’ T N E I P I C E R 5
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
CUSIP number
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B (keep for your records)
CORRECTED (if checked)
Form 1099-B
6
11
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number Cost or other basis3 Federal income tax withheld4
$
10
$
Profit or (loss) realized in
2011 on closed contracts
11 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2010
12 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2011
13 Aggregate profit or (loss) on
contracts
$
$$
Type of gain or loss8
Short-term
Long-term
If box checked, loss
based on amount in
box 2 is not allowed
15
14 Bartering
$$
$
9 Description
If this box is checked, 
boxes 1b, 3, 5, and 8 
may be blank
$
Sales price of stocks,
bonds, etc.
Account number (see instructions)
7
XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, P A 18605
10-1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1-00-1 1 1 1
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36306 RFC
1,000
27,000 15,000
(11,000)
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 79

Page 80 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
day you got them (for example, by holding them How To Make the 
in a separate brokerage account). Mark-to-Market ElectionSpecial Rules for
To make the mark-to-market election for 2012,Traders in Securities How To Report
you must file a statement by April 17, 2012. This
statement should be attached to either yourTransactions from trading activities result in cap-Special rules apply if you are a trader in securi-
ital gains and losses and must be reported on 2011 individual income tax return or a requestties in the business of buying and selling securi-
Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040), asties for your own account. To be engaged in for an extension of time to file that return. The
appropriate. Losses from these transactions arebusiness as a trader in securities, you must statement must include the following informa-
subject to the limit on capital losses explainedmeet all the following conditions. tion.
earlier in this chapter.• You must seek to profit from daily market • That you are making an election under
movements in the prices of securities and section 475(f) of the Internal RevenueMark-to-market election made. If you made
not from dividends, interest, or capital ap- Code.the mark-to-market election, you should report
preciation. all gains and losses from trading as ordinary • The first tax year for which the election isgains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, instead• Your activity must be substantial. effective.of as capital gains and losses on Form 8949 and
• You must carry on the activity with con- • The trade or business for which you areSchedule D. In that case, securities held at the
tinuity and regularity. end of the year in your business as a trader are making the election.
marked to market by treating them as if they
The following facts and circumstances should were sold (and reacquired) for fair market value If you are not required to file a 2011 income
be considered in determining if your activity is a on the last business day of the year. But do not tax return, you make the election by placing thesecurities trading business. mark to market any securities you held for in- above statement in your books and records no
vestment. Report sales from those securities on later than March 15, 2012. Attach a copy of the• Typical holding periods for securities
Form 8949 and Schedule D, as appropriate, notbought and sold. statement to your 2012 return.
Form 4797. See the 2011 Instructions for If your method of accounting for 2011 is• The frequency and dollar amount of your Schedule D. inconsistent with the mark-to-market election,trades during the year.
you must change your method of accounting forExpenses. Interest expense and other invest-• The extent to which you pursue the activity securities under Revenue Procedure 2011-14ment expenses that an investor would deduct onto produce income for a livelihood. (or its successor) available at www.irs.gov/irb/Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by a
2011-04_IRB/ar08.html . Revenue Procedure• The amount of time you devote to the ac- trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or
tivity. 2011-14 requires you to file Form 3115, Applica-Loss From Business, if the expenses are from
tion for Change in Accounting Method. Follow itsthe trading business. Commissions and other
If your trading activities do not meet the above instructions. Enter ª64º on line 1a of the Formcosts of acquiring or disposing of securities are
definition of a business, you are considered an not deductible but must be used to figure gain or 3115.
investor, and not a trader. It does not matter loss. The limit on investment interest expense, Once you make the election, it will apply to
whether you call yourself a trader or a ªday which applies to investors, does not apply to 2012 and all later tax years, unless you gettrader.º interest paid or incurred in a trading business. permission from the IRS to revoke it. The effect
of making the election is described underNote. You may be a trader in some securi- Self-employment tax. Gains and losses from Mark-to-market election made, earlier.ties and have other securities you hold for in- selling securities as a trader are not subject to
For more information on this election, seevestment. The special rules discussed here do self-employment tax. This is true whether the
Revenue Procedure 99-17, on page 52 of Inter-not apply to the securities held for investment. election is made or not. For an exception that
nal Revenue Bulletin 1999-7 atYou must keep detailed records to distinguish applies to section 1256 contracts, see
 www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb99-07.pdf.the securities. The securities held for investment Self-Employment Income earlier under Section
must be identified as such in your records on the 1256 Contracts Marked to Market.
Page 80 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 81 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by Walk-in. Many products and services
using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) are available on a walk-in basis.
Assistant available online at www.irs.gov/
5. individuals. • Products. You can walk in to many post
• Sign up to receive local and national tax offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up
news by email. certain forms, instructions, and publica-
How To Get Tax tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery• Get information on starting and operating stores, copy centers, city and county gov-a small business. ernment offices, credit unions, and officeHelp supply stores have a collection of products
available to print from a CD or photocopyPhone. Many services are available byYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRSphone. order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-
tions, and get information from the IRS in sev-
 enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue
eral ways. By selecting the method that is best Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-for you, you will have quick and easy access to able for research purposes.tions. Call 1-800-TAX -FORMtax help. (1-800-829-3676) to order current-year • Services. You can walk in to your localforms, instructions, and publications, andFree help with your return. Free help in pre- Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-prior-year forms and instructions. Youparing your return is available nationwide from ness day for personal, face-to-face taxshould receive your order within 10 days.IRS-certified volunteers. The Volunteer Income help. An employee can explain IRS letters,Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to request adjustments to your tax account,• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withhelp low-moderate income taxpayers and the or help you set up a payment plan. If youyour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) program is need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-• Solving problems. You can getdesigned to assist taxpayers age 60 and older tions about how the tax law applies to yourface-to-face help solving tax problemswith their tax returns. Most VITA and TCE sites individual tax return, or you are more com-every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-offer free electronic filing and all volunteers will fortable talking with someone in person,sistance Centers. An employee can ex-let you know about credits and deductions you visit your local Taxpayer Assistanceplain IRS letters, request adjustments tomay be entitled to claim. To find the nearest Center where you can spread out youryour account, or help you set up a pay-VITA or TCE site, visit IRS.gov or call records and talk with an IRS representa-ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-1-800-906-9887 or 1-800-829-1040. tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-tance Center for an appointment. To findAs part of the TCE program, AARP offers the essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, youthe number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near- can call your local Center and leave atacts or look in the phone book underest AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or message requesting an appointment to re-United States Government, Internal Reve-visit AARP's website at solve a tax account issue. A representa-nue Service.www.aarp.org/money/taxaide. tive will call you back within 2 businessFor more information on these programs, go days to schedule an in-person appoint-• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessto IRS.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the ment at your convenience. If you have anto TTY/TDD equipment, callupper right-hand corner. ongoing, complex tax account problem or1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to
a special need, such as a disability, anorder forms and publications.Internet. You can access the IRS web-
appointment can be requested. All othersite at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis- issues will be handled without an appoint-a week to:
 ten to pre-recorded messages covering ment. To find the number of your localvarious tax topics.• E-file your return. Find out about commer- office, go to cial tax preparation and e-file services www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the• Refund information. To check the status ofavailable free to eligible taxpayers. phone book under United States Govern-your 2011 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 or
ment, Internal Revenue Service.1-800-829-4477 (automated refund infor-• Check the status of your 2011 refund. Go
mation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week).to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Re-
Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS ac-fund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS Mail. You can send your order for
knowledges receipt of your e-filed return,acknowledges receipt of your e-filed re- forms, instructions, and publications to
or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper re-turn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper the address below. You should receive
turn. If you filed Form 8379 with your re-return. If you filed Form 8379 with your a response within 10 days after your request is
turn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filedreturn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you received.
electronically). Have your 2011 tax returnfiled electronically). Have your 2011 tax
available so you can provide your socialreturn available so you can provide your Internal Revenue Service
security number, your filing status, and thesocial security number, your filing status, 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
exact whole dollar amount of your refund.and the exact whole dollar amount of your Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
If you check the status of your refund andrefund.
are not given the date it will be issued, Taxpayer Advocate Service. The Taxpayer• Download forms, including talking tax please wait until the next week before Advocate Service (TAS) is your voice at the IRS.forms, instructions, and publications. checking back. Our job is to ensure that every taxpayer is• Order IRS products online. treated fairly, and that you know and understand• Other refund information. To check the
your rights. We offer free help to guide youstatus of a prior-year refund or amended• Research your tax questions online.
through the often-confusing process of resolvingreturn refund, call 1-800-829-1040.• Search publications online by topic or tax problems that you haven't been able to solvekeyword. on your own. Remember, the worst thing youEvaluating the quality of our telephone
can do is nothing at all.services. To ensure IRS representatives give• Use the online Internal Revenue Code,
accurate, courteous, and professional answers, TAS can help if you can't resolve your prob-regulations, or other official guidance.
we use several methods to evaluate the quality lem with the IRS and:• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) of our telephone services. One method is for a • Your problem is causing financial difficul-published in the last few years. second IRS representative to listen in on or ties for you, your family, or your business.• Figure your withholding allowances using record random telephone calls. Another is to ask
• You face (or your business is facing) anthe withholding calculator online at www. some callers to complete a short survey at the
immediate threat of adverse action.irs.gov/individuals. end of the call.
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 81

Page 82 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You have tried repeatedly to contact the before the IRS or in court on audits, appeals, tax • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-
IRS but no one has responded, or the IRS tions.collection disputes, and other issues for free or
has not responded to you by the date for a small fee. Some clinics can provide infor- • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andpromised. mation about taxpayer rights and responsibili- finding aid.
ties in many different languages for individuals
If you qualify for our help, we'll do everything • Tax law frequently asked questions.who speak English as a second language. For
we can to get your problem resolved. You will be more information and to find a clinic near you, • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-assigned to one advocate who will be with you at see the LITC page on www.irs.gov/advocate or sponse system.every turn. We have offices in every state, the IRS Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of theDistrict of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Although Clinic List. This publication is also available by U.S. Code.TAS is independent within the IRS, our advo- calling 1-800-829-3676 or at your local IRS of-cates know how to work with the IRS to get your • Links to other Internet based Tax Re-fice.problems resolved. And our services are always search Materials.free.
Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS • Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxAs a taxpayer, you have rights that the IRS
Guide to Free Tax Services, is your guide to IRS forms.must abide by in its dealings with you. Our tax
services and resources. Learn about free taxtoolkit at www.TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov can • Internal Revenue Bulletins.information from the IRS, including publications,help you understand these rights.
services, and education and assistance pro- • Toll-free and email technical support.If you think TAS might be able to help you,
grams. The publication also has an index of overcall your local advocate, whose number is in • Two releases during the year.100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information)your phone book and on our website at www.irs. ± The first release will ship the beginningyou can listen to on the telephone. The majoritygov/advocate. You can also call our toll-free of January 2012.number at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD of the information and services listed in this ± The final release will ship the beginning1-800-829-4059. publication are available to you free of charge. If of March 2012.TAS also handles large-scale or systemic there is a fee associated with a resource or
problems that affect many taxpayers. If you service, it is listed in the publication. Purchase the DVD from National Technicalknow of one of these broad issues, please report Accessible versions of IRS published prod- Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/it to us through our Systemic Advocacy Manage- ucts are available on request in a variety of cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or callment System at www.irs.gov/advocate. alternative formats for people with disabilities. 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). (plus a $6 handling fee).DVD for tax products. You can orderLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are inde- Publication 1796, IRS Tax Productspendent from the IRS. Some clinics serve indi- DVD, and obtain:
viduals whose income is below a certain level
• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-and who need to resolve a tax problem. These
lications.clinics provide professional representation
Page 82 Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help

Page 83 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary • Stock for which the average Demand loan: A loan payable in value on the last business day of
full at any time upon demand by theare the meanings of the terms as basis method is available and the year.
lender.used in this publication. The same that is acquired for cash in an
Market discount: The stated re-term used in another publication account after 2011. Dividend: A distribution of demption price of a bond at matur-may have a slightly different mean- • A specified security trans- money or other property made by a ity minus your basis in the bonding. ferred to an account if the corporation to its shareholders out immediately after you acquire it.
broker or other custodian of of its earnings and profits.Accrual method: An accounting Market discount arises when the
the account receives a trans-method under which you report value of a debt obligation de-Equity option: Any option:fer statement reporting theyour income when you earn it, creases after its issue date.
security as a covered secur-whether or not you have received it. • To buy or sell stock, or
Market discount bond: Anyity.You generally deduct your ex- • That is valued directly or indi- bond having market discount ex-penses when you incur a liability for • A security acquired due to a rectly by reference to any cept:them, rather than when you pay stock dividend, stock split, re- stock or narrow-based secur-them. • Short-term obligations withorganization, redemption, ity index.
fixed maturity dates of up to 1stock conversion, recapitali-At-risk rules: Rules that limit the
year from the date of issue,zation, corporate division, oramount of loss you may deduct to Fair market value: The price at
other similar action, if the ba-the amount you risk losing in the which property would change • Tax-exempt obligations thatsis of the acquired security isactivity. hands between a willing buyer and you bought before May 1,determined from the basis of a willing seller, both having reason- 1993,Basis: Basis is the amount of a covered security. able knowledge of the relevant • U.S. savings bonds, andyour investment in property for tax facts.
purposes. The basis of property A ªspecified securityº is any • Certain installment obliga-you buy is usually the cost. Basis is Forgone interest: The amountshare of stock (or any interest tions.used to figure gain or loss on the of interest that would be payable fortreated as stock, such as an Ameri-
sale or disposition of investment any period if interest accrued at thecan Depositary Receipt) in an en- Mutual fund: A mutual fund is aproperty. applicable federal rate and wastity organized as, or treated for regulated investment companypayable annually on December 31,federal tax purposes as, a corpora- generally created by ªpoolingºBelow-market loan: A demand minus any interest payable on thetion (foreign or domestic). For thisloan (defined later) on which inter- funds of investors to allow them toloan for that period.purpose, a security classified asest is payable at a rate below the take advantage of diversity of in-stock by the issuer is treated asapplicable federal rate, or a term Forward contract: A contract to vestments and professional man-stock. If the issuer has not classi-loan where the amount loaned is deliver a substantially fixed amount agement.fied the security, the security is notmore than the present value of all of property (including cash) for a
treated as stock unless the broker Nominee: A person who re-payments due under the loan. substantially fixed price.
knows that the security is reasona- ceives, in his or her name, income
Call: An option that entitles the Futures contract: An ex-bly classified as stock under gen- that actually belongs to someone
purchaser to buy, at any time change-traded contract to buy oreral federal tax principles. else.
before a specified future date, sell a specified commodity or finan-See the Instructions for Form Noncovered security: A non-property such as a stated number cial instrument at a specified price1099-B for more details. covered security, for purposes ofof shares of stock at a specified at a specified future date. See also
Form 1099-B, is any security that isprice. Conversion transaction: Any Commodity future.
not a covered security. The follow-transaction that you entered into
Cash method: An accounting Gift loan: Any below-market loan ing securities are not covered se-after April 30, 1993, that meetsmethod under which you report where the forgone interest is in the curities:both of these tests.your income in the year in which nature of a gift.
• Stock acquired in 2011 that isyou actually or constructively re- 1. Substantially all of your ex- transferred in 2011 to a divi-Interest: Compensation for theceive it. You generally deduct your pected return from the trans- use or forbearance of money. dend reinvestment plan thatexpenses in the year you pay them. action is due to the time value meets the requirements ofof your net investment. Investment interest: The inter-Commodities trader: A person Regulations section
est you paid or accrued on money2. The transaction is one of thewho is actively engaged in trading 1.1012-1(e)(6). However, ayou borrowed that is allocable tofollowing.section 1256 contracts and is regis- covered security acquired inproperty held for investment.tered with a domestic board of 2011 and transferred to a div-a. A straddle, including anytrade designated as a contract idend reinvestment plan afterLimited partner: A partnerset of offsetting positionsmarket by the Commodities Fu- 2011 remains a covered se-whose participation in partnershipon stock.tures Trading Commission. curity. For purposes of thisactivities is restricted, and whose
b. Any transaction in which rule, stock is consideredpersonal liability for partnershipCommodity future: A contract you acquire property transferred to a dividend rein-debts is limited to the amount ofmade on a commodity exchange, (whether or not actively vestment plan if it is held in amoney or other property that he orcalling for the sale or purchase of a traded) at substantially the plan that is not a dividend re-she contributed or may have tofixed amount of a commodity at a same time that you con- investment plan and the plancontribute.future date for a fixed price. tract to sell the same prop- amends its plan documents to
Listed option: Any option that iserty or substantially become a dividend reinvest-Covered security: For purposes
traded on, or subject to the rules of,identical property at a price ment plan. The stock is con-of Form 1099-B, a covered security
a qualified board or exchange.set in the contract. sidered transferred as of theis any of the following:
effective date of the planc. Any other transaction that• A specified security (defined Marked to market rule: The amendments.is marketed or sold as pro-below) acquired for cash in treatment of each section 1256
ducing capital gains from a • A security acquired due to aan account after 2010, except contract (defined later) held by a
transaction described in stock dividend, stock split, re-stock for which the average taxpayer at the close of the year as
(1).basis method is available. if it were sold for its fair market organization, redemption,
Publication 550 (2011) Page 83

Page 84 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
stock conversion, recapitali- real property trades or busi- Real estate mortgage invest- Securities futures contract: A
nesses in which you materi- contract of sale for future deliveryment conduit (REMIC): An en-zation, corporate division, or
ally participate. of a single security or of a nar-tity that is formed for the purpose ofother similar action, if the ba-
row-based security index.holding a fixed pool of mortgagessis of the acquired security is • You perform more than 750 secured by interests in real prop-determined from the basis of hours of services during the Short sale: The sale of propertyerty, with multiple classes of inter-a noncovered security. year in real property trades or that you generally do not own. Youests held by investors. Thesebusinesses in which you ma-• A security that, when ac- borrow the property to deliver to ainterests may be either regular orterially participate. buyer and, at a later date, you buyquired, did not have to be re- residual. substantially identical property andported on Form 1099-B
Portfolio income: Gross income deliver it to the lender.Regulated futures contract: Abecause it was acquired from
from interest, dividends, annuities, section 1256 contract that:an exempt recipient or an ex- Straddle: Generally, a set of off-or royalties that is not derived in theempt foreign person as de- • Provides that amounts that setting positions on personal prop-ordinary course of a trade or busi-fined in Regulations section must be deposited to, or may erty. A straddle may consist of aness. It includes gains from the1.6045-1(g)(1). be withdrawn from, your mar- purchased option to buy and a pur-sale or trade of property (other than gin account depend on daily chased option to sell on the same• A security for which reporting an interest in a passive activity) market conditions (a system number of shares of the security,is required by Regulations producing portfolio income or held of marking to market), and with the same exercise price andsection 1.6049-5(d)(3)(ii) (cer- for investment.
period.tain securities owned by a for- • Is traded on, or subject to thePremium: The amount by whicheign intermediary or rules of, a qualified board of Stripped preferred stock: Stockyour cost or other basis in a bondflow-through entity). exchange, such as a domes- that meets the following tests.right after you get it is more than tic board of trade designatedSee the Instructions for Form the total of all amounts payable on as a contract market by the 1. There has been a separation1099-B for more details. the bond after you get it (other than Commodity Futures Trading in ownership between thepayments of qualified stated inter- Commission or any board of stock and any dividend on theNonequity option: Any listed est). trade or exchange approved stock that has not becomeoption that is not an equity option,
payable.by the Secretary of the Trea-such as debt options, commodity Private activity bond: A bond
sury.futures options, currency options, that is part of a state or local gov- 2. The stock:and broad-based stock index op- ernment bond issue of which:
tions. a. Is limited and preferred asRestricted stock: Stock you get
1. More than 10% of the pro- to dividends,for services you perform that is
Options dealer: Any person reg- ceeds are to be used for a nontransferable and is subject to a b. Does not participate in cor-istered with an appropriate national private business use, and substantial risk of forfeiture. porate growth to any signif-securities exchange as a market 2. More than 10% of the pay- icant extent, andSection 1256 contract: Any:maker or specialist in listed op- ment of the principal or inter-tions. c. Has a fixed redemption• Regulated futures contract,est is:
price.Original issue discount (OID): • Foreign currency contract asa. Secured by an interest inThe amount by which the stated defined in chapter 4 underproperty to be used for aredemption price at maturity of a Term loan: Any loan that is not aForeign currency contract inprivate business use (ordebt instrument is more than its is- demand loan.Section 1256 Contractspayments for the property),
sue price. Marked to Market,or Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-
• Nonequity option,Passive activity: An activity in- curities at a loss within 30 daysb. Derived from payments for
before or after you buy or acquire involving the conduct of a trade or property (or borrowed • Dealer equity option, or
a fully taxable trade, or acquire amoney) used for a privatebusiness in which you do not mate-
• Dealer securities futures con- contract or option to buy, substan-business use.rially participate and any rental ac-
tract. tially identical stock or securities.tivity. However, the rental of real
estate is not a passive activity if Put: An option that entitles the For tax years beginning afterboth of the following are true. purchaser to sell, at any time July 21, 2010, a section 1256 con-
• More than one-half of the per- before a specified future date, tract does not include certain
sonal services you perform property such as a stated number swaps as listed in Exceptions
during the year in all trades or of shares of stock at a specified under Section 1256 Contracts
businesses are performed in price. Marked to Market in chapter 4. ■
Page 84 Publication 550 (2011)

Page 85 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Capital asset .............. . 53 Capital loss carryover ..... . 64, Covered security,A
70, 72 defined ................... . 83Convertible ............... . 50Abusive tax shelters  (See Tax
Worksheet 4-1 ............ . 70Coupon ................... . 17shelters)
Cash method ..... . 8, 17, 33, 83Enterprise zone facility ..... . 13Accounting fees ............ . 37 DReporting options for savingsFederally guaranteed ...... . 13Accrual method ..... . 8, 17, 26, Day traders ................. . 80bond interest ............. . 8Identification .............. . 4433, 83
Dealer equity options ....... . 41Cash-settled options ....... . 41Market discount ... . 13, 33, 46,Accuracy-related penalty .... . 5
Dealer securities futures54, 69, 83 Casualty losses ............ . 54Acquisition discount ... . 17, 46 contracts ................. . 41New York Liberty bonds ... . 13 CDOs (Collateralized debtAdjusted basis ..... . 22, 43, 44, Debt instruments, retirementPar value ................. . 46 obligations) .............. . 2746 of ........................ . 54Premiums on ....... . 35, 46, 84 Certificates of depositAlaska Permanent Fund Decedents .............. . 44, 70Private activity ........ . 13, 84 (CDs) .................... . 15dividends ............ . 24, 34 U.S. savings bond interest,Redemption or retirement Children:Amortization of bond reporting of .............. . 9of ...................... . 39 Alaska Permanent Fundpremium .............. . 35-36 Demand loans .............. . 83Sold between interest dividends ............... . 34Annuities: Demutualization ............ . 51dates ................... . 12 Capital gain distributions ... . 34Borrowing on .............. . 37 State and local Deposits, loss on ........... . 54Custodian account for ...... . 4Interest on ................. . 6 government ............. . 53 Discount on debtGifts to .................... . 5Life insurance proceeds used to Stripped ........... . 13, 15, 46 instruments .............. . 14Investment income of .... . 3, 34buy ..................... . 12 Tax credit bonds .......... . 13 Certificates of deposit ...... . 15Qualified dividends ........ . 34Sale of .................... . 54 Election to report all interest asTax-exempt ............... . 53 Savings account with parent asSingle-premium ........... . 37 OID .................... . 17Traded flat ................. . 7 trustee ................... . 5Trade for .............. . 39, 50 Face-amount certificates ... . 15U.S. savings (See U.S. savings U.S. savings bond owner ... . 9Applicable federal rate ...... . 7 Gain or loss treatment ..... . 53bonds) Clerical help ................ . 37Appreciated financial Inflation-indexed .......... . 15U.S. Treasury (See U.S. Collateralized debt obligationspositions ................. . 40 Market discount bonds (SeeTreasury bills, notes, and (CDOs) ................... . 27Arbitrage bonds ............ . 13 Market discount bonds)bonds) Commissions .............. . 44Assistance  (See Tax help) Original issue discount (SeeBrokerage fees ......... . 37, 70 Commodities traders ....... . 83At-risk rules ......... . 32, 69, 83 Original issue discount (OID))Build America Bonds ....... . 13 Commodity futures ..... . 55, 57,Attorneys' fees ............. . 37 Short-term obligations .... . 16,83 53Automatic investment Community property: Stripped bonds andservice ............ . 37, 45, 57 C U.S. savings bonds ......... . 9 coupons ................ . 15Average basis .............. . 47 Calls and puts .......... . 61, 83 Comprehensive Example: Discounted debtDouble-category method ... . 47 Table 4-3 ................. . 62 Form 1099-B .............. . 71 instruments .............. . 14Illustrated ................. . 48 Capital assets .............. . 52 Form 8949 ................ . 71 Discounted tax-exemptCapital gain Schedule D ............... . 71 obligations ............... . 46distributions ..... . 22, 25, 34,B Constructive ownership Dividends  (See also Form57 transactions ......... . 52, 55Backup withholding ......... . 4 1099-DIV) ............ . 20, 83Capital gain tax Constructive receipt ........ . 17 Alaska PermanentBad debts .............. . 54, 58 computation ............. . 71 Fund ............... . 24, 34Constructive sales ......... . 40Bankrupt financial institutions: Capital gains and Exempt-interest ..... . 6, 24, 57Contractors, insolvencyDeposit in ................. . 54 losses ................. . 52-58 Extraordinary ............. . 59of ........................ . 58Bargain purchases ......... . 43 Constructive ownership Holding period ............ . 21ConversionBasis ................ . 42-51, 83 transactions ............ . 55 Insurance policies ......... . 24transactions ......... . 55, 83Adjusted ....... . 22, 43, 44, 46 Definition ................. . 52 Money market funds ....... . 22Convertible stocks andAverage .................. . 47 Empowerment zone Nominees ............. . 20, 26bonds .................... . 50Cost .................. . 42, 47 assets .................. . 68 Ordinary .................. . 21Cooperatives, sales of stockInherited property ......... . 43 Investment property ....... . 53 Patronage ................ . 24to ........................ . 66Investment property ....... . 42 Long-term ............ . 59, 70 Payments in lieu of ........ . 59Co-owners of U.S. savingsLike-kind exchanges ....... . 49 Long-term debt Qualified ........... . 21, 25, 34bonds ..................... . 9Other than cost ............ . 42 instruments ............. . 53 Qualified foreignCorporate distributions .... . 20REITs .................... . 44 Losses, limit on ........... . 70 corporation ............. . 21REMIC, residual interest ... . 27 Capital gain ........ . 25, 34, 57Passive activities .......... . 69 Received in January ....... . 21Replacement stock ........ . 67 Constructive .............. . 23Qualified covered call Reinvestment of ........... . 57Shares acquired by Dividends (See Dividends)options ................. . 64 Reinvestment plans ... . 22, 37,reinvestment ............ . 44 Fractional shares .......... . 23Qualified small business 45Stocks and bonds ..... . 22, 23, Liquidating ............ . 22, 26stock ................... . 67 Reporting requirements ... . 20,35, 44 Nondividend .......... . 22, 25Reporting requirements ... . 64, 24-26
Bearer obligations ...... . 15, 54 Return of capital ........... . 2268 Restricted stock ........... . 25
Stock rights ............... . 23Below-market loans ...... . 7, 83 Rollover of gain from sale of Sale or trade vs. ........... . 39
Undistributed capitalsecurities ............... . 66Bonds: Scrip ..................... . 23
gains ................... . 22Short-term ............ . 59, 70Accrued interest on ........ . 20 Sold stock ................ . 20
Corporate Stock ................. . 45, 57Amortization of premium ... . 35 Tax rates ................. . 71
reorganizations .......... . 49 Underreported ............. . 5Arbitrage .................. . 13 28% rate gain worksheet,
Veterans' insurance ..... . 6, 24Cost basis .............. . 42, 47completed sample .... . 79Basis ................. . 35, 44
Build America Bonds ...... . 13 Divorce ................ . 43, 51Table 4-4 ............... . 71 Coupon bonds ............. . 17
Publication 550 (2011) Page 85

Page 86 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 3115 ............ . 8, 36, 80 Futures, commodity .... . 55, 57, Dividends on deposit or shareE
83 accounts ................ . 6Form 4684 .................. . 54Education Savings Bond
Frozen deposits ......... . 6, 20Wash sales ............... . 60Program .............. . 10-11 Form 4797 .............. . 49, 56
Gift for opening account .... . 6Interest excluded under .... . 19 Form 4952 .................. . 35 Individual retirementRecordkeeping Form 6198 .................. . 69 G arrangements (IRAs) ..... . 6requirements ............ . 11 Form 6781 .... . 42, 55, 64, 69, 72 Gains on qualified small Installment saleEmployee stock options ..... . 2 Form 8275 .................. . 31 business stock ........... . 67 payments ................ . 6Employee stock ownership Form 8275-R ............... . 31 Insurance dividends ........ . 6Gains on sales or trades  (Seeplans (ESOPs), sales of stock Form 8582 .................. . 28 Money market funds ........ . 6also Capital gains andto ........................ . 66 Form 8615 ................... . 3 Nominee distributions ....... . 5losses) ............ . 47, 51, 52Employer identification Prepaid insuranceForm 8815 .............. . 11, 19 Gifts ............. . 5, 43, 57, 83numbers (EINs) .......... . 28 premiums ................ . 6Form 8824 .................. . 49 Gifts of shares ............. . 49Empowerment zone ........ . 68 Reporting .............. . 17-20Form 8832 .................. . 28 Glossary ................ . 83-84Endowment contracts ...... . 37 Seller-financedForm 8886 .............. . 30, 31 Government obligations .... . 17 mortgage ........... . 18, 20Enterprise zone facility Form 8949: Tax refunds ................ . 6bonds .................... . 13 Bad debts ................. . 58 Taxable ........... . 6-7, 12, 13Equity option ........... . 41, 83 HBasis adjustment .......... . 22 Tax-exempt ........... . 12, 18Estate income received by Hedging transactions ..... . 41,Capital Gains ............. . 68 U.S. savings bonds, personbeneficiary ................ . 3 42, 55Capital Losses ............ . 68 responsible for tax (TableExchanges of mutual fund Help  (See Tax help)Comprehensive 1-2) ..................... . 9shares ................... . 50 Holding period:Example ................ . 71 Underreported ............. . 5Exempt-interest dividends on Investment property ....... . 56Cooperative, sale to Unstated .................. . 42mutual fund stock ........ . 57 Replacement stock ........ . 67certain .................. . 66 Usurious interest ........... . 6Expenses of producing Shares acquired byCopyrights in musical VA insurance dividends ..... . 6income ................... . 36 reinvestment ............ . 57works .................. . 53 Investment clubs ........... . 28Straddles ................. . 65Employee stock ownership plan, Investment counsel andsale to .................. . 66 advice .................... . 37F Empowerment Zone Investment expenses ....... . 32Face-amount certificates ... . 15 IAssets .................. . 68 Allocated ................. . 26Fair market value ... . 42, 43, 47, Income from sources outsideExempt-interest At-risk rules ............... . 3283 U.S. ....................... . 2dividends ............... . 57 Deductible ................ . 36Federal guarantee on Income tax treaties (TableForm 1099-B .......... . 39, 69 Limits on deductions ....... . 32bonds .................... . 13 1-3) ...................... . 21Form 1099-CAP ........... . 69 Nondeductible ............ . 37Fees to buy or sell ......... . 37 Indian tribal government ... . 12Form 1099-S .............. . 69 Pass-through entities ...... . 37Financial asset securitization Individual retirementFractional shares .......... . 23 Reporting requirements .... . 38investment trusts arrangements (IRAs):Gain, qualified small business Investment income .......... . 3(FASITs) ................. . 27 Interest income ............. . 6stock ................... . 68 Children ................ . 3, 34First-in first-out (FIFO) ..... . 47 Inflation-indexed debtHow to fill in, generally ..... . 68 General Information ........ . 3
instruments .......... . 15, 16Foreign currency Long-term gains and Net income ............... . 34
transactions ............. . 41 losses .................. . 70 Inherited property: Records to keep ............ . 3
Basis ..................... . 43Foreign income ............. . 2 Marked-to-market Reporting of (Table 1-1) .... . 4
Holding period ............ . 57election ................. . 80Forgone interest ........... . 83 Investment property ........ . 33
Transfer by inheritance .... . 39Market discount bonds .... . 54,Form 1040 .............. . 18, 24 Basis ..................... . 42
69 Insolvency of Definition ................. . 39Form 1040, Schedule B ..... . 18
contractors .............. . 58Musical compositions ...... . 53 Gain or loss treatment ..... . 53Form 1040, Schedule D .... . 68,
Nominees ................. . 69 Installment sales ........... . 69 Gift, received as ........... . 4371
Nonbusiness bad debt ..... . 54 Holding period ............ . 56Insurance:Form 1040A ................ . 18 Nondividend Liquidation, received in .... . 45Borrowing on .............. . 37Form 1040X ................ . 40 distributions ............. . 25 Nontaxable trades, receivedDividends, interest on .... . 6, 24Form 1041 .................. . 28 in ...................... . 43Option .................... . 61 Interest option on .......... . 12Form 1065 .................. . 28 Sales and trades .......... . 39Life insurance companies,Property bought at variousSchedule K-1 ............. . 28 Services, received for ...... . 43demutualization ......... . 51times ................... . 69
Form 1066, Schedule Q .... . 27, Spouse, received from ..... . 43Life, paid to beneficiary .... . 12Rollover, publicly traded
37 Taxable trades, receivedPrepaid premiums .......... . 6securities ............... . 66
Form 1096 ........... . 20, 26, 69 in ...................... . 43Single-premium life ........ . 37Rollover, qualified small
Trades .................... . 50Form 1099-B ........... . 39, 69 business stock .......... . 68
Veterans' dividends, interestComprehensive Sale expenses ............ . 70 Jon .................... . 6, 24Example ................ . 71 Short-term gains and
Joint accounts .............. . 5Interest expenses:losses .................. . 70Covered security,
Joint and separateAllocation of ............... . 33Software .................. . 44defined ................. . 83
returns ............... . 32, 71Investment interest .... . 33, 83Worthless securities ....... . 40Noncovered security,
Limit on ............. . 33, 34Form SS-4 .................. . 28defined ................. . 83
When to deduct ......... . 33Form W-8BEN ............... . 5Form 1099-CAP ............ . 69 LMargin accounts .......... . 33Form W-9 ................... . 5Form 1099-DIV ... . 3, 20, 24, 26 Life insurance companies:Paid in advance ........... . 33Forward contracts .......... . 83Form 1099-INT .... . 3, 5, 10, 18, demutualization ........... . 51Straddles ................. . 3820, 26, 27 Fractional shares ....... . 23, 57 Like-kind exchanges ... . 49, 51Interest income ............. . 5Form 1099-MISC ........ . 20, 59 Free tax services ........... . 81 Basis of propertyAnnuity contracts ........... . 6
Form 1099-OID ... . 5, 14, 19, 26, Frozen deposits .......... . 6, 20 received ................ . 49Bonds traded flat ........... . 7
27 Reporting requirements .... . 49Futures contracts: Certificates of deposits ..... . 6
Form 1099-S ............... . 69 Limited partners ............ . 83Definition ................. . 83 Condemnation awards ...... . 6
Form 1120 .................. . 28 Regulated ............ . 41, 84 Deferred interest Liquidating
accounts ................ . 6Form 2439 .................. . 22 Securities .......... . 57, 60, 61 distributions ......... . 22, 45
Page 86 Publication 550 (2011)

Page 87 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Listed options .......... . 41, 83 Nonbusiness bad debts ... . 54, Preferred stock: Tax-exempt interest
58 Nonqualified .............. . 50 income ................. . 18Load charges .............. . 44
Redeemable at a Trades .................... . 80Noncapital assets .......... . 52Loans:
premium ................ . 23 Repossession of realNoncovered security,Below-market ......... . 7-8, 83
Stripped .............. . 26, 84 property .................. . 57defined ................... . 83Gift and demand ........ . 7, 83
Premiums on bonds .... . 35, 46, Restricted property ......... . 43Guarantees ............... . 58 Nondeductible investment
84expenses ................ . 37 Restricted stock ........ . 25, 84Term ................... . 7, 84
Private activity bonds ..... . 13,Nondividend Retirement of debtLocal government obligations
84distributions ............. . 22 instrument ............... . 54(See State or local government
Public utility stockobligations) Nonequity options ...... . 41, 84 Return of capital  (See
reinvestment ............. . 45 Nondividend distributions)Long-term capital gains and Nonqualified preferred
Publications  (See Tax help)losses ................ . 59, 70 stock ..................... . 50 Revocable trust, trustee's
Puts and calls .......... . 61, 84 commissions for ......... . 37Long-term debt Nonresident aliens:
Table 4-3 ................. . 62instruments .............. . 53 Backup withholding ......... . 5 Rollover of gain from sale:
Losses on sales or trades  (See Empowerment zoneNontaxable return of
also Capital gains and assets .................. . 68capital ................... . 22 Qlosses) ................... . 52 Securities ............. . 66, 67Nontaxable stock rights .... . 57 Qualified dividends ......... . 25Amount calculation ........ . 47 Nontaxable trades ...... . 49, 57 Qualified small businessCarryback election .... . 41, 42 Notes: stock .............. . 46, 57, 67 SMutual fund or REIT stock held Individuals, bought at Gains on .................. . 67 S corporations ......... . 27, 456 months or less ........ . 57 discount ................ . 54
Safe deposit box ........... . 37Passive activities ... . 28, 32, 34 U.S. Treasury (See U.S.
Related parties ............ . 51 Sales and trades of investmentTreasury bills, notes, and RSection 1244 (small business) property .................. . 39bonds) Real estate investment trustsstock ................... . 56 Definition ................. . 39(REITs) ............ . 22, 44, 57Small business investment Savings bonds  (See U.S.Real estate mortgageOcompany stock .......... . 56 savings bonds)investment conduitsWash sales ............... . 64 Office expenses ............ . 37 SBIC stock  (See Small business(REMICs) ....... . 26-27, 37, 84Options .................... . 61 investment company stock)Regular interest ........... . 26Calls and puts ......... . 61, 83 Schedule D:Residual interest ...... . 27, 61M Cash settlement ....... . 41, 61 ComprehensiveRecordkeeping requirements:Marked to market rules .... . 41, Dealer equity .............. . 41 Example ................ . 71Education Savings Bond80, 83 Deep-in-the-money ........ . 63 Scrip dividends ............ . 23Program ................ . 11Market discount bonds .... . 13, Employee stock ............ . 2 Section 1202 gain .......... . 68Investment income ......... . 316, 33, 46, 54, 69, 83 Equity ................ . 41, 83 Section 1244 stock ......... . 56Small business stock ...... . 56Accrued market Gain or loss ........... . 61, 63 Section 1256 contracts .... . 40,Redemption of stock ....... . 39discount ................ . 16 Holding period ............ . 57 57, 61, 69, 84Redemption or retirement ofListed ................ . 41, 83Mark-to-market election .... . 80 Net gain on ............... . 42bonds .................... . 39Nonequity ............. . 41, 84Maximum rate of capital gains Net loss on ............... . 41Regulated futuresQualified covered call ...... . 63(Table 4-4) ............... . 71 Reporting requirements .... . 42contract .............. . 41, 84Reporting requirements .... . 61Mechanics' and suppliers' Securities:Section 1256 contracts ... . 40, Reinvestment rights ........ . 44liens ..................... . 58 Holding period ............ . 5661 REITs  (See Real estateMeetings, expenses of Installment sales .......... . 69Wash sales ............... . 60 investment trusts (REITs))attending ................. . 37 Lost, stolen, etc., cost ofOptions dealer ............. . 84 Related partyMissing children, photographs replacing ............... . 37Ordinary gains and transactions ...... . 38, 51-52of ......................... . 2 Rollover of gain fromlosses ................ . 52, 54 Related persons ............ . 63Mixed straddles ........ . 59, 65 sale ................ . 66, 67Original issue discount REMICs  (See Real estateMoney market funds ....... . 22 Traders in ................. . 80(OID) ....... . 12, 14-16, 46, 84 mortgage investment conduits Worthless ............. . 40, 58Interest income ............. . 6 Adjustment to ............. . 20 (REMICs)) Securities futuresMore information  (See Tax help) Reporting requirements .... . 14 Reorganizations, contracts ...... . 41, 57, 61, 84Mortgages: Rules ..................... . 15 corporate ................ . 49 Self-employment income ... . 42Revenue bonds ........... . 13
Reporting requirements:Secondary liability on Self-employment tax ....... . 80Bad debts ................. . 58home ................... . 58 P Seller-financedBond premiumSeller-financed ............ . 20 mortgages ............... . 20Passive activities ........... . 84 amortization ............ . 36Municipal bonds  (See also State Gains and losses ...... . 28, 32, Short sales ................. . 59Capital gains andor local government 34, 69 Adjusted basis ............ . 46losses .............. . 64, 68obligations) ........ . 12, 18, 53 Defined ................... . 84Pass-through entities: Dividend income .......... . 24 Expenses of .............. . 38Mutual fund, defined ....... . 83 Rollover of gain ........... . 68 Exempt-interest dividends ... . 6 Extraordinary dividends .... . 59Mutual funds .... . 22, 32, 34, 37, Patronage dividends ....... . 24 Interest on U.S. savings Puts ...................... . 6144, 57 Penalties: bonds ................. . 8, 9 Small business investmentIndividual retirement Accuracy-related ........ . 5, 30 Investment expenses ...... . 38 company stock .......... . 56arrangements (IRAs) ..... . 2 Backup withholding ......... . 5 Like-kind exchanges ....... . 49 Short-term capital gains andpublicly offered ............ . 37 Civil fraud ................. . 32 Options ................... . 61 losses ................ . 59, 70Early withdrawal ......... . 6, 20 Original issue discount ..... . 14
Short-termFailure to pay tax .......... . 32 S corporation income,N obligations ..... . 16-17, 46, 53Failure to supply SSN ...... . 4 deductions, and
New York Liberty bonds .... . 13 Interest deduction, limitSubstantial credits .................. . 27
on ...................... . 34understatement ......... . 31Nominee distributions: Section 1256 contracts .... . 42
Valuation misstatement .... . 31Dividends ............. . 20, 26 Sixty/forty (60/40) rule ...... . 41State or local government
Interest income .......... . 5, 20 Political parties: Small business investmentobligations .............. . 13
Original issue discount ..... . 14 Debts owed by ............ . 58 company stock ....... . 56, 68Straddles ................. . 69
Nominee, defined .......... . 83 Reporting requirements .... . 56Portfolio income ........... . 84 Substitute payments ....... . 59
Publication 550 (2011) Page 87

Page 88 of 88 of Publication 550 11:30 - 17-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Small business stock ...... . 46, Sales to ESOPs or Tax rates: Trust income received by
56, 57, 67 cooperatives ............ . 66 Capital gain and losses .... . 71 beneficiary ................ . 3
Small business ........ . 46, 57Social security number (SSN): Tax refunds: Trustee's commission for
Specialized small businessCustodial accounts ......... . 4 Interest on ................. . 6 revocable trust ........... . 37
investment company .... . 45Joint accounts ............. . 4 Tax shelters ............. . 29-32 TTY/TDD information ....... . 81
Splits ..................... . 45Requirement to give ........ . 4 Penalties ................. . 30
Straddles (See Straddles)Specialized small business Reporting requirements .... . 30 UStripped preferred stock .. . 26,investment company Rules to curb abuse ....... . 29 U.S. savings bonds ........ . 6, 884stock ................. . 45, 68 Taxable income, expenses Reporting interest on ..... . 6, 8Surrender of .............. . 39Spouses: of ........................ . 38 Retirement or profit-sharingTrades .................... . 50Transfers between (See also Taxes: plan, distributed from .... . 10Trust instruments treatedRelated party State and local transfer .... . 37 Worksheet .............. . 19as ...................... . 40transactions) ........ . 43, 51 State income .............. . 38 Tax, responsible person (TableStraddles ................ . 62-66State or local government Tax-exempt bonds ......... . 53 1-2) ..................... . 9Defined ................... . 84obligations ............ . 12-14 Tax-exempt income: U.S. Treasury bills, notes, andHolding period ............ . 65Market discount bonds (See Expenses of .............. . 38 bonds .......... . 6, 12, 51, 57Interest expense and carryingMarket discount bonds) Interest ............... . 12, 18 Undistributed capitalcharges ................ . 38Private activity bonds ..... . 13, Tax-exempt obligations ... . 12, gains ..................... . 25Loss deferral rules ......... . 6384 16, 46 Usurious interest ............ . 6Mixed ................ . 59, 65Registration requirement ... . 12 Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 81Reporting requirements .... . 69Taxable interest ........... . 13 Term loans ............... . 7, 84Stripped bonds andTax-exempt interest ....... . 12 VTrade or business .......... . 32coupons .......... . 13, 15, 46Stock: Veterans' insurance:Traders in securities ....... . 80Stripped preferred stock .. . 26,Basis .......... . 22, 23, 44, 67 Dividends on .............. . 24Trades:84Capital asset .............. . 53
Insurance ................. . 50Substitute payments ....... . 59Constructive ownership .... . 52 WInvestment property ....... . 39Convertible ............... . 50 Warrants ................... . 60Like-kind .............. . 49, 51Corporate ................. . 49 T Nontaxable ........ . 43, 49, 57 Wash sales .......... . 60-61, 84Dividends (See Dividends) Tables: Reporting requirements .... . 80 Holding period ............ . 57Fractional shares ...... . 23, 57 Capital gains maximum rate Stock ..................... . 50 Loss deferral rules,Identification .............. . 44 (Table 4-4) .............. . 71 Taxable ................... . 43 straddles ............... . 64Installment sales .......... . 69 Income tax treaties (Table U.S. Treasury notes or Withholding, backup ........ . 4Nonqualified preferred 1-3) .................... . 21 bonds .................. . 51 Worksheets:stock ................... . 50 Investment income, reporting of Treasury bills, notes, and bonds Capital gains, 28% rateOptions for employees ...... . 2 (Table 1-1) ............... . 4 (See U.S. Treasury bills, notes, worksheet, completedPublic utility, Puts and calls (Table and bonds) sample ................. . 79reinvestment ............ . 45 4-3) .................... . 62 Treasury inflation-indexed Capital loss carryover ...... . 70Redemption of ............ . 39 U.S. savings bonds, person securities ................ . 15Replacement stock ........ . 67 Worthless securities ... . 40, 58responsible for tax (TableRestricted stock ....... . 25, 84 Treasury inflation-protected1-2) ..................... . 9 ■Rights ............. . 23, 45, 57 securities (TIPS) ..... . 12, 15Tax credit bonds ........... . 13S corporations ............ . 45 Treaties, income tax (TableTax help .................... . 81 1-3) ...................... . 21
Page 88 Publication 550 (2011)