Future Developments
For the latest information about developments 
related to Pub. 525, such as legislation enacted 
after it was published, go to IRS.gov/Pub525.
What's New
Deferred compensation contribution limit 
increased. If you participate in a 401(k), 
403(b), or the federal government's Thrift Sav-
ings Plan (TSP), the total annual amount you 
can contribute is increased to $22,500 ($30,000 
if age 50 or older). This also applies to most 457 
plans.
Health flexible spending arrangements 
(health FSAs) under cafeteria plans.  For tax 
years beginning in 2023, the dollar limitation un-
der section 125(i) on voluntary employee salary 
reductions for contributions to health FSAs is 
$3,050.
Temporary allowance of 100% business 
meal deduction has expired.  The temporary 
allowance of a 100% business meal deduction 
for food or beverages provided by a restaurant 
and paid or incurred after December 31, 2020, 
and before January 1, 2023, has expired. T ax-
payers may continue to deduct 50% of the cost 
of business meals if the taxpayer (or an em-
ployee of the taxpayer) is present and the food 
or beverages aren’t considered lavish or extrav-
agant.
Contributions to simplified employee pen-
sion plan (SEP) and savings incentive 
match plan for employees (SIMPLE) Roth 
IRAs. Section 601 of the SECURE 2.0 Act of 
2022 provided that your employer may provide 
for contributions to a Roth IRA under a SEP or 
SIMPLE IRA plan.
Designated Roth nonelective contributions 
and designated Roth matching contribu-
tions. Section 604 of the SECURE 2.0 Act of 
2022 permits certain nonelective contributions 
and matching contributions that are made after 
December 29, 2022, to be designated as Roth 
contributions.
De minimis financial incentives. Section 113 
of the SECURE 2.0 Act of 2022 provided that 
employers can offer their employees de minimis 
financial incentives to make elective deferrals. 
These incentives may not exceed $250 in value, 
and, in general, are includible in employees’ in-
come.
Reminders
Paycheck Protection Program loan forgive-
ness. Gross income doesn’t include any 
amount arising from the forgiveness of a Pay-
check Protection Program (PPP) loan, effective 
for taxable years ending after March 27, 2020. 
(See P .L. 116-136.) Likewise, gross income 
does not include any amount arising from the 
forgiveness of Second Draw PPP loans, effec-
tive December 27, 2020. (See P .L. 116 -260.) 
When a taxpayer who does not factually satisfy 
the conditions for a qualifying forgiveness cau-
ses its lender to forgive the PPP loan by 
Department 
of the 
T reasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 525
Cat. No. 15047D
Taxable and
Nontaxable
Income
For use in preparing
2023 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 44  12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jan 16, 2024

inaccurately representing that the taxpayer sat-
isfies them, the taxpayer may not exclude the 
amount of the forgiven loan from gross income 
under 15 U.S.C. section 636m(i) or section 
276(b)(1) of the COVID-related T ax Relief Act of 
2020. For more information, see Forgiveness of 
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Loans.
Emergency financial aid grants.  Certain 
emergency financial aid grants under the 
CARES Act are excluded from the income of 
college and university students, effective for 
grants made after March 26, 2020. (See P .L. 
116-136 and P .L. 116-260.)
Other loan forgiveness under the CARES 
Act. Gross income does not include any 
amount arising from the forgiveness of certain 
loans, emergency Economic Injury Disaster 
Loan (EIDL) grants, and certain loan repayment 
assistance, each as provided by the CARES 
Act, effective for tax years ending after March 
27, 2020. (See P .L. 116-136 and P .L. 116-260.)
Exclusion of income for volunteer firefight-
ers and emergency medical responders.  If 
you are a volunteer firefighter or emergency 
medical responder, you may be able to exclude 
from gross income certain rebates or reductions 
of state or local property or income taxes and 
up to $50 per month provided by a state or local 
government. For more information, see Volun-
teer firefighters and emergency medical res-
ponders.
Repeal of deduction for alimony payments 
and corresponding inclusion in gross in-
come.  Alimony received under a divorce or 
separation instrument executed after 2018 
won't be includible in your income. The same is 
true of alimony received under a divorce or sep-
aration instrument executed before 2019 and 
modified after 2018, if the modification ex-
pressly states that the alimony isn't deductible 
to the payer or includible in your income. For 
more information, see Pub. 504.
Forms 1040A and 1040EZ no longer availa-
ble. Forms 1040A and 1040EZ aren't available 
to file your 2023 taxes. If you used one of these 
forms in the past, you’ll now file Form 1040 or 
1040-SR.
Qualified equity grants.  For tax years begin-
ning after 2017, certain qualified employees can 
make a new election to defer income taxation 
for up to 5 years for the qualified stocks re-
ceived. See Qualified Equity Grants  under Em-
ployee Compensation, later.
Suspension of qualified bicycle commuting 
reimbursement exclusion.  For tax years be-
ginning after 2017, reimbursement you receive 
from your employer for the purchase, repair, or 
storage of a bicycle you regularly use for travel 
between your residence and place of employ-
ment must be included in your gross income.
Unemployment compensation.  If you re-
ceived unemployment compensation but did not 
receive Form 1099-G, Certain Government Pay-
ments, through the mail, you may need to ac-
cess your information through your state’s web-
site to get your electronic Form 1099-G.
Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) 
account. This is a type of savings account for 
individuals with disabilities and their families. 
Distributions are tax free if used to pay the ben-
eficiary's qualified disability expenses. See Pub. 
907 for more information.
Certain amounts received by wrongfully in-
carcerated individuals. Certain amounts you 
receive due to a wrongful incarceration may be 
excluded from gross income. See IRS.gov/
Newsroom/IRS-Updates-Frequently-Asked-
Questions-Related-to-Wrongful-Incarceration 
for more information.
Foreign income. If you're a U.S. citizen or resi-
dent alien, you must report income from sour-
ces outside the United States (foreign income) 
on your tax return unless it’s exempt by U.S. law. 
This is true whether you reside inside or outside 
the United States and whether or not you re-
ceive a Form W-2, Wage and T ax Statement, or 
Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This applies 
to earned income (such as wages and tips) as 
well as unearned income (such as interest, divi-
dends, capital gains, pensions, rents, and royal-
ties).
If you reside outside the United States, you 
may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign 
source earned income. For details, see Pub. 54, 
T ax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens 
Abroad.
Olympic and Paralympic medals and United 
States Olympic Committee (USOC) prize 
money. If you receive Olympic and Paralympic 
medals and USOC prize money, the value of the 
medals and the amount of the prize money may 
be nontaxable. See the Instructions for Sched-
ule 1 (Form 1040), line 8m, at IRS.gov/
Form1040 for more information.
Public safety officers.  A spouse, former 
spouse, and child of a public safety officer killed 
in the line of duty can exclude from gross in-
come survivor benefits received from a govern-
mental section 401(a) plan attributable to the of-
ficer's service. See section 101(h).
A public safety officer that's permanently 
and totally disabled or killed in the line of duty 
and a surviving spouse or child can exclude 
from income death or disability benefits re-
ceived from the federal Bureau of Justice Assis-
tance or death benefits paid by a state program. 
See section 104(a)(6).
Qualified Medicaid waiver payments.  Cer-
tain payments you receive for providing care to 
an eligible individual in your home under a 
state's Medicaid waiver program may be exclu-
ded from your income under Notice 2014 -7. 
See also Instructions for Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 8s.
Qualified settlement income.  If you're a 
qualified taxpayer, you can contribute all or part 
of your qualified settlement income, up to 
$100,000, to an eligible retirement plan, includ-
ing an IRA. Contributions to eligible retirement 
plans, other than a Roth IRA or a designated 
Roth contribution, reduce the qualified settle-
ment income that you must include in income. 
See Exxon Valdez settlement income  under 
Other Income , later. Also, see Pub. 590 -A for 
more information.
Taxpayer identification number (TIN). A TIN 
is your social security number (SSN), individual 
taxpayer identification number (ITIN), adoption 
taxpayer identification number (ATIN), or em-
ployer identification number (EIN).
Terrorist attacks.  Y ou can exclude from in-
come certain disaster assistance, disability, and 
death payments received as a result of a terro-
rist or military action. For more information, see 
Sickness and Injury Benefits , later; Pub. 3920, 
T ax Relief for Victims of T errorist Attacks; and 
Pub. 907, T ax Highlights for Persons With Disa-
bilities.
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC) . Photographs of missing 
children selected by the Center may appear in 
this publication on pages that would otherwise 
be blank. Y ou can help bring these children 
home by looking at the photographs and calling 
800-THE-LOST (800 -843-5678) if you recog-
nize a child.
Introduction
Y ou can receive income in the form of money, 
property, or services. This publication discusses 
many kinds of income and explains whether 
they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis-
cussions on employee wages and fringe bene-
fits, and income from bartering, partnerships, S 
corporations, and royalties. It also includes in-
formation on disability pensions, life insurance 
proceeds, and welfare and other public assis-
tance benefits. Check the index for the location 
of a specific subject.
In most cases, an amount included in your 
income is taxable unless it is specifically ex-
empted by law. Income that is taxable must be 
reported on your return and is subject to tax. In-
come that is nontaxable may have to be shown 
on your tax return but isn’t taxable.
Constructively received income. If you are a 
cash method taxpayer, you are generally taxed 
on income that is available to you, regardless of 
whether it is actually in your possession.
A valid check that you received or that was 
made available to you before the end of the tax 
year is considered income constructively re-
ceived in that year, even if you don’t cash the 
check or deposit it to your account until the next 
year. For example, if the postal service tries to 
deliver a check to you on the last day of the tax 
year but you aren’t at home to receive it, you 
must include the amount in your income for that 
tax year. If the check was mailed so that it 
couldn’t possibly reach you until after the end of 
the tax year, and you otherwise couldn’t get the 
funds before the end of the year, you include the 
amount in your income for the next tax year.
Assignment of income.  Income received 
by an agent for you is income you constructively 
received in the year the agent received it. If you 
agree by contract that a third party is to receive 
income for you, you must include the amount in 
your income when the third party receives it.
Example 1.  Y ou and your employer agree 
that part of your salary is to be paid directly to 
one of your creditors. Y ou must include that 
amount in your income when your creditor re-
ceives it.
Advance payments. Generally, you report an 
advance payment for goods, services, or other 
items as income in the year you receive the pay-
ment. However, if you use an accrual method of 
accounting and are otherwise eligible, you can 
Page 2 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2 Publication 525 (2023)

elect to postpone including the advance pay-
ment in income until the next year. See Pub. 
538 for more information.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and sug-
gestions for future editions.
Y ou can send us comments through 
IRS.gov/FormComments. Or, you can write to 
the Internal Revenue Service, T ax Forms and 
Publications, 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, 
IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments and 
suggestions as we revise our tax forms, instruc-
tions, and publications. Don’t send tax ques-
tions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Getting answers to your tax questions. 
If you have a tax question not answered by this 
publication or the How T o Get T ax Help section 
at the end of this publication, go to the IRS In-
teractive T ax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the 
search feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications. Go to IRS.gov/Forms to download 
current and prior -year forms, instructions, and 
publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and 
publications. Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to or-
der current forms, instructions, and publica-
tions; call 800 -829-3676 to order prior -year 
forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon 
as possible. Don’t resubmit requests you’ve al-
ready sent us. Y ou can get forms and publica-
tions faster online.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
334 T ax Guide for Small Business
523 Selling Y our Home
527 Residential Rental Property
541 Partnerships
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
550 Investment Income and Expenses
554 T ax Guide for Seniors
559 Survivors, Executors, and 
Administrators
575 Pension and Annuity Income
907 T ax Highlights for Persons With 
Disabilities
915 Social Security and Equivalent 
Railroad Retirement Benefits
970 T ax Benefits for Education
4681 Canceled Debts, Foreclosures, 
Repossessions, and Abandonments
  334
  523
  527
  541
  544
  550
  554
  559
  575
  907
  915
  970
  4681
Form (and Instructions)
1040 U.S. Individual Income T ax Return
1040-NR U.S. Nonresident Alien Income 
T ax Return
1040-SR U.S. T ax Return for Seniors
1099-R Distributions From Pensions, 
Annuities, Retirement or 
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance 
Contracts, etc.
W-2 Wage and T ax Statement
See How T o Get T ax Help at the end of this pub-
lication for information about getting these pub-
lications.
Employee Compensation
In most cases, you must include in gross in-
come everything you receive in payment for per-
sonal services. In addition to wages, salaries, 
commissions, fees, and tips, this includes other 
forms of compensation such as fringe benefits 
and stock options.
Y ou should receive a Form W -2 from your 
employer or former employer showing the pay 
you received for your services. Include all your 
pay on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 1a, even if 
you don’t receive Form W -2, or you receive a 
Form W -2 that doesn’t include all pay that 
should be included on the Form W-2.
If you performed services, other than as an 
independent contractor, and your employer 
didn’t withhold social security and Medicare 
taxes from your pay, you must file Form 8919 
with your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. These wages 
must be included on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, 
line 1g. See Form 8919 for more information.
Fair market value (FMV).  The FMV of an 
item of property is the price at which the item 
would change hands between a willing buyer 
and a willing seller, neither being required to 
buy or sell and both having reasonable knowl-
edge of the relevant facts.
Childcare providers. If you provide childcare, 
either in the child's home or in your home or 
other place of business, the pay you receive 
must be included in your income. If you're not 
an employee, you're probably self -employed 
and must include payments for your services on 
Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From 
Business. Y ou generally aren’t an employee un-
less you're subject to the will and control of the 
person who employs you as to what you're to 
do, and how you're to do it.
Babysitting. If you babysit for relatives or 
neighborhood children, whether on a regular 
basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare 
providers apply to you.
Self-employment tax.  Whether you're an 
employee or self -employed person, your in-
come could be subject to self -employment tax. 
See the Instructions for Schedule C (Form 
1040) and the Instructions for Schedule SE 
(Form 1040) if you're self -employed. Also see 
Pub. 926 for more information.
Bankruptcy.  If you filed for bankruptcy under 
chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code, you must 
  1040
  1040-NR
  1040-SR
  1099-R
  W-2
allocate your wages and withheld income tax. 
Y our Form W-2 will show your total wages and 
withheld income tax for the year. On your tax re-
turn, you report the wages and withheld income 
tax for the period before you filed for bank-
ruptcy. Y our bankruptcy estate reports the wa-
ges and withheld income tax for the period after 
you filed for bankruptcy. If you receive other in-
formation returns (such as Form 1099 -DIV or 
Form 1099 -INT) that report gross income to 
you, rather than to the bankruptcy estate, you 
must allocate that income.
The only exception is for purposes of figur-
ing your self -employment tax if you're self -em-
ployed. For that purpose, you must take into ac-
count all your self -employment income for the 
year from services performed both before and 
after the beginning of the case.
Y ou must file a statement with your income 
tax return stating you filed a chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy case. The statement must show the allo-
cation and describe the method used to make 
the allocation. For a sample of this statement 
and other information, see Notice 2006 -83, 
2006-40 I.R.B. 596, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2006-40_IRB#NOT -2006-83.
Miscellaneous 
Compensation
This section discusses many types of employee 
compensation. The subjects are arranged in al-
phabetical order.
Advance commissions and other earnings. 
If you receive advance commissions or other 
amounts for services to be performed in the fu-
ture and you're a cash -method taxpayer, you 
must include these amounts in your income in 
the year you receive them.
If you repay unearned commissions or other 
amounts in the same year you receive them, re-
duce the amount of unearned commissions in-
cluded in your income by the repayment. If you 
repay them in a later tax year, you can deduct 
the repayment as an itemized deduction on your 
Schedule A (Form 1040), Other Itemized De-
ductions, line 16, or you may be able to take a 
credit for that year. See Repayments, later.
Allowances and reimbursements.  If you re-
ceive travel, transportation, or other business 
expense allowances or reimbursements from 
your employer, see Pub. 463.
Back pay awards. Include in income amounts 
you're awarded in a settlement or judgment for 
back pay. These include payments made to you 
for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums, 
and unpaid health insurance premiums. They 
should be reported to you by your employer on 
Form W-2.
Bonuses and awards.  Bonuses or awards 
you receive for outstanding work are included in 
your income and should be shown on your Form 
W-2. These include prizes such as vacation 
trips for meeting sales goals. If the prize or 
award you receive is goods or services, you 
must include the FMV of the goods or services 
in your income. However, if your employer 
merely promises to pay you a bonus or award at 
Page 3 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 3

some future time, it isn’t taxable until you re-
ceive it or it’s made available to you.
Employee achievement award.  If you re-
ceive tangible personal property (other than 
cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as 
an award for length of service or safety achieve-
ment, you must generally exclude its value from 
your income. However, the amount you can ex-
clude is limited to your employer's cost and 
can’t be more than $1,600 ($400 for awards that 
aren’t qualified plan awards) for all such awards 
you receive during the year. Y our employer can 
tell you whether your award is a qualified plan 
award. Y our employer must make the award as 
part of a meaningful presentation, under condi-
tions and circumstances that don’t create a sig-
nificant likelihood of it being disguised pay.
However, the exclusion doesn’t apply to the 
following awards.
• A length-of-service award if you received it 
for less than 5 years of service or if you re-
ceived another length-of-service award 
during the year or the previous 4 years. 
• A safety achievement award if you're a 
manager, administrator, clerical employee, 
or other professional employee or if more 
than 10% of eligible employees previously 
received safety achievement awards dur-
ing the year. 
Example 2.  Y ou received three employee 
achievement awards during the year: a nonqua-
lified plan award of a watch valued at $250, and 
two qualified plan awards of a stereo valued at 
$1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued at $500. 
Assuming that the requirements for qualified 
plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each award 
by itself would be excluded from income. How-
ever, because the $1,750 total value of the 
awards is more than $1,600, you must include 
$150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in your income.
Differential wage payments. This is any pay-
ment made by an employer to an individual for 
any period during which the individual is, for a 
period of more than 30 days, an active duty 
member of the uniformed services and repre-
sents all or a portion of the wages the individual 
would have received from the employer for that 
period. These payments are treated as wages 
and are subject to income tax withholding, but 
not FICA or FUTA taxes. The payments are re-
ported as wages on Form W-2.
Government cost -of-living allowances. 
Most payments received by U.S. Government 
civilian employees for working abroad are taxa-
ble. However, certain cost -of-living allowances 
are tax free. Pub. 516 explains the tax treatment 
of allowances, differentials, and other special 
pay you receive for employment abroad.
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. 
Y our employer will report to you the total amount 
of deferrals for the year under a nonqualified de-
ferred compensation plan. This amount is 
shown in Form W -2, box 12, using code Y . This 
amount isn’t included in your income.
However, if at any time during the tax year, 
the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or 
isn’t operated under those requirements, all 
amounts deferred under the plan for the tax 
year and all preceding tax years are included in 
your income for the current year. This amount is 
included in your wages shown in Form W -2, 
box 1. It’s also shown in Form W -2, box 12, us-
ing code Z.
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans 
of nonqualified entities.  In most cases, any 
compensation deferred under a nonqualified 
deferred compensation plan of a nonqualified 
entity is included in gross income when there is 
no substantial risk of forfeiture of the rights to 
such compensation. For this purpose, a non-
qualified entity is one of the following.
1. A foreign corporation, unless substantially 
all of its income is:
a. Effectively connected with the con-
duct of a trade or business in the Uni-
ted States, or
b. Subject to a comprehensive foreign 
income tax.
2. A partnership, unless substantially all of its 
income is allocated to persons other than:
a. Foreign persons for whom the income 
isn’t subject to a comprehensive for-
eign income tax, and
b. T ax-exempt organizations.
Note received for services.  If your employer 
gives you a secured note as payment for your 
services, you must include the FMV (usually the 
discount value) of the note in your income for 
the year you receive it. When you later receive 
payments on the note, a proportionate part of 
each payment is the recovery of the FMV that 
you previously included in your income. Don’t 
include that part again in your income. Include 
the rest of the payment in your income in the 
year of payment.
If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable 
unsecured note as payment for your services, 
payments on the note that are credited toward 
the principal amount of the note are compensa-
tion income when you receive them.
Severance pay. Y ou must include in income 
amounts you receive as severance pay and any 
payment for the cancellation of your employ-
ment contract.
Severance payments are subject to social 
security and Medicare taxes, income tax 
withholding, and FUTA tax.  Severance pay-
ments are wages subject to social security and 
Medicare taxes. As noted in section 15 of Pub. 
15, Special Rules for Various T ypes of Services 
and Payments , severance payments are also 
subject to income tax withholding and FUTA 
tax.
Accrued leave payment. If you're a federal 
employee and receive a lump -sum payment for 
accrued annual leave when you retire or resign, 
this amount will be included as wages on your 
Form W-2.
If you resign from one agency and are reem-
ployed by another agency, you may have to re-
pay part of your lump -sum annual leave pay-
ment to the second agency. Y ou can reduce 
gross wages by the amount you repaid in the 
same tax year in which you received it. Attach to 
your tax return a copy of the receipt or state-
ment given to you by the agency you repaid to 
explain the difference between the wages on 
your return and the wages on your Forms W-2.
Outplacement services.  If you choose to 
accept a reduced amount of severance pay so 
that you can receive outplacement services 
(such as training in résumé writing and inter-
view techniques), you must include the unre-
duced amount of the severance pay in income.
Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer 
while you're sick or injured is part of your salary 
or wages. In addition, you must include in your 
income sick pay benefits received from any of 
the following payers.
• A welfare fund.
• A state sickness or disability fund.
• An association of employers or employees.
• An insurance company, if your employer 
paid for the plan.
However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-
dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you 
receive under the policy aren’t taxable. For 
more information, see Other Sickness and In-
jury Benefits  under Sickness and Injury Bene-
fits, later.
Social security and Medicare taxes paid by 
employer. If you and your employer have an 
agreement that your employer pays your social 
security and Medicare taxes without deducting 
them from your gross wages, you must report 
the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages 
on your tax return. The payment is also treated 
as wages for figuring your social security and 
Medicare taxes and your social security and 
Medicare benefits. However, these payments 
aren’t treated as social security and Medicare 
wages if you're a household worker or a farm 
worker.
Stock appreciation rights.  Don’t include a 
stock appreciation right granted by your em-
ployer in income until you exercise (use) the 
right. When you use the right, you're entitled to 
a cash payment equal to the FMV of the corpo-
ration's stock on the date of use minus the FMV 
on the date the right was granted. Y ou include 
the cash payment in income in the year you use 
the right.
Digital assets. If your employer gives you digi-
tal assets (such as Bitcoin) as payment for your 
services, you must include the FMV of the digi-
tal assets as of the date(s) of receipt in your in-
come. The FMV of digital assets paid as wages 
is subject to federal income tax withholding, 
Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) tax, 
and Federal Unemployment T ax Act (FUTA) tax 
and must be reported on Form W -2. Notice 
2014-21, 2014 -16 I.R.B. 938, describes how 
digital assets are treated for federal tax purpo-
ses and is available at IRS.gov/irb/
2014-16_IRB#NOT -2014-21. For further infor-
mation, see IRS.gov/DigitalAssets.
Fringe Benefits
Fringe benefits received in connection with the 
performance of your services are included in 
your income as compensation unless you pay 
FMV for them or they’re specifically excluded by 
law. Refraining from the performance of serv-
ices (for example, under a covenant not to 
Page 4 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4 Publication 525 (2023)

compete) is treated as the performance of serv-
ices for purposes of these rules.
See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in this 
discussion, for information on how to determine 
the amount to include in income.
Recipient of fringe benefit.  Y ou're the recipi-
ent of a fringe benefit if you perform the serv-
ices for which the fringe benefit is provided. 
Y ou're considered to be the recipient even if it’s 
given to another person, such as a member of 
your family. An example is a car your employer 
gives to your spouse for services you perform. 
The car is considered to have been provided to 
you and not to your spouse.
Y ou don’t have to be an employee of the pro-
vider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. If 
you're a partner, a director, or an independent 
contractor, you can also be the recipient of a 
fringe benefit.
Provider of benefit.  Y our employer or another 
person for whom you perform services is the 
provider of a fringe benefit regardless of 
whether that person actually provides the fringe 
benefit to you. The provider can be a client or 
customer of an independent contractor.
Accounting period.  Y ou must use the same 
accounting period your employer uses to report 
your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Y our em-
ployer has the option to report taxable noncash 
fringe benefits by using either of the following 
rules.
• The general rule: benefits are reported for 
a full calendar year (January 1–December 
31).
• The special accounting period rule: bene-
fits provided during the last 2 months of the 
calendar year (or any shorter period) are 
treated as paid during the following calen-
dar year. For example, each year your em-
ployer reports the value of benefits provi-
ded during the last 2 months of the prior 
year and the first 10 months of the current 
year.
Y our employer doesn’t have to use the same ac-
counting period for each fringe benefit, but must 
use the same period for all employees who re-
ceive a particular benefit.
Y ou must use the same accounting period 
that you use to report the benefit to claim an 
employee business deduction (for example, use 
of a car).
Form W-2. Y our employer must include all tax-
able fringe benefits in Form W -2, box 1, as wa-
ges, tips, and other compensation, and, if appli-
cable, in boxes 3 and 5 as social security and 
Medicare wages. Although not required, your 
employer may include the total value of fringe 
benefits in box 14 (or on a separate statement). 
However, if your employer provided you with a 
vehicle and included 100% of its annual lease 
value in your income, the employer must sepa-
rately report this value to you in box 14 (or on a 
separate statement).
Accident or Health Plan
In most cases, the value of accident or health 
plan coverage provided to you by your employer 
isn’t included in your income. Benefits you 
receive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-
plained under Sickness and Injury Benefits , 
later.
For information on the items covered in this 
section, other than Long-term care coverage , 
see Pub. 969.
Long-term care coverage.  Contributions by 
your employer to provide coverage for long-term 
care services generally aren’t included in your 
income. However, contributions made through a 
flexible spending or similar arrangement (such 
as a cafeteria plan) must be included in your in-
come. This amount will be reported as wages in 
Form W-2, box 1.
Archer MSA contributions.  Contributions by 
your employer to your Archer MSA generally 
aren’t included in your income. Their total will be 
reported in Form W-2, box 12, with code R. Y ou 
must report this amount on Form 8853, Archer 
MSAs and Long -T erm Care Insurance Con-
tracts. File the form with your return.
Health flexible spending arrangement 
(health FSA).  If your employer provides a 
health FSA that qualifies as an accident or 
health plan, the amount of your salary reduc-
tion, and reimbursements of your medical care 
expenses, in most cases aren’t included in your 
income.
For 2023, health FSAs are subject to a 
$3,050 limit on salary reduction contributions.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). 
If your employer offers an HRA that qualifies as 
an accident or health plan, your coverage under 
the HRA and reimbursements of your medical 
care expenses from the HRA generally aren’t in-
cluded in your income.
Health savings account (HSA).  If you’re an 
eligible individual, you and any other person, in-
cluding your employer or a family member, can 
make contributions to your HSA. Contributions, 
other than employer contributions, are deducti-
ble on your return whether or not you itemize 
deductions. Contributions made by your em-
ployer aren’t included in your income. Distribu-
tions from your HSA that are used to pay quali-
fied medical expenses aren’t included in your 
income. Distributions not used for qualified 
medical expenses are included in your income. 
See Pub. 969 for the requirements of an HSA.
Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide 
partner's HSA aren’t contributions by an em-
ployer. The contributions are treated as a distri-
bution of money and aren’t included in the part-
ner's gross income. Contributions by a 
partnership to a partner's HSA for services ren-
dered are treated as guaranteed payments that 
are includible in the partner's gross income. In 
both situations, the partner can deduct the con-
tribution made to the partner's HSA.
Contributions by an S corporation to a 
2%-shareholder-employee's HSA for services 
rendered are treated as guaranteed payments 
and are includible in the shareholder -employ-
ee's gross income. The shareholder -employee 
can deduct the contribution made to the share-
holder-employee's HSA.
Qualified HSA funding distribution.  Y ou 
can make a one-time distribution from your indi-
vidual retirement arrangement (IRA) to an HSA 
and you generally won’t include any of the distri-
bution in your income. See Pub. 590 -B for the 
requirements for these qualified HSA funding 
distributions.
Adoption Assistance
Y ou may be able to exclude from your income 
amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-
nection with your adoption of an eligible child. 
See the Instructions for Form 8839 for more in-
formation.
Adoption benefits are reported by your em-
ployer in Form W -2, box 12, with code T . They 
are also included as social security and Medi-
care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they 
aren’t included as wages in box 1. T o determine 
the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must 
complete Part III of Form 8839. File the form 
with your return.
Athletic Facilities
If your employer provides you with the free or 
low-cost use of an employer -operated gym or 
other athletic club on your employer's premises, 
the value isn’t included in your compensation. 
The gym must be used primarily by employees, 
their spouses, and their dependent children.
If your employer pays for a fitness program 
provided to you at an off -site resort hotel or ath-
letic club, the value of the program is included in 
your compensation.
De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
If your employer provides you with a product or 
service and the cost of it is so small that it would 
be unreasonable for the employer to account for 
it, the value isn’t included in your income. In 
most cases, the value of benefits such as dis-
counts at company cafeterias, cab fares home 
when working overtime, occasional personal 
use of an employer’s copying machine (where 
at least 85% of the use of the machine is for 
business), and company picnics aren’t included 
in your income. Also, see Employee Discounts, 
later.
Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you a tur-
key, ham, or other item of nominal value at 
Christmas or other holidays, don’t include the 
value of the gift in your income. However, if your 
employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or a 
similar item that you can easily exchange for 
cash, you include the value of that gift as extra 
salary or wages regardless of the amount in-
volved.
Dependent Care Benefits
If your employer provides dependent care bene-
fits under a dependent care assistance plan, 
Page 5 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 5

you may be able to exclude these benefits from 
your income. Dependent care benefits include:
• Amounts your employer pays directly to ei-
ther you or your care provider for the care 
of your qualifying person while you work,
• The FMV of care in a daycare facility provi-
ded or sponsored by your employer, and
• Pre-tax contributions you made under a 
dependent care FSA.
The amount you can exclude is limited to the 
lesser of:
• The total amount of dependent care bene-
fits you received during the year,
• The total amount of qualified expenses you 
incurred during the year,
• Y our earned income,
• Y our spouse's earned income, or
• $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately).
Y our employer must show the total amount 
of dependent care benefits provided to you dur-
ing the year under a dependent care assistance 
plan in Form W -2, box 10. Any amount over 
your employer’s plan limit is also included in 
box 1. See Form 2441.
T o claim the exclusion, you must complete 
Part III of Form 2441. See the Instructions for 
Form 2441 for more information.
Educational Assistance
Y ou can exclude from your income up to $5,250 
of qualified employer -provided educational as-
sistance. For more information, see Pub. 970.
Employee Discounts
If your employer sells you property or services 
at a discount, you may be able to exclude the 
amount of the discount from your income. The 
exclusion applies to discounts on property or 
services offered to customers in the ordinary 
course of the line of business in which you 
work. However, it doesn’t apply to discounts on 
real property or property commonly held for in-
vestment (such as stocks or bonds).
The exclusion is limited to the price charged 
nonemployee customers multiplied by the fol-
lowing percentage.
• For a discount on property, your employer's 
gross profit percentage (gross profit divi-
ded by gross sales) on all property sold 
during the employer's previous tax year. 
(Ask your employer for this percentage.)
• For a discount on services, 20% (0.20).
Financial Counseling Fees
Financial counseling fees paid for you by your 
employer are included in your income and must 
be reported as part of wages. Fees for tax or in-
vestment counseling are miscellaneous item-
ized deductions and are no longer deductible.
Qualified retirement planning services paid 
for you by your employer may be excluded from 
your income. For more information, see Retire-
ment Planning Services, later.
Employer-Provided Group-Term 
Life Insurance
In most cases, the cost of up to $50,000 of 
group-term life insurance coverage provided to 
you by your employer (or former employer) isn’t 
included in your income. However, you must in-
clude in income the cost of employer -provided 
insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000 
of coverage reduced by any amount you pay to-
ward the purchase of the insurance.
For exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost 
excluded and Entire cost taxed, later.
If your employer provided more than 
$50,000 of coverage, the amount included in 
your income is reported as part of your wages in 
Form W-2, box 1. Also, it's shown separately in 
box 12 with code C.
Group-term life insurance.  This insurance is 
term life insurance protection (insurance for a 
fixed period of time) that:
• Provides a general death benefit,
• Is provided to a group of employees,
• Is provided under a policy carried by the 
employer, and
• Provides an amount of insurance to each 
employee based on a formula that prevents 
individual selection.
Permanent benefits.  If your group -term 
life insurance policy includes permanent bene-
fits, such as a paid -up or cash surrender value, 
you must include in your income, as wages, the 
cost of the permanent benefits minus the 
amount you pay for them. Y our employer should 
be able to tell you the amount to include in your 
income.
Accidental death benefits.  Insurance that 
provides accidental or other death benefits but 
doesn't provide general death benefits (for ex-
ample, travel insurance) isn’t group -term life in-
surance.
Former employer.  If your former employer 
provided more than $50,000 of group -term life 
insurance coverage during the year, the amount 
included in your income is reported as wages in 
Form W-2, box 1. Also, it's shown separately in 
box 12 with code C. Box 12 will also show the 
amount of uncollected social security and Medi-
care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes 
M and N. Y ou must pay these taxes with your in-
come tax return. Include them on Schedule 2 
(Form 1040), line 13. For more information, see 
the Instructions for Forms 1040 and 1040-SR.
Two or more employers.  Y our exclusion for 
employer-provided group -term life insurance 
coverage can’t exceed the cost of $50,000 of 
coverage, whether the insurance is provided by 
a single employer or multiple employers. If two 
or more employers provide insurance coverage 
that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-
ported as wages on your Forms W -2 won’t be 
correct. Y ou must figure how much to include in 
your income. Reduce the amount you figure by 
any amount reported in Form W -2, box 12, with 
code C, add the result to the wages reported in 
box 1, and report the total on your return.
Figuring the taxable cost.  Use the following 
worksheet to figure the amount to include in 
your income.
If you pay any part of the cost of the insur-
ance, your entire payment reduces, dollar for 
dollar, the amount you would otherwise include 
in your income. However, you can’t reduce the 
amount to include in your income by:
• Payments for coverage in a different tax 
year;
• Payments for coverage through a cafeteria 
plan, unless the payments are after-tax 
contributions; or
• Payments for coverage not taxed to you 
because of the exceptions discussed later 
under Entire cost excluded.
Page 6 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6 Publication 525 (2023)

Worksheet 1. Figuring the 
Cost of Group-Term Life 
Insurance To Include in 
Income
Keep for Y our Records
1. Enter the total amount of 
your insurance coverage 
from your 
employer(s) ........... 1.  
2. Limit on exclusion for 
employer-provided 
group-term life insurance 
coverage ............. 2. 50,000
3. Subtract line 2 from 
line 1 ................ 3.  
4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 
Figure to the nearest 
tenth ................ 4.  
5. Go to T able 1. Using your 
age on the last day of the 
tax year, find your age group 
in the left column, and enter 
the cost from the column on 
the right for your age 
group ............... 5.  
6. Multiply line 4 by 
line 5 ................ 6.  
7. Enter the number of full 
months of coverage at this 
cost ................. 7.  
8. Multiply line 6 by 
line 7 ................ 8.  
9. Enter the 
premiums you 
paid per 
month ........ 9.  
10. Enter the number 
of months you 
paid the 
premiums ..... 10. 
11. Multiply line 9 by 
line 10 ............... 11. 
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. 
Include this amount in 
your income as 
wages .............. 12. 
T able 1. Cost of $1,000 of 
Group-Term Life Insurance for 1 
Month
Age Cost
Under 25 ................. $ .05
25 through 29 .............. .06
30 through 34 .............. .08
35 through 39 .............. .09
40 through 44 .............. .10
45 through 49 .............. .15
50 through 54 .............. .23
55 through 59 .............. .43
60 through 64 .............. .66
65 through 69 .............. 1.27
70 and above .............. 2.06
Example 3.  Y ou're 51 years old and work 
for employers A and B. Both employers provide 
group-term life insurance coverage for you for 
the entire year. Y our coverage is $35,000 with 
employer A and $45,000 with employer B. Y ou 
pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
ployer B group plan. Y ou figure the amount to 
include in your income as follows.
Worksheet 1. Figuring the 
Cost of Group-Term Life 
Insurance To Include in 
Income—Illustrated
Keep for Y our Records
1. Enter the total amount of 
your insurance coverage 
from your 
employer(s) ............ 1. 80,000
2. Limit on exclusion for 
employer-provided 
group-term life insurance 
coverage .............. 2. 50,000
3. Subtract line 2 from 
line 1 ................. 3. 30,000
4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 
Figure to the nearest 
tenth ................. 4. 30.0
5. Go to T able 1. Using your 
age on the last day of the tax 
year, find your age group in 
the left column, and enter the 
cost from the column on the 
right for your age 
group ................ 5. .23
6. Multiply line 4 by 
line 5 ................. 6. 6.90
7. Enter the number of full 
months of coverage at this 
cost .................. 7. 12
8. Multiply line 6 by 
line 7 ................. 8. 82.80
9. Enter the 
premiums you paid 
per month ..... 9. 4.15
10. Enter the number 
of months you paid 
the 
premiums ..... 10. 12
11. Multiply line 9 by 
line 10 ................ 11. 49.80
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. 
Include this amount in 
your income as 
wages ............... 12. 33.00
The total amount to include in income for the 
cost of excess group -term life insurance is $33. 
Neither employer provided over $50,000 insur-
ance coverage, so the wages shown on your 
Forms W -2 don't include any part of that $33. 
Y ou must add it to the wages shown on your 
Forms W-2 and include the total on your return.
Entire cost excluded.  Y ou aren't taxed on the 
cost of group-term life insurance if any of the fol-
lowing circumstances apply.
1. Y ou’re permanently and totally disabled 
and have ended your employment.
2. Y our employer is the beneficiary of the pol-
icy for the entire period the insurance is in 
force during the tax year.
3. A charitable organization to which contri-
butions are deductible is the only benefi-
ciary of the policy for the entire period the 
insurance is in force during the tax year. 
Page 7 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 7

(Y ou aren’t entitled to a deduction for a 
charitable contribution for naming a chari-
table organization as the beneficiary of 
your policy.)
4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:
a. Y ou retired before January 2, 1984, 
and were covered by the plan when 
you retired; or
b. Y ou reached age 55 before January 2, 
1984, and were employed by the em-
ployer or its predecessor in 1983.
Entire cost taxed.  Y ou’re taxed on the entire 
cost of group -term life insurance if either of the 
following circumstances applies.
• The insurance is provided by your em-
ployer through a qualified employees' trust, 
such as a pension trust or a qualified annu-
ity plan.
• Y ou’re a key employee and your employer's 
plan discriminates in favor of key employ-
ees.
Meals and Lodging
Y ou don't include in your income the value of 
meals and lodging provided to you and your 
family by your employer at no charge if the fol-
lowing conditions are met.
1. The meals are:
a. Furnished on the business premises 
of your employer, and
b. Furnished for the convenience of your 
employer.
2. The lodging is:
a. Furnished on the business premises 
of your employer,
b. Furnished for the convenience of your 
employer, and
c. A condition of your employment. (Y ou 
must accept it in order to be able to 
properly perform your duties.)
Y ou also don't include in your income the 
value of meals or meal money that qualifies as a 
minimal fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini-
mal) Benefits, earlier.
Faculty lodging.  If you're an employee of an 
educational institution or an academic health 
center and you're provided with lodging that 
doesn't meet the three conditions given earlier, 
you may still not have to include the value of the 
lodging in income. However, the lodging must 
be qualified campus lodging, and you must pay 
an Adequate rent.
Academic health center. This is an organ-
ization that meets the following conditions.
• Its principal purpose or function is to pro-
vide medical or hospital care or medical 
education or research.
• It receives payments for graduate medical 
education under the Social Security Act.
• One of its principal purposes or functions is 
to provide and teach basic and clinical 
medical science and research using its 
own faculty.
Qualified campus lodging. Qualified cam-
pus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your 
spouse, or any of your dependents by, or on be-
half of, the institution or center for use as a 
home. The lodging must be located on or near a 
campus of the educational institution or aca-
demic health center.
Adequate rent.  The amount of rent you 
pay for the year for qualified campus lodging is 
considered adequate if it's at least equal to the 
lesser of:
• 5% of the appraised value of the lodging, 
or
• The average of rentals paid by individuals 
(other than employees or students) for 
comparable lodging held for rent by the ed-
ucational institution.
If the amount you pay is less than the lesser of 
these amounts, you must include the difference 
in your income.
The lodging must be appraised by an inde-
pendent appraiser and the appraisal must be 
reviewed on an annual basis.
Example 4.  Y ou are a sociology professor 
for State University and rent a home from the 
university that is qualified campus lodging. The 
house is appraised at $200,000. The average 
rent paid for comparable university lodging by 
persons other than employees or students is 
$14,000 a year. Y ou pay an annual rent of 
$11,000. Y ou don’t include in your income any 
rental value because the rent you pay equals at 
least 5% of the appraised value of the house 
(5% × $200,000 = $10,000). If you paid annual 
rent of only $8,000, you would have to include 
$2,000 in your income ($10,000 − $8,000).
Moving Expense Reimbursements
For tax years 2018 through 2025, reimburse-
ments for certain moving expenses are no lon-
ger excluded from the gross income of nonmili-
tary taxpayers.
No-Additional-Cost Services
The value of services you receive from your em-
ployer for free, at cost, or for a reduced price 
isn't included in your income if your employer:
• Offers the same service for sale to custom-
ers in the ordinary course of the line of 
business in which you work, and
• Doesn’t have a substantial additional cost 
(including any sales income given up) to 
provide you with the service (regardless of 
what you paid for the service).
In most cases, no -additional-cost services 
are excess capacity services, such as airline, 
bus, or train tickets; hotel rooms; and telephone 
services.
Example 5.  Y ou're employed as a flight at-
tendant for a company that owns both an airline 
and a hotel chain. Y our employer allows you to 
take personal flights (if there is an unoccupied 
seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if there 
is an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. The 
value of the personal flight isn't included in your 
income. However, the value of the hotel room is 
included in your income because you don't work 
in the hotel business.
Retirement Planning Services
If your employer has a qualified retirement plan, 
qualified retirement planning services provided 
to you (and your spouse) by your employer 
aren't included in your income. Qualified serv-
ices include retirement planning advice, infor-
mation about your employer's retirement plan, 
and information about how the plan may fit into 
your overall individual retirement income plan. 
Y ou can't exclude the value of any tax prepara-
tion, accounting, legal, or brokerage services 
provided by your employer. Also, see Financial 
Counseling Fees, earlier.
Transportation
If your employer provides you with a qualified 
transportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded 
from your income, up to certain limits. A quali-
fied transportation fringe benefit is:
• T ransportation in a commuter highway ve-
hicle (such as a van) between your home 
and work place,
• A transit pass, or
• Qualified parking.
Cash reimbursement by your employer for 
these expenses under a bona fide reimburse-
ment arrangement is also excludable. However, 
cash reimbursement for a transit pass is exclud-
able only if a voucher or similar item that can be 
exchanged only for a transit pass isn't readily 
available for direct distribution to you.
Exclusion limit.  The exclusion for commuter 
vehicle transportation and transit pass fringe 
benefits can't be more than $300 a month.
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe 
benefit can't be more than $300 a month.
If the benefits have a value that is more than 
these limits, the excess must be included in 
your income.
Commuter highway vehicle.  This is a high-
way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not in-
cluding the driver). At least 80% of the vehicle's 
mileage must reasonably be expected to be:
• For transporting employees between their 
homes and workplace, and
• On trips during which employees occupy at 
least half of the vehicle's adult seating ca-
pacity (not including the driver).
Transit pass. This is any pass, token, farecard, 
voucher, or similar item entitling a person to ride 
mass transit (whether public or private) free or 
at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter high-
way vehicle operated by a person in the busi-
ness of transporting persons for compensation.
Qualified parking. This is parking provided to 
an employee at or near the employer's place of 
business. It also includes parking provided on 
or near a location from which the employee 
commutes to work by mass transit, in a com-
muter highway vehicle, or by car pool. It doesn't 
include parking at or near the employee's home.
Page 8 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8 Publication 525 (2023)

Tuition Reduction
Y ou can exclude a qualified tuition reduction 
from your income. This is the amount of a 
reduction in tuition:
• For education (below graduate level) fur-
nished by an educational institution to an 
employee, former employee who retired or 
became disabled, or his or her spouse and 
dependent children;
• For education furnished to a graduate stu-
dent at an educational institution if the 
graduate student is engaged in teaching or 
research activities for that institution; or
• Representing payment for teaching, re-
search, or other services if you receive the 
amount under the National Health Service 
Corps Scholarship Program or the Armed 
Forces Health Professions Scholarship 
and Financial Assistance program. 
For more information, see Pub. 970.
Working Condition Benefits
If your employer provides you with a product or 
service and the cost of it would have been al-
lowable as a business or depreciation deduc-
tion if you paid for it yourself, the cost isn't inclu-
ded in your income.
Example 6.  Y ou work as an engineer and 
your employer provides you with a subscription 
to an engineering trade magazine. The cost of 
the subscription isn't included in your income 
because the cost would have been allowable to 
you as a business deduction if you had paid for 
the subscription yourself.
Valuation of Fringe Benefits
If a fringe benefit is included in your income, the 
amount included is generally its value deter-
mined under the general valuation rule or under 
the special valuation rules. For an exception, 
see Employer-Provided Group-T erm Life Insur-
ance, earlier.
General valuation rule.  Y ou must include in 
your income the amount by which the FMV of 
the fringe benefit is more than the sum of:
1. The amount, if any, you paid for the bene-
fit, plus
2. The amount, if any, specifically excluded 
from your income by law.
If you pay FMV for a fringe benefit, no amount is 
included in your income.
Fringe benefit FMV.  The FMV of a fringe 
benefit is determined by all the facts and cir-
cumstances. It’s the amount you would have to 
pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit. This 
is determined without regard to:
• Y our perceived value of the benefit, or
• The amount your employer paid for the 
benefit.
Employer-provided vehicles.  If your em-
ployer provides a car (or other highway motor 
vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car is 
usually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.
Under the general valuation rules, the value 
of an employer -provided vehicle is the amount 
you would have to pay a third party to lease the 
same or a similar vehicle on the same or com-
parable terms in the same geographic area 
where you use the vehicle. An example of a 
comparable lease term is the amount of time 
the vehicle is available for your use, such as a 
1-year period. The value can't be determined by 
multiplying a cents-per-mile rate times the num-
ber of miles driven unless you prove the vehicle 
could have been leased on a cents-per-mile ba-
sis. See Notice 2021-7 for more information on 
temporary relief for employers and employees 
using the automobile lease valuation rule to de-
termine the value of an employer-provided vehi-
cle in 2020 or 2021. The special valuation rule 
used for 2021 under the Notice must continue 
to be used by the employer and the employee 
for all subsequent years, except to the extent 
the employer uses the commuting valuation 
rule. See Special valuation rules below.
Flights on employer -provided aircraft. 
Under the general valuation rules, if your flight 
on an employer -provided piloted aircraft is pri-
marily personal and you control the use of the 
aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount it 
would cost to charter the flight from a third party.
If there is more than one employee on the 
flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must be 
divided among those employees. The division 
must be based on all the facts, including which 
employee or employees control the use of the 
aircraft.
Special valuation rules.  Generally, you can 
use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefit 
only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-
ployer uses a special valuation rule, you can't 
use a different special rule to value that benefit. 
Y ou can always use the general valuation rule 
discussed earlier, based on facts and circum-
stances, even if your employer uses a special 
rule.
If you and your employer use a special valu-
ation rule, you must include in your income the 
amount your employer determines under the 
special rule minus the sum of:
1. Any amount you repaid your employer, 
plus
2. Any amount specifically excluded from in-
come by law.
The special valuation rules are the following.
• The automobile lease rule.
• The vehicle cents-per-mile rule.
• The commuting rule.
• The unsafe conditions commuting rule.
• The employer-operated eating-facility rule. 
For more information on these rules, see 
Pub. 15-B.
For information on the noncommercial flight 
and commercial flight valuation rules, see sec-
tions 1. 61-21(g) and 1. 61-21(h) of the regula-
tions.
Retirement Plan 
Contributions
Except for Roth contributions, your employer's 
contributions to a qualified retirement plan for 
you aren’t included in income at the time con-
tributed. (Y our employer can tell you whether 
your retirement plan is qualified.) However, the 
cost of life insurance coverage included in the 
plan may have to be included.
If your employer pays into a nonqualified 
plan for you, you must generally include the 
contributions in your income as wages for the 
tax year in which the contributions are made. 
However, if your interest in the plan isn't trans-
ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of for-
feiture (you have a good chance of losing it) at 
the time of the contribution, you don't have to in-
clude the value of your interest in your income 
until it's transferable or is no longer subject to a 
substantial risk of forfeiture.
For information on distributions from re-
tirement plans, see Pub. 575 (or Pub. 
721 if you’re a federal employee or re-
tiree).
Elective Deferrals
If you’re covered by certain kinds of retirement 
plans, you can choose to have part of your com-
pensation contributed by your employer to a re-
tirement fund, rather than have it paid to you. 
The amount you set aside (called an “elective 
deferral”) is treated as an employer contribution 
to a qualified plan. An elective deferral, other 
than a designated Roth contribution (discussed 
later), isn't included in wages subject to income 
tax at the time contributed. However, it’s inclu-
ded in wages subject to social security and 
Medicare taxes.
Elective deferrals include elective contribu-
tions to the following retirement plans.
1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section 
401(k) plans).
2. The TSP for federal employees.
3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-
sion plans (SARSEP plans).
4. Savings incentive match plans for employ-
ees (SIMPLE plans).
5. T ax-sheltered annuity plans (section 
403(b) plans).
6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re-
porting by employer, later.)
7. Section 457 plans.
Qualified automatic contribution arrange-
ments. Under a qualified automatic contribu-
tion arrangement, your employer can treat you 
as having elected to have a part of your com-
pensation contributed to a section 401(k) plan. 
Y ou’re to receive written notice of your rights 
and obligations under the qualified automatic 
contribution arrangement. The notice must ex-
plain:
• Y our rights to elect not to have elective 
contributions made, or to have contribu-
tions made at a different percentage; and
• How contributions made will be invested in 
the absence of any investment decision by 
you.
Y ou must be given a reasonable period of 
time after receipt of the notice and before the 
first elective contribution is made to make an 
election with respect to the contributions.
TIP
Page 9 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 9

Overall limit on deferrals.  For 2023, you 
shouldn't have deferred more than a total of 
$22,500 of contributions to the plans listed in 
(1) through (3), earlier, unless you are 50 or 
older. The specific plan limits for the plans listed 
in (4) through (7), earlier, are discussed later. 
Amounts deferred under specific plan limits are 
part of the overall limit on deferrals.
Y our employer or plan administrator should 
apply the proper annual limit when figuring your 
plan contributions. However, you’re responsible 
for monitoring the total you defer to ensure that 
the deferrals aren't more than the overall limit.
Catch-up contributions. Y ou may be allowed 
catch-up contributions (additional elective de-
ferrals) if you're age 50 or older by the end of 
your tax year. For 2023, the catch -up limit for 
section 401(k) and 403(b) plans, the TSP , SAR-
SEP plans, and governmental section 457 plans 
is $7,500. For SIMPLE plans, it’s $3,500.
For more information about catch -up contri-
butions to:
• Section 401(k) plans, see Elective Defer-
rals in chapter 4 of Pub. 560;
• SARSEPs, see Salary Reduction Simpli-
fied Employee Pensions in chapter 2 of 
Pub. 560;
• SIMPLE plans, see SIMPLE Plans in chap-
ter 3 of Pub. 560; and
• Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferrals 
under section 457 plans, later.
Limit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans.  If 
you're a participant in a SIMPLE plan, you gen-
erally shouldn't have deferred more than 
$15,500 in 2023. Amounts you defer under a 
SIMPLE plan count toward the overall limit 
($22,500 for 2023) and may affect the amount 
you can defer under other elective deferral 
plans.
Limit for tax -sheltered annuities. If you're a 
participant in a tax -sheltered annuity plan (sec-
tion 403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals 
for 2023 is generally $22,500. However, if you 
have at least 15 years of service with a public 
school system, a hospital, a home health serv-
ice agency, a health and welfare service 
agency, a church, or a convention or associa-
tion of churches (or associated organization), 
the limit on elective deferrals is increased by the 
least of the following amounts.
1. $3,000.
2. $15,000, reduced by the sum of:
a. The additional pre-tax elective defer-
rals made in earlier years because of 
this rule, plus
b. The aggregate amount of designated 
Roth contributions permitted for prior 
tax years because of this rule.
3. $5,000 times the number of your years of 
service for the organization, minus the to-
tal elective deferrals made by your em-
ployer on your behalf for earlier years.
If you qualify for the 15 -year rule, your elec-
tive deferrals under this limit can be as high as 
$25,500 for 2023.
For more information, see Pub. 571.
Limit for deferral under section 501(c)(18) 
plans.  If you're a participant in a section 
501(c)(18) plan (a trust created before June 25, 
1959, funded only by employee contributions), 
you should have deferred no more than the 
lesser of $7,000 or 25% of your compensation. 
Amounts you defer under a section 501(c)(18) 
plan count toward the overall limit ($22,500 in 
2023) and may affect the amount you can defer 
under other elective deferral plans.
Limit for deferrals under section 457 plans. 
If you're a participant in a section 457 plan (a 
deferred compensation plan for employees of 
state or local governments or tax-exempt organ-
izations), you should have deferred no more 
than the lesser of your includible compensation 
or $22,500 in 2023. However, if you're within 3 
years of normal retirement age, you may be al-
lowed an increased limit if the plan allows it. 
See Increased limit, later.
Includible compensation.  Generally, this 
is your Form W-2 wages plus elective deferrals. 
In most cases, it includes all the following pay-
ments.
1. Wages and salaries.
2. Fees for professional services.
3. The value of any employer-provided quali-
fied transportation fringe benefit (defined 
under T ransportation, earlier) that isn't in-
cluded in your income.
4. Other amounts received (cash or non-
cash) for personal services you per-
formed, including, but not limited to, the 
following items.
a. Commissions and tips.
b. Fringe benefits.
c. Bonuses.
d. De minimis financial incentives to 
make elective deferrals to a qualified 
cash or deferred arrangement.
5. Employer contributions (elective deferrals) 
to the following.
a. The section 457 plan.
b. Section 401(k) plans that aren't inclu-
ded in your income.
c. A SARSEP plan.
d. A tax-sheltered annuity (section 
403(b) plan).
e. A SIMPLE plan.
f. A section 125 cafeteria plan.
Instead of using the amounts listed earlier to 
determine your includible compensation, your 
employer can use any of the following amounts.
• Y our wages as defined for income tax with-
holding purposes.
• Y our wages as reported in Form W-2, 
box 1.
• Y our wages that are subject to social se-
curity withholding (including elective defer-
rals).
Increased limit.  During any, or all, of the 
last 3 years ending before you reach normal re-
tirement age under the plan, your plan may pro-
vide that your limit is the lesser of:
1. T wice the annual limit ($45,000 for 2023), 
or
2. The basic annual limit plus the amount of 
the basic limit not used in prior years (only 
allowed if not using age 50-or-over 
catch-up contributions).
Catch-up contributions.  Y ou can gener-
ally have additional elective deferrals made to 
your governmental section 457 plan if:
• Y ou reached age 50 by the end of the year, 
and
• No other elective deferrals can be made for 
you to the plan for the year because of lim-
its or restrictions.
If you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of your 
includible compensation or $22,500, plus 
$7,500. However, if you're within 3 years of re-
tirement age and your plan provides the in-
creased limit, discussed earlier, that limit may 
be higher.
Designated Roth contributions.  Employers 
with section 401(k) plans, section 403(b) plans, 
and governmental section 457 plans can create 
qualified Roth contribution programs so that you 
may elect to have part or all of your elective de-
ferrals to the plan designated as after -tax Roth 
contributions. Designated Roth contributions 
are treated as elective deferrals, except that 
they're included in income. Y our retirement plan 
must maintain separate accounts and record-
keeping for the designated Roth contributions. 
In addition, your retirement plan may allow you 
to designate certain nonelective contributions or 
matching contributions as Roth contributions. 
These Roth contributions are also included in 
income.
Qualified distributions from a Roth account 
aren't included in income. A distribution made 
before the end of the 5 -tax-year period begin-
ning with the first tax year for which you made a 
Roth contribution to the account isn't a qualified 
distribution.
Reporting by employer.  Y our employer gen-
erally shouldn't include elective deferrals in your 
wages in Form W -2, box 1. Instead, your em-
ployer should mark the Retirement plan check-
box in box 13 and show the total amount defer-
red in box 12.
Section 501(c)(18)(D) contributions. 
Wages shown in Form W -2, box 1, shouldn't 
have been reduced for contributions you made 
to a section 501(c)(18)(D) plan. The amount 
you contributed should be identified with code 
H in box 12. Y ou may deduct the amount defer-
red subject to the limits that apply. Include your 
deduction in the total on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 24f.
Designated Roth contributions.  These 
contributions are elective deferrals but are inclu-
ded in your wages in Form W -2, box 1. Desig-
nated Roth contributions to a section 401(k) 
plan are reported using code AA in box 12, or, 
for section 403(b) plans, code BB in box 12. 
Designated Roth contributions to a governmen-
tal section 457 plan are reported using code EE 
in box 12.
Designated Roth nonelective contribu-
tions and designated Roth matching 
Page 10 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
10 Publication 525 (2023)

contributions.  These contributions are repor-
ted on Form 1099 -R for the year in which the 
contributions are allocated to your account. The 
total amount of designated Roth nonelective 
contributions and designated Roth matching 
contributions that are allocated to your account 
in the year is reported in box 1 and in box 2a. 
These contributions are reported using code G 
in box 7.
Excess deferrals. If your deferrals exceed the 
limit, you must notify your plan by the date re-
quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex-
cess amount will be distributed to you. If you 
participate in more than one plan, you can have 
the excess paid out of any of the plans that per-
mit these distributions. Y ou must notify each 
plan by the date required by that plan of the 
amount to be paid from that particular plan. The 
plan must then pay you the amount of the ex-
cess, along with any income earned on that 
amount, by April 15 of the following year.
Y ou must include the excess deferral in your 
income for the year of the deferral. File Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR to add the excess deferral 
amount to earned income on line 1h.
Excess not distributed.  If you don't take 
out the excess amount, you can't include it in 
the cost of the contract even though you inclu-
ded it in your income. Therefore, you're taxed 
twice on the excess deferral left in the 
plan—once when you contribute it, and again 
when you receive it as a distribution (unless the 
excess deferral was a designated Roth contri-
bution).
Excess distributed to you.  If you take out 
the excess after the year of the deferral and you 
receive the corrective distribution by April 15 of 
the following year, don't include it in income 
again in the year you receive it. If you receive it 
later, you must include it in income in both the 
year of the deferral and the year you receive it 
(unless the excess deferral was a designated 
Roth contribution). Any income on the excess 
deferral taken out is taxable in the tax year in 
which you take it out. If you take out part of the 
excess deferral and the income on it, allocate 
the distribution proportionately between the ex-
cess deferral and the income.
Y ou should receive a Form 1099 -R for the 
year in which the excess deferral is distributed 
to you. Use the following rules to report a cor-
rective distribution shown on Form 1099 -R for 
2023.
• If the distribution was for a 2023 excess 
deferral, your Form 1099-R should have 
code 8 in box 7. Add the excess deferral 
amount to your wages on your 2023 tax re-
turn.
• If the distribution was for a 2023 excess 
deferral to a designated Roth account, your 
Form 1099-R should have codes B and 8 
in box 7. Don’t add this amount to your wa-
ges on your 2023 return.
• If the distribution was for a 2022 excess 
deferral, your Form 1099-R should have 
code P in box 7. If you didn't add the ex-
cess deferral amount to your wages on 
your 2022 tax return, you must file an 
amended return on Form 1040-X. If you 
didn't receive the distribution by April 15, 
2023, you must also add it to your wages 
on your 2023 tax return.
• If the distribution was for the income 
earned on an excess deferral, your Form 
1099-R should have code 8 in box 7. Add 
the income amount to your wages on your 
2023 income tax return, regardless of 
when the excess deferral was made.
Report a loss on a corrective distribution of an 
excess deferral in the year the excess amount 
(reduced by the loss) is distributed to you. In-
clude the loss as a negative amount on Sched-
ule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, and identify it as 
“Loss on Excess Deferral Distribution.”
Even though a corrective distribution of 
excess deferrals is reported on Form 
1099-R, it isn't otherwise treated as a 
distribution from the plan. It can't be rolled over 
into another plan, and it isn't subject to the addi-
tional tax on early distributions.
Excess Contributions
If you're a highly compensated employee, the 
total of your elective deferrals made for you for 
any year under a section 401(k) plan or SAR-
SEP plan may be limited by the average defer-
rals, as a percentage of pay, made by all eligible 
non-highly compensated employees.
If you contributed more to the plan than al-
lowed, the excess contributions may be distrib-
uted to you. Y ou must include the distribution in 
your income on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 1h.
If you receive a corrective distribution of ex-
cess contributions (and allocable income), it's 
included in your income in the year of the distri-
bution. The allocable income is the amount of 
gain or loss through the end of the plan year for 
which the contribution was made that is alloca-
ble to the excess contributions. Y ou should re-
ceive a Form 1099 -R for the year the excess 
contributions are distributed to you. Add the dis-
tribution to your wages for that year.
Even though a corrective distribution of 
excess contributions is reported on 
Form 1099-R, it isn't otherwise treated 
as a distribution from the plan. It can't be rolled 
over into another plan, and it isn't subject to the 
additional tax on early distributions.
Excess Annual Additions
The amount contributed in 2023 to a defined 
contribution plan is generally limited to the 
lesser of 100% of your compensation or 
$66,000. Under certain circumstances, contri-
butions that exceed these limits (excess annual 
additions) may be corrected by a distribution of 
your elective deferrals or a return of your af-
ter-tax contributions and earnings from these 
contributions.
A corrective payment of excess annual addi-
tions consisting of elective deferrals or earnings 
from your after -tax contributions is fully taxable 
in the year paid. A corrective payment consist-
ing of your after-tax contributions isn't taxable.
If you received a corrective payment of ex-
cess annual additions, you should receive a 
separate Form 1099 -R for the year of the 
TIP
TIP
payment with code E in box 7. Report the total 
payment shown in Form 1099 -R, box 1, on 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 5a. Report the tax-
able amount shown in Form 1099 -R, box 2a, on 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 5b.
Even though a corrective distribution of 
excess annual additions is reported on 
Form 1099-R, it isn't otherwise treated 
as a distribution from the plan. It can't be rolled 
over into another plan, and it isn't subject to the 
additional tax on early distributions.
Stock Options
Employee stock options aren’t subject to 
Railroad Retirement Tax.  In Wisconsin Cen-
tral Ltd.  v. United States , 138 S. Ct. 2067, the 
U.S. Supreme Court ruled that “money remu-
neration” is “currency issued by a recognized 
authority as a medium of exchange,” and that 
employee stock options aren’t “money remuner-
ation” subject to the Railroad Retirement T ax 
Act (RRTA). Tier 1 and Tier 2 taxes aren’t with-
held when employees covered by the RRTA ex-
ercise stock options. Federal income tax must 
still be withheld on taxable compensation from 
railroad employees exercising their options. If 
you receive an option to buy or sell stock or 
other property as payment for your services, 
you may have income when you receive the op-
tion (the grant), when you exercise the option 
(use it to buy or sell the stock or other property), 
or when you sell or otherwise dispose of the op-
tion or property acquired through exercise of the 
option. The timing, type, and amount of income 
inclusion depend on whether you receive a non-
statutory stock option or a statutory stock op-
tion. Y our employer can tell you which kind of 
option you hold.
Nonstatutory Stock Options
Grant of option.  If you're granted a nonstatu-
tory stock option, you may have income when 
you receive the option. The amount of income 
to include and the time to include it depend on 
whether the FMV of the option can be readily 
determined. The FMV of an option can be read-
ily determined if it’s actively traded on an estab-
lished market.
The FMV of an option that isn't traded on an 
established market can be readily determined 
only if all of the following conditions exist.
• Y ou can transfer the option.
• Y ou can exercise the option immediately in 
full.
• The option or the property subject to the 
option isn't subject to any condition or re-
striction (other than a condition to secure 
payment of the purchase price) that has a 
significant effect on the FMV of the option.
• The FMV of the option privilege can be 
readily determined.
The option privilege for an option to buy is the 
opportunity to benefit during the option's exer-
cise period from any increase in the value of 
property subject to the option without risking 
any capital. For example, if during the exercise 
period the FMV of stock subject to an option is 
greater than the option's exercise price, a profit 
may be realized by exercising the option and 
immediately selling the stock at its higher value. 
TIP
Page 11 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 11

The option privilege for an option to sell is the 
opportunity to benefit during the exercise period 
from a decrease in the value of the property 
subject to the option.
If you or a member of your family is an 
officer, director, or more -than-10% 
owner of an expatriated corporation, 
you may owe an excise tax on the value of non-
statutory options and other stock -based com-
pensation from that corporation. For more infor-
mation on the excise tax, see section 4985.
Option with readily determinable value. 
If you receive a nonstatutory stock option that 
has a readily determinable FMV at the time it's 
granted to you, the option is treated like other 
property received as compensation. See Re-
stricted Property , later, for rules on how much 
income to include and when to include it. How-
ever, the rule described in that discussion for 
choosing to include the value of property in your 
income for the year of the transfer doesn't apply 
to a nonstatutory option.
Option without readily determinable 
value.  If the FMV of the option isn't readily de-
terminable at the time it's granted to you (even if 
it's determined later), you don't have income un-
til you exercise or transfer the option.
 
Exercise or transfer of option. When you ex-
ercise a nonstatutory stock option, the amount 
to include in your income depends on whether 
the option had a readily determinable value.
Option with readily determinable value. 
When you exercise a nonstatutory stock option 
that had a readily determinable value at the time 
the option was granted, you don't have to in-
clude any amount in income.
Option without readily determinable 
value.  When you exercise a nonstatutory 
stock option that didn't have a readily determi-
nable value at the time the option was granted, 
the restricted property rules apply to the prop-
erty received. The amount to include in your in-
come is the difference between the amount you 
pay for the property and its FMV when it be-
comes substantially vested. If it isn't substan-
tially vested at the time you exercise this non-
statutory stock option (so that you may have to 
give the stock back), you don't have to include 
any amount in income. Y ou include the differ-
ence in income when the option becomes sub-
stantially vested. For more information on re-
stricted property, see Restricted Property, later.
Transfer in arm's -length transaction.  If 
you transfer a nonstatutory stock option without 
a readily determinable value in an arm's -length 
transaction to an unrelated person, you must in-
clude in your income the money or other prop-
erty you received for the transfer as if you had 
exercised the option.
Transfer in non-arm's-length transaction. 
If you transfer a nonstatutory stock option with-
out a readily determinable value in a 
non-arm's-length transaction (for example, a 
gift), the option isn't treated as exercised or 
closed at that time. Y ou must include in your in-
come, as compensation, any money or property 
received. When the transferee exercises the 
CAUTION
!
option, you must include in your income, as 
compensation, the excess of the FMV of the 
stock acquired by the transferee over the sum of 
the exercise price paid and any amount you in-
cluded in income at the time you transferred the 
option. At the time of the exercise, the trans-
feree recognizes no income and has a basis in 
the stock acquired equal to the FMV of the 
stock.
Any transfer of this kind of option to a related 
person is treated as a non-arm's-length transac-
tion. See Regulations section 1.83-7 for the def-
inition of a related person.
Recourse note in satisfaction of the ex-
ercise price of an option.  If you're an em-
ployee, and you issue a recourse note to your 
employer in satisfaction of the exercise price of 
an option to acquire your employer's stock, and 
your employer and you subsequently agree to 
reduce the stated principal amount of the note, 
you generally recognize compensation income 
at the time and in the amount of the reduction.
Tax form. If you have income from the exercise 
of nonstatutory stock options, your employer 
should report the amount to you in Form W -2, 
box 12, with code V . The employer should show 
the spread (that is, the FMV of stock over the 
exercise price of options granted to you for that 
stock) from your exercise of the nonstatutory 
stock options. Y our employer should include 
this amount in boxes 1, 3 (up to the social se-
curity wage base), and 5. Y our employer should 
include this amount in box 14 if it's a railroad 
employer.
If you're a nonemployee spouse and you ex-
ercise nonstatutory stock options you received 
incident to a divorce, the income is reported to 
you in box 3 of Form 1099-MISC.
Sale of the stock.  There are no special in-
come rules for the sale of stock acquired 
through the exercise of a nonstatutory stock op-
tion. Report the sale as explained in the Instruc-
tions for Schedule D (Form 1040) for the year of 
the sale. Y ou may receive a Form 1099 -B re-
porting the sales proceeds.
Y our basis in the property you acquire under 
the option is the amount you pay for it plus any 
amount you included in income upon grant or 
exercise of the option.
Y our holding period begins as of the date 
you acquired the option, if it had a readily deter-
minable value, or as of the date you exercised 
or transferred the option if it had no readily de-
terminable value.
For options granted on or after January 1, 
2014, the basis information reported to you on 
Form 1099 -B won't reflect any amount you in-
cluded in income upon grant or exercise of the 
option. For options granted before January 1, 
2014, any basis information reported to you on 
Form 1099 -B may or may not reflect any 
amount you included in income upon grant or 
exercise; therefore, the basis may need to be 
adjusted.
It’s your responsibility to make any ap-
propriate adjustments to the basis in-
formation reported on Form 1099 -B by 
completing Form 8949.
CAUTION
!
Statutory Stock Options
There are two kinds of statutory stock options.
• Incentive stock options (ISOs).
• Options granted under employee stock 
purchase plans.
For either kind of option, you must be an em-
ployee of the company granting the option, or a 
related company, at all times during the period 
beginning on the date the option is granted and 
ending 3 months before the date you exercise 
the option (for an ISO, 1 year before if you're 
disabled). Also, the option must be nontransfer-
able except at death.
If you don't meet the employment require-
ments, or you receive a transferable option, 
your option is a nonstatutory stock option.
Grant of option.  If you receive a statutory 
stock option, don't include any amount in your 
income when the option is granted.
Exercise of option.  If you exercise a statutory 
stock option, don't include any amount in in-
come when you exercise the option.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).  For the 
AMT , you must treat stock acquired through the 
exercise of an ISO as if no special treatment ap-
plied. This means that, when your rights in the 
stock are transferable or no longer subject to a 
substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include as 
an adjustment in figuring alternative minimum 
taxable income the amount by which the FMV 
of the stock exceeds the option price. Enter this 
adjustment on Form 6251, line 2i. Increase your 
AMT basis in any stock you acquire by exercis-
ing the ISO by the amount of the adjustment. 
However, no adjustment is required if you dis-
pose of the stock in the same year you exercise 
the option.
See Restricted Property , later, for more in-
formation.
Y our AMT basis in stock acquired 
through an ISO is likely to differ from 
your regular tax basis. Therefore, keep 
adequate records for both the AMT and regular 
tax so that you can figure your adjusted gain or 
loss.
Example 7.  Y our employer, Elm Company, 
granted you an ISO on April 8, 2022, to buy 100 
shares of Elm Company at $9 a share, its FMV 
at the time. Y ou exercised the option on January 
7, 2023, when the stock was selling on the open 
market for $14 a share. On January 27, 2023, 
when the stock was selling on the open market 
for $16 a share, your rights to the stock first be-
came transferable. Y ou include $700 ($1,600 
value when your rights first became transferable 
minus $900 option price) as an adjustment on 
Form 6251, line 2i.
If you exercise an ISO during 2023, you 
should receive Form 3921, or a state-
ment, from the corporation for each 
transfer made during 2023. The corporation 
must send or provide you with the form by Janu-
ary 31, 2024. Keep this information for your re-
cords.
RECORDS
TIP
Page 12 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
12 Publication 525 (2023)

Sale of the stock.  Y ou have taxable income 
or a deductible loss when you sell the stock that 
you bought by exercising the option. Y our in-
come or loss is the difference between the 
amount you paid for the stock (the option price) 
and the amount you receive when you sell it. 
Y ou generally treat this amount as capital gain 
or loss and report it as explained in the Instruc-
tions for Schedule D (Form 1040) for the year of 
the sale.
However, you may have ordinary income for 
the year that you sell or otherwise dispose of 
the stock in either of the following situations.
• Y ou don't satisfy the holding period re-
quirement.
• Y ou satisfy the conditions described under 
Option granted at a discount under Em-
ployee stock purchase plan, later.
Y our employer or former employer should report 
the ordinary income to you as wages in Form 
W-2, box 1, and you must report this ordinary 
income amount on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, 
line 1a. Enter on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8k, any income from the exercise of stock 
options not otherwise reported on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 1a.
For options granted on or after January 1, 
2014, the basis information reported to you on 
Form 1099 -B won't reflect any amount you in-
cluded in income upon grant or exercise of the 
option. For options granted before January 1, 
2014, any basis information reported to you on 
Form 1099 -B may or may not reflect any 
amount you included in income upon grant or 
exercise; therefore, the basis may need to be 
adjusted.
It’s your responsibility to make any ap-
propriate adjustments to the basis in-
formation reported on Form 1099 -B by 
completing Form 8949.
Holding period requirement.  Y ou satisfy 
the holding period requirement if you don't sell 
the stock until the end of the later of the 1 -year 
period after the stock was transferred to you or 
the 2-year period after the option was granted. 
However, you're considered to satisfy the hold-
ing period requirement if you sold the stock to 
comply with conflict-of-interest requirements.
Y our holding period for the property you ac-
quire when you exercise an option begins on 
the day after you exercise the option.
ISOs. If you sell stock acquired by exercising 
an ISO, you need to determine if you satisfied 
the holding period requirement.
Holding period requirement satisfied.  If 
you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO 
and satisfy the holding period requirement, your 
gain or loss from the sale is capital gain or loss. 
Report the sale as explained in the Instructions 
for Schedule D (Form 1040). The basis of your 
stock is the amount you paid for the stock.
Holding period requirement not satis-
fied.  If you sell stock acquired by exercising an 
ISO, don't satisfy the holding period require-
ment, and have a gain from the sale, the gain is 
ordinary income up to the amount by which the 
stock's FMV when you exercised the option ex-
ceeded the option price. Any excess gain is 
capital gain. If you have a loss from the sale, it's 
CAUTION
!
a capital loss and you don't have any ordinary 
income.
Y our employer or former employer should re-
port the ordinary income to you as wages in 
Form W-2, box 1, and you must report this ordi-
nary income amount on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, 
line 1a. If your employer or former employer 
doesn't provide you with a Form W -2, or if the 
Form W-2 doesn't include the ordinary income 
in box 1, you must report the ordinary income 
as wages on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8k, 
for the year of the sale or other disposition of 
the stock. Report the capital gain or loss as ex-
plained in the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 
1040). In determining capital gain or loss, your 
basis is the amount you paid when you exer-
cised the option plus the amount reported as 
wages.
Example 8.  Y our employer, Oak Corpora-
tion, granted you an ISO on March 12, 2021, to 
buy 100 shares of Oak Corporation stock at $10 
a share, its FMV at the time. Y ou exercised the 
option on January 7, 2022, when the stock was 
selling on the open market for $12 a share. On 
January 27, 2023, you sold the stock for $15 a 
share. Although you held the stock for more 
than a year, less than 2 years had passed from 
the time you were granted the option. In 2023, 
you must report the difference between the op-
tion price ($10) and the value of the stock when 
you exercised the option ($12) as wages. The 
rest of your gain is capital gain, figured as fol-
lows.
Selling price ($15 × 100 shares) ......... $ 1,500 
Purchase price ($10 × 100 shares) ....... − 1,000 
Gain ............................ $ 500 
Amount reported as wages
[($12 × 100 shares) − $1,000] .......... − 200 
Amount reported as capital gain ..... $ 300 
Employee stock purchase plan.  If you sold 
stock acquired by exercising an option granted 
under an employee stock purchase plan, you 
need to determine if you satisfied the holding 
period requirement.
Holding period requirement satisfied.  If 
you sold stock acquired by exercising an option 
granted under an employee stock purchase 
plan, and you satisfy the holding period require-
ment, determine your ordinary income as fol-
lows.
Y our basis is equal to the option price at the 
time you exercised your option and acquired the 
stock. The timing and amount of pay period de-
ductions don't affect your basis.
Example 9.  Pine Company has an em-
ployee stock purchase plan. The option price is 
the lower of the stock price at the time the op-
tion is granted or at the time the option is exer-
cised. The value of the stock when the option 
was granted was $25. Pine Company deducts 
$5 from Adrian's pay every week for 48 weeks 
(total = $240 ($5 × 48)). The value of the stock 
when the option is exercised is $20. Adrian re-
ceives 12 shares of Pine Company’s stock 
($240 ÷ $20). Adrian's holding period for all 12 
shares begins the day after the option is exer-
cised, even though the money used to purchase 
the shares was deducted from Adrian's pay on 
48 separate days. Adrian's basis in each share 
is $20.
Option granted at a discount.  If, at the 
time the option was granted, the option price 
per share was less than 100% (but not less than 
85%) of the FMV of the share, and you dispose 
of the share after meeting the holding period re-
quirement, or you die while owning the share, 
you must include in your income as compensa-
tion the lesser of:
• The excess of the FMV of the share at the 
time the option was granted over the option 
price, or
• The excess of the FMV of the share at the 
time of the disposition or death over the 
amount paid for the share under the option.
For this purpose, if the option price wasn't fixed 
or determinable at the time the option was gran-
ted, the option price is figured as if the option 
had been exercised at the time it was granted.
Any excess gain is capital gain. If you have a 
loss from the sale, it's a capital loss, and you 
don't have any ordinary income.
Example 10.  Y our employer, Willow Cor-
poration, granted you an option under its em-
ployee stock purchase plan to buy 100 shares 
of stock of Willow Corporation for $20 a share at 
a time when the stock had a value of $22 a 
share. Eighteen months later, when the value of 
the stock was $23 a share, you exercised the 
option, and 14 months after that you sold your 
stock for $30 a share. In the year of sale, you 
must report as wages the difference between 
the option price ($20) and the value at the time 
the option was granted ($22). The rest of your 
gain ($8 per share) is capital gain, figured as 
follows.
Selling price ($30 × 100 shares) ......... $ 3,000 
Purchase price (option price) 
($20 × 100 shares) .................. − 2,000 
Gain ............................ $ 1,000 
Amount reported as wages
[($22 × 100 shares) − $2,000] ........... − 200 
Amount reported as capital gain ..... $ 800 
Holding period requirement not satis-
fied.  If you don't satisfy the holding period re-
quirement, your ordinary income is the amount 
by which the stock's FMV when you exercised 
the option exceeded the option price. This ordi-
nary income isn't limited to your gain from the 
sale of the stock. Increase your basis in the 
stock by the amount of this ordinary income. 
The difference between your increased basis 
and the selling price of the stock is a capital 
gain or loss.
Example 11. The facts are the same as in 
Example 10, except that you sold the stock only 
6 months after you exercised the option. Y ou 
didn't satisfy the holding period requirement, so 
you must report $300 as wages and $700 as 
capital gain, figured as follows.
Page 13 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 13

Selling price ($30 × 100 shares) ......... $3,000 
Purchase price (option price) 
($20 × 100 shares) .................. − 2,000 
Gain ............................ $1,000 
Amount reported as wages
[($23 × 100 shares) − $2,000] ........... − 300 
Amount reported as capital gain
 [$3,000 – ($2,000 + $300)] ............. $700 
If you sold stock in 2023 that you ac-
quired by exercising an option granted 
at a discount under an employee stock 
purchase plan, you should receive Form 3922 
from the corporation. The corporation must 
send or provide you with the form by January 
31, 2024. Keep this information for your records.
Qualified Equity Grants
P .L. 115-97 made a change in the law that al-
lows a new election for “qualified employees” of 
private corporations to elect to defer income 
taxation for up to 5 years from the date of vest-
ing on “qualified stock” granted in connection 
with broad -based compensatory stock option 
and restricted stock unit (RSU) programs. This 
election is available for stock attributable to op-
tions exercised or RSUs settled after 2017. The 
corporation must have a written plan providing 
RSU or option to at least 80% of U.S. employ-
ees. The recipients must have the same rights 
and privileges under RSU or option plan.
The term “qualified employee” doesn’t in-
clude:
• 1% owner of corporation (current or any 
point during prior 10 calendar years),
• Current or former CEO or CFO (current or 
any point previously),
• Family of previously mentioned individuals, 
or
• One of the four highest compensated offi-
cers (current or any point during prior 10 
calendar years).
The term “qualified stock” means any stock 
in a corporation that is the employer of the em-
ployee if:
• Stock is received relating to the exercise of 
an option, or
• Stock is received in settlement of an RSU, 
and
• Option or RSU was granted by the corpo-
ration.
The term “qualified stock” can’t include 
stock from stock -settled stock appreciation 
rights or restricted stock awards (restricted 
property). It won’t include any stock if the em-
ployee may receive cash instead of stock. The 
election is made in a manner similar to the elec-
tion described under Choosing to include in in-
come for year of transfer, later, under Restricted 
Property, even though the “qualified stock” isn't 
restricted property. The election must be made 
no later than 30 days after the first date the 
rights of the employee in such stock are trans-
ferable or aren’t subject to a substantial risk of 
forfeiture, whichever occurs earlier. See Restric-
ted Property, later, for how to make the choice.
If an employee elects to defer income inclu-
sion under the provision, the income must be in-
cluded in the employee's income for the year 
TIP
that includes the earliest of (1) the first date the 
qualified stock becomes transferable, (2) the 
date the employee first becomes an excluded 
employee (as excluded from “qualified em-
ployee”), (3) the first date on which any stock of 
the employer becomes readily tradable on an 
established securities market, (4) the date 5 
years after the first date the employee's right to 
the stock becomes substantially vested, or (5) 
the date on which the employee revokes his or 
her inclusion deferral election.
The employer corporation is required to pro-
vide notification of rights to employees covered 
under a qualified program or face penalties. 
There will be withholding at the highest mar-
ginal rate.
Restricted Property
In most cases, if you receive property for your 
services, you must include its FMV in your in-
come in the year you receive the property. How-
ever, if you receive stock or other property that 
has certain restrictions that affect its value, you 
don't include the value of the property in your in-
come until it has been substantially vested. (Y ou 
can choose to include the value of the property 
in your income in the year it's transferred to you, 
as discussed later, rather than the year it's sub-
stantially vested.)
Until the property becomes substantially 
vested, it's owned by the person who makes the 
transfer to you, usually your employer. However, 
any income from the property, or the right to use 
the property, is included in your income as addi-
tional compensation in the year you receive the 
income or have the right to use the property.
When the property becomes substantially 
vested, you must include its FMV , minus any 
amount you paid for it, in your income for that 
year. Y our holding period for this property be-
gins when the property becomes substantially 
vested.
Example 12.  Y our employer, the Holly Cor-
poration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 
a share. At the time of the sale, the FMV of the 
stock is $100 a share. Under the terms of the 
sale, the stock is under a substantial risk of for-
feiture (you have a good chance of losing it) for 
a 5 -year period. Y our stock isn't substantially 
vested when it's transferred, so you don't in-
clude any amount in your income in the year 
you buy it. At the end of the 5 -year period, the 
FMV of the stock is $200 a share. Y ou must in-
clude $19,000 in your income [100 shares × 
($200 FMV − $10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by 
the Holly Corporation on your 100 shares of 
stock are taxable to you as additional compen-
sation during the period the stock can be forfei-
ted.
Substantially vested. Property is substantially 
vested when:
• It’s transferable, or
• It isn't subject to a substantial risk of forfei-
ture. (Y ou don't have a good chance of los-
ing it.)
Transferable property. Property is trans-
ferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge your in-
terest in the property to any person (other than 
the transferor), and if the person receiving your 
interest in the property isn't required to give up 
the property, or its value, if the substantial risk of 
forfeiture occurs.
Substantial risk of forfeiture. Generally, a 
substantial risk of forfeiture exists only if rights 
in property that are transferred are conditioned, 
directly or indirectly, on the future performance 
(or refraining from performance) of substantial 
services by any person, or on the occurrence of 
a condition related to a purpose of the transfer if 
the possibility of forfeiture is substantial.
Example 13.  The Redwood Corporation 
transfers to you as compensation for services 
100 shares of its corporate stock for $100 a 
share. Under the terms of the transfer, you must 
resell the stock to the corporation at $100 a 
share if you leave your job for any reason within 
3 years from the date of transfer. Y ou must per-
form substantial services over a period of time, 
and you must resell the stock to the corporation 
at $100 a share (regardless of its value) if you 
don't perform the services; so, your rights to the 
stock are subject to a substantial risk of forfei-
ture.
Choosing to include in income for year of 
transfer.  Y ou can choose to include the value 
of restricted property at the time of transfer (mi-
nus any amount you paid for the property) in 
your income for the year it's transferred. If you 
make this choice, the substantial vesting rules 
don't apply and, generally, any later apprecia-
tion in value isn't included in your compensation 
when the property becomes substantially ves-
ted. Y our basis for figuring gain or loss when 
you sell the property is the amount you paid for 
it plus the amount you included in income as 
compensation.
If you make this choice, you can't re-
voke it without the consent of the IRS. 
Consent will be given only if you were 
under a mistake of fact as to the underlying 
transaction.
If you forfeit the property after you have in-
cluded its value in income, your loss is the 
amount you paid for the property minus any 
amount you realized on the forfeiture.
Y ou can't make this choice for a non-
statutory stock option.
How to make the choice.  Y ou make the 
choice by filing a written statement with the In-
ternal Revenue Service Center where you file 
your return. Y ou must file this statement no later 
than 30 days after the date the property was 
transferred. Mail your statement to the address 
listed for your state under “Are requesting a re-
fund or aren’t enclosing a check or money or-
der...” given in Where Do Y ou File in the Instruc-
tions for Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR. Y ou must 
give a copy of this statement to the person for 
whom you performed the services and, if some-
one other than you received the property, to that 
person.
Y ou must sign the statement and indicate on 
it that you're making the choice under section 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Page 14 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
14 Publication 525 (2023)

83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state-
ment must contain all of the following informa-
tion.
• Y our name, address, and TIN.
• A description of each property for which 
you're making the choice.
• The date or dates on which the property 
was transferred and the tax year for which 
you're making the choice.
• The nature of any restrictions on the prop-
erty.
• The FMV at the time of transfer (ignoring 
restrictions except those that will never 
lapse) of each property for which you're 
making the choice.
• Any amount that you paid for the property.
• A statement that you have provided copies 
to the appropriate persons.
Y ou can't make this choice for a non-
statutory stock option.
Dividends received on restricted stock. Div-
idends you receive on restricted stock are trea-
ted as compensation and not as dividend in-
come. Y our employer should include these 
payments on your Form W-2. If they are also re-
ported on a Form 1099 -DIV , you should list 
them on Schedule B (Form 1040), with a state-
ment that you have included them as wages. 
Don’t include them in the total dividends re-
ceived.
Stock you chose to include in your in-
come. Dividends you receive on restricted 
stock you chose to include in your income in the 
year transferred are treated the same as any 
other dividends. Y ou should receive a Form 
1099-DIV showing these dividends. Don’t in-
clude the dividends in your wages on your re-
turn. Report them as dividends.
Sale of property not substantially vested. 
These rules apply to the sale or other disposi-
tion of property that you didn't choose to include 
in your income in the year transferred and that 
isn't substantially vested.
If you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-
erty in an arm's -length transaction, include in 
your income as compensation for the year of 
sale the amount realized minus the amount you 
paid for the property. If you exchange the prop-
erty in an arm's -length transaction for other 
property that isn't substantially vested, treat the 
new property as if it were substituted for the ex-
changed property.
The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-
tory stock option to a related person isn't con-
sidered an arm's -length transaction. See Regu-
lations section 1. 83-7 for the definition of a 
“related person.”
If you sell the property in a transaction that 
isn't at arm's length, include in your income as 
compensation for the year of sale the total of 
any money you received and the FMV of any 
substantially vested property you received on 
the sale. In addition, you'll have to report in-
come when the original property becomes sub-
stantially vested, as if you still held it. Report as 
compensation its FMV minus the total of the 
amount you paid for the property and the 
amount included in your income from the earlier 
sale.
CAUTION
!
Example 14.  In 2020, you paid your em-
ployer $50 for a share of stock that had an FMV 
of $100 and was subject to forfeiture until 2023. 
In 2022, you sold the stock to your spouse for 
$10 in a transaction not at arm's length. Y ou had 
compensation of $10 from this transaction. In 
2023, when the stock had an FMV of $120, it 
became substantially vested. For 2022, you 
must report additional compensation of $60, fig-
ured as follows.
FMV of stock at time of substantial 
vesting ...................... $120 
Minus: Amount paid for stock ....... $50 
Minus: Compensation previously 
included in income from sale to 
spouse ...................... 10 − 60 
Additional income .......... $60 
Inherited property not substantially vested. 
If you inherit property not substantially vested at 
the time of the decedent's death, any income 
you receive from the property is considered in-
come in respect of a decedent and is taxed ac-
cording to the rules for restricted property re-
ceived for services. For information about 
income in respect of a decedent, see Pub. 559.
Special Rules for
Certain Employees
This part of the publication deals with special 
rules for people in certain types of employment: 
members of the clergy, members of religious or-
ders, people working for foreign employers, mili-
tary personnel, and volunteers.
Clergy
If you’re a member of the clergy, you must in-
clude in your income offerings and fees you re-
ceive for marriages, baptisms, funerals, 
masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the of-
fering is made to the religious institution, it isn't 
taxable to you.
If you’re a member of a religious organiza-
tion and you give your outside earnings to the 
organization, you must still include the earnings 
in your income. However, you may be entitled to 
a charitable contribution deduction for the 
amount paid to the organization. See Pub. 526. 
Also, see Members of Religious Orders, later.
Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a 
member of the clergy is usually treated as any 
other pension or annuity. It must be reported on 
lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Housing
Special rules for housing apply to members of 
the clergy. Under these rules, you don't include 
in your income the rental value of a home (in-
cluding utilities) or a designated housing allow-
ance provided to you as part of your pay. How-
ever, the exclusion can't be more than the 
reasonable pay for your service. If you pay for 
the utilities, you can exclude any allowance des-
ignated for utility cost, up to your actual cost. 
The home or allowance must be provided as 
compensation for your services as an ordained, 
licensed, or commissioned minister. However, 
you must include the rental value of the home or 
the housing allowance as earnings from 
self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040) 
if you’re subject to the self -employment tax. For 
more information, see Pub. 517.
Members of Religious 
Orders
If you're a member of a religious order who has 
taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings 
that you renounce and turn over to the order de-
pends on whether your services are performed 
for the order.
Services performed for the order.  If you're 
performing the services as an agent of the order 
in the exercise of duties required by the order, 
don't include in your income the amounts turned 
over to the order.
If your order directs you to perform services 
for another agency of the supervising church or 
an associated institution, you're considered to 
be performing the services as an agent of the 
order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an or-
der that you turn over to the order aren't inclu-
ded in your income.
Example 15.  Y ou're a member of a church 
order and have taken a vow of poverty. Y ou re-
nounce any claims to your earnings and turn 
over to the order any salaries or wages you 
earn. Y ou're a registered nurse, so your order 
assigns you to work in a hospital that is an as-
sociated institution of the church. However, you 
remain under the general direction and control 
of the order. Y ou're considered to be an agent of 
the order and any wages you earn at the hospi-
tal that you turn over to your order aren't inclu-
ded in your income.
Services performed outside the order.  If 
you're directed to work outside the order, your 
services aren't an exercise of duties required by 
the order unless they meet both of the following 
requirements.
• They're the kind of services that are ordi-
narily the duties of members of the order.
• They're part of the duties that you must ex-
ercise for, or on behalf of, the religious or-
der as its agent.
If you're an employee of a third party, the serv-
ices you perform for the third party won't be 
considered directed or required of you by the 
order. Amounts you receive for these services 
are included in your income, even if you have 
taken a vow of poverty.
Example 16.  Y ou are a member of a reli-
gious order and have taken a vow of poverty. 
Y ou renounce all claims to your earnings and 
turn over your earnings to the order.
Y ou are a schoolteacher. Y ou were instruc-
ted by the superiors of the order to get a job 
with a private tax -exempt school. Y ou became 
an employee of the school, and, at your re-
quest, the school made the salary payments di-
rectly to the order.
Because you are an employee of the school, 
you’re performing services for the school rather 
than as an agent of the order. The wages you 
Page 15 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 15

earn working for the school are included in your 
income.
Example 17.  Y ou are a member of a reli-
gious order who, as a condition of membership, 
have taken vows of poverty and obedience. All 
claims to your earnings are renounced. Y ou re-
ceived permission from the order to establish a 
private practice as a psychologist and counsel 
members of religious orders as well as non-
members. Although the order reviews your 
budget annually, you control not only the details 
of your practice but also the means by which 
your work as a psychologist is accomplished.
Y our private practice as a psychologist 
doesn't make you an agent of the religious or-
der. The psychological services you provide 
aren't the type of services that are provided by 
the order. The income you earn as a psycholo-
gist is earned in your individual capacity. Y ou 
must include in your income the earnings from 
your private practice.
Foreign Employer
Special rules apply if you work for a foreign em-
ployer.
U.S. citizen.  If you're a U.S. citizen who works 
in the United States for a foreign government, 
an international organization, a foreign em-
bassy, or any foreign employer, you must in-
clude your salary in your income.
Social security and Medicare taxes. 
Y ou're exempt from social security and Medi-
care employee taxes if you're employed in the 
United States by an international organization or 
a foreign government. However, you must pay 
self-employment tax on your earnings from 
services performed in the United States, even 
though you aren't self -employed. This rule also 
applies if you're an employee of a qualifying 
wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-
ernment.
Employees of international organizations or 
foreign governments.  Y our compensation for 
official services to an international organization 
is exempt from federal income tax if you aren't a 
citizen of the United States or you're a citizen of 
the Philippines (whether or not you're a citizen 
of the United States).
Y our compensation for official services to a 
foreign government is exempt from federal in-
come tax if all of the following are true.
• Y ou aren't a citizen of the United States or 
you're a citizen of the Philippines (whether 
or not you're a citizen of the United States).
• Y our work is like the work done by employ-
ees of the United States in foreign coun-
tries.
• The foreign government gives an equal ex-
emption to employees of the United States 
in its country.
Waiver of alien status.  If you're an alien 
who works for a foreign government or interna-
tional organization and you file a waiver under 
section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-
ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salary 
you receive after the date you file the waiver 
isn't exempt under this rule. However, it may be 
exempt under a treaty or agreement. See Pub. 
519, U.S. T ax Guide for Aliens, for more infor-
mation about treaties.
Nonwage income.  This exemption applies 
only to employees' wages, salaries, and fees. 
Pensions and other income, such as investment 
income, don't qualify for this exemption.
Employment abroad.  For information on the 
tax treatment of income earned abroad, see 
Pub. 54.
Military
Payments you receive as a member of a military 
service are generally taxed as wages except for 
retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. Al-
lowances generally aren't taxed. For more infor-
mation on the tax treatment of military allowan-
ces and benefits, see Pub. 3.
Differential wage payments.  Any payments 
made to you by an employer during the time 
you're performing service in the uniformed serv-
ices are treated as compensation. These wages 
are subject to income tax withholding and are 
reported on Form W -2. See the discussion un-
der Miscellaneous Compensation, earlier.
Military retirement pay. If your retirement pay 
is based on age or length of service, it’s taxable 
and must be included in your income as a pen-
sion on lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. Don’t include in your income the 
amount of any reduction in retirement or re-
tainer pay to provide a survivor annuity for your 
spouse or children under the Retired Service-
man's Family Protection Plan or the Survivor 
Benefit Plan.
For a more detailed discussion of survivor 
annuities, see Pub. 575.
Disability. If you're retired on disability, see 
Military and Government Disability Pensions un-
der Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.
Qualified reservist distribution (QRD). If you 
received a QRD of all or part of the balance in 
your health FSA because you're a reservist and 
you have been ordered or called to active duty 
for a period of 180 days or more, the QRD is 
treated as wages and is reportable on Form 
W-2.
Veterans' benefits.  Don’t include in your in-
come any veterans' benefits paid under any law, 
regulation, or administrative practice adminis-
tered by the Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans or 
their families aren't taxable.
• Education, training, and subsistence allow-
ances.
• Disability compensation and pension pay-
ments for disabilities paid either to veter-
ans or their families.
• Grants for homes designed for wheelchair 
living.
• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who 
lost their sight or the use of their limbs.
• Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-
dends paid either to veterans or their bene-
ficiaries, including the proceeds of a veter-
an's endowment policy paid before death.
• Interest on insurance dividends left on de-
posit with the VA.
• Benefits under a dependent-care assis-
tance program.
• The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a 
member of the U.S. Armed Forces who 
died after September 10, 2001.
• Payments made under the compensated 
work therapy program.
• Any bonus payment by a state or political 
subdivision because of service in a combat 
zone.
Note. If, in a previous year, you received a 
bonus payment by a state or political subdivi-
sion because of service in a combat zone that 
you included in your income, you can file a 
claim for refund of the taxes on that income. 
Use Form 1040 -X to file the claim. File a sepa-
rate form for each tax year involved. In most ca-
ses, you must file your claim within 3 years after 
the date you filed your original return or within 2 
years after the date you paid the tax, whichever 
is later. See the Instructions for Form 1040-X for 
information on filing that form.
Volunteers
The tax treatment of amounts you receive as a 
volunteer is covered in the following discus-
sions.
Peace Corps.  Living allowances you receive 
as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader 
for housing, utilities, household supplies, food, 
and clothing are exempt from tax.
Taxable allowances.  The following allow-
ances must be included in your income and re-
ported as wages.
• Allowances paid to your spouse and minor 
children while you're a volunteer leader 
training in the United States.
• Living allowances designated by the Direc-
tor of the Peace Corps as basic compen-
sation. These are allowances for personal 
items such as domestic help, laundry and 
clothing maintenance, entertainment and 
recreation, transportation, and other mis-
cellaneous expenses.
• Leave allowances.
• Readjustment allowances or termination 
payments. These are considered received 
by you when credited to your account.
Example 18.  Y ou are a Peace Corps vol-
unteer and get $175 a month as a readjustment 
allowance during your period of service, to be 
paid to you in a lump sum at the end of your tour 
of duty. Although the allowance isn't available to 
you until the end of your service, you must in-
clude it in your income on a monthly basis as it’s 
credited to your account.
Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If 
you're a VISTA volunteer, you must include meal 
and lodging allowances paid to you in your in-
come as wages.
National Senior Service Corps programs. 
Don’t include in your income amounts you re-
ceive for supportive services or reimbursements 
Page 16 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
16 Publication 525 (2023)

for out -of-pocket expenses from the following 
programs.
• Retired Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP).
• Foster Grandparent Program.
• Senior Companion Program. 
Service Corps of Retired Executives 
(SCORE). If you receive amounts for suppor-
tive services or reimbursements for 
out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, don't in-
clude these amounts in gross income.
Volunteer tax counseling.  Don’t include in 
your income any reimbursements you receive 
for transportation, meals, and other expenses 
you have in training for, or actually providing, 
volunteer federal income tax counseling for the 
elderly (TCE).
Y ou can deduct as a charitable contribution 
your unreimbursed out -of-pocket expenses in 
taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-
tance (VITA) program.
Volunteer firefighters and emergency medi-
cal responders.  If you are a volunteer fire-
fighter or emergency medical responder, do not 
include in your income the following benefits 
you receive from a state or local government.
• Rebates or reductions of property or in-
come taxes you receive because of serv-
ices you performed as a volunteer fire-
fighter or emergency medical responder.
• Payments you receive because of services 
you performed as a volunteer firefighter or 
emergency medical responder, up to $50 
for each month you provided services.
The excluded income reduces any related 
tax or contribution deduction.
Business and
Investment Income
This section provides information on the treat-
ment of income from certain rents and royalties, 
and from interests in partnerships and S corpo-
rations.
Note. Y ou may be subject to the Net Invest-
ment Income T ax (NIIT). The NIIT is a 3.8% tax 
on the lesser of net investment income or the 
excess of your modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) over a threshold amount. For details, 
see Form 8960 and its instructions.
Income from sales at auctions, includ-
ing online auctions, may be business 
income. For more information, see Pub. 
334.
Rents From Personal 
Property
If you rent out personal property, such as equip-
ment or vehicles, how you report your income 
and expenses is in most cases determined by:
• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-
ness, and
• Whether or not the rental activity is con-
ducted for profit.
In most cases, if your primary purpose is in-
come or profit and you're involved in the rental 
CAUTION
!
activity with continuity and regularity, your rental 
activity is a business.
Reporting business income and expenses. 
If you're in the business of renting personal 
property, report your income and expenses on 
Schedule C (Form 1040). The form instructions 
have information on how to complete them.
Reporting nonbusiness income.  If you 
aren't in the business of renting personal prop-
erty, report your rental income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8l.
Reporting nonbusiness expenses.  If you 
rent personal property for profit, include your 
rental expenses in the total amount you enter on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 24b.
If you don't rent personal property for profit, 
your deductions are limited and you can't report 
a loss to offset other income. See Activity not 
for profit under Other Income, later.
Royalties
Royalties from copyrights; patents; and oil, gas, 
and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary 
income.
In most cases, you report royalties on 
Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you hold 
an operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are 
in business as a self -employed writer, inventor, 
artist, etc., report your income and expenses on 
Schedule C (Form 1040).
Copyrights and patents. Royalties from copy-
rights on literary, musical, or artistic works, and 
similar property, or from patents on inventions, 
are amounts paid to you for the right to use your 
work over a specified period of time. Royalties 
are generally based on the number of units 
sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a 
performance, or machines sold.
Oil, gas, and minerals.  Royalty income from 
oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount 
you receive when natural resources are extrac-
ted from your property. The royalties are gener-
ally based on production or revenue and are 
paid to you by a person or company who leases 
the property from you.
Depletion. If you're the owner of an eco-
nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas 
wells, you can recover your investment through 
the depletion allowance.
Coal and iron ore.  Under certain circum-
stances, you can treat amounts you receive 
from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-
ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather 
than as royalty income. For information about 
gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore, 
see chapter 2 of Pub. 544.
Sale of property interest.  If you sell your 
complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, 
the amount you receive is considered payment 
for the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty 
income. Under certain circumstances, the sale 
is subject to capital gain or loss treatment as ex-
plained in the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 
1040). For more information on selling section 
1231 property, see chapter 3 of Pub. 544.
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, 
or a net profit interest in a mineral property for 
the life of the property, you have made a lease 
or a sublease, and any cash you receive for the 
assignment of other interests in the property is 
ordinary income subject to a depletion allow-
ance.
Part of future production sold (carved 
out production payment).  If you own mineral 
property but sell part of the future production, in 
most cases you treat the money you receive 
from the buyer at the time of the sale as a loan 
from the buyer. Don’t include it in your income 
or take depletion based on it.
When production begins, you include all the 
proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-
tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that 
amount to arrive at your taxable income from 
the property.
Partnership Income
A partnership generally isn't a taxable entity. 
The income, gains, losses, deductions, and 
credits of a partnership are passed through to 
the partners based on each partner's distribu-
tive share of these items. For more information, 
see Pub. 541.
Partner's distributive share.  Y our distributive 
share of partnership income, gains, losses, de-
ductions, or credits is generally based on the 
partnership agreement. Y ou must report your 
distributive share of these items on your return 
whether or not they are actually distributed to 
you. However, your distributive share of the 
partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba-
sis of your partnership interest at the end of the 
partnership year in which the losses took place.
Partnership agreement.  The partnership 
agreement usually covers the distribution of 
profits, losses, and other items. However, if the 
agreement doesn't state how a specific item of 
gain or loss will be shared, or the allocation sta-
ted in the agreement doesn't have substantial 
economic effect, your distributive share is fig-
ured according to your interest in the partner-
ship.
Partnership return.  Although a partnership 
generally pays no tax, it must file an information 
return on Form 1065. This shows the result of 
the partnership's operations for its tax year and 
the items that must be passed through to the 
partners.
Schedule K -1 (Form 1065).  Y ou should 
receive from each partnership in which you're a 
member a copy of Schedule K -1 (Form 1065) 
showing your share of income, deductions, 
credits, and tax preference items of the partner-
ship for the tax year. Keep Schedule K -1 for 
your records. Don’t attach it to your Form 1040 
or 1040 -SR, unless you're specifically required 
to do so.
Partner's return.  Y ou must generally report 
partnership items on your individual return the 
same way as they're reported on the partner-
ship return. That is, if the partnership had a cap-
ital gain, you report your share as explained in 
the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040). 
Page 17 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 17

Y ou report your share of partnership ordinary in-
come on Schedule E (Form 1040).
In many cases, Schedule K -1 (Form 
1065) will tell you where to report an 
item of income on your individual re-
turn.
Qualified joint venture.  If you and your 
spouse each materially participate as the only 
members of a jointly owned and operated busi-
ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year, 
you can make a joint election to be treated as a 
qualified joint venture instead of a partnership. 
T o make this election, you must divide all items 
of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at-
tributable to the business between you and your 
spouse in accordance with your respective in-
terests in the venture. For further information on 
how to make the election and which sched-
ule(s) to file, see the instructions for your indi-
vidual tax return.
S Corporation Income
In most cases, an S corporation doesn't pay tax 
on its income. Instead, the income, losses, de-
ductions, and credits of the corporation are 
passed through to the shareholders based on 
each shareholder's pro rata share. Y ou must re-
port your share of these items on your return. In 
most cases, the items passed through to you 
will increase or decrease the basis of your S 
corporation stock as appropriate.
S corporation return.  An S corporation must 
file a return on Form 1120-S. This shows the re-
sults of the corporation's operations for its tax 
year and the items of income, losses, deduc-
tions, or credits that affect the shareholders' in-
dividual income tax returns.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120 -S). Y ou should 
receive a copy of Schedule K -1 (Form 1120 -S) 
from any S corporation in which you're a share-
holder. Schedule K -1 (Form 1120 -S) shows 
your share of income, losses, deductions, and 
credits for the tax year. Keep Schedule K -1 
(Form 1120-S) for your records. Don’t attach it 
to your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, unless you're 
specifically required to do so.
Shareholder's return.  Y our distributive share 
of the items of income, losses, deductions, or 
credits of the S corporation must be shown sep-
arately on your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. The 
character of these items is generally the same 
as if you had realized or incurred them person-
ally.
In many cases, Schedule K -1 (Form 
1120-S) will tell you where to report an 
item of income on your individual re-
turn.
Distributions.  In most cases, S corpora-
tion distributions are a nontaxable return of your 
basis in the corporation stock. However, in cer-
tain cases, part of the distributions may be taxa-
ble as a dividend, or as a long -term or 
short-term capital gain, or as both. The corpora-
tion's distributions may be in the form of cash or 
property.
TIP
TIP
More information.  For more information, see 
the Instructions for Form 1120-S.
Sickness and
Injury Benefits
In most cases, you must report as income any 
amount you receive for personal injury or sick-
ness through an accident or health plan that is 
paid for by your employer. If both you and your 
employer pay for the plan, only the amount you 
receive that is due to your employer's payments 
is reported as income. However, certain pay-
ments may not be taxable to you. For informa-
tion on nontaxable payments, see Military and 
Government Disability Pensions  and Other 
Sickness and Injury Benefits , later in this dis-
cussion.
Don’t report as income any amounts 
paid to reimburse you for medical ex-
penses you incurred after the plan was 
established.
Cost paid by you.  If you pay the entire cost of 
an accident or health plan, don't include any 
amounts you receive from the plan for personal 
injury or sickness as income on your tax return. 
If your plan reimbursed you for medical expen-
ses you deducted in an earlier year, you may 
have to include some, or all, of the reimburse-
ment in your income. See Recoveries under 
Miscellaneous Income, later.
Cafeteria plans. In most cases, if you're cov-
ered by an accident or health insurance plan 
through a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the 
insurance premiums wasn't included in your in-
come, you aren't considered to have paid the 
premiums and you must include any benefits 
you receive in your income. If the amount of the 
premiums was included in your income, you're 
considered to have paid the premiums and any 
benefits you receive aren't taxable.
Disability Pensions
If you retired on disability, you must include in 
income any disability pension you receive under 
a plan that is paid for by your employer. Y ou 
must report your taxable disability payments on 
line 1h of Form 1040 or 1040-SR until you reach 
minimum retirement age. Minimum retirement 
age is generally the age at which you can first 
receive a pension or annuity if you aren't disa-
bled.
Y ou may be entitled to a tax credit if 
you were permanently and totally disa-
bled when you retired. For information 
on this credit, see Pub. 524.
Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
mum retirement age, payments you receive are 
taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the pay-
ments on lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. For more information on pensions 
and annuities, see Pub. 575.
Terrorist attacks or military action.  Don’t in-
clude in your income disability payments you re-
ceive for injuries incurred as a direct result of 
TIP
TIP
terrorist attacks or military action directed 
against the United States (or its allies), whether 
outside or within the United States. In the case 
of the September 11 attacks, injuries eligible for 
coverage by the September 11 Victim Compen-
sation Fund are treated as incurred as a direct 
result of the attack. However, you must include 
in your income any amounts that you received 
that you would have received in retirement had 
you not become disabled as a result of a terro-
rist attack or military action. Accordingly, you 
must include in your income any payments you 
receive from a 401(k), pension, or other retire-
ment plan to the extent that you would have re-
ceived the amount at the same or later time re-
gardless of whether you had become disabled. 
See Pub. 907.
A terrorist action is one that is directed 
against the United States or any of its allies (in-
cluding a multinational force in which the United 
States is participating). A military action is one 
that involves the U.S. Armed Forces and is a re-
sult of actual or threatened violence or aggres-
sion against the United States or any of its al-
lies, but doesn't include training exercises.
Contact the company or agency mak-
ing these payments if it incorrectly re-
ports your payments as taxable income 
to the IRS on Form W -2, or on Form 1099 -R, to 
request that it reissue the form to report some or 
all of these payments as nontaxable income in 
box 12 (under code J) of Form W -2 or in box 1 
but not in box 2a of Form 1099 -R. If income 
taxes are being incorrectly withheld from these 
payments, you may also submit Form W -4 to 
the company or agency to stop the withholding 
of income taxes from payments reported on 
Form W -2 or you may submit Form W -4P to 
stop the withholding of income taxes from pay-
ments reported on Form 1099-R.
Disability payments you receive for injuries 
not incurred as a direct result of a terrorist at-
tack or military action or for illnesses or disea-
ses not resulting from an injury incurred as a di-
rect result of a terrorist attack or military action 
can't be excluded from your income under this 
provision but may be excludable for other rea-
sons. See Pub. 907.
Retirement and profit -sharing plans.  If you 
receive payments from a retirement or 
profit-sharing plan that doesn't provide for disa-
bility retirement, don't treat the payments as a 
disability pension. The payments must be re-
ported as a pension or annuity.
Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa-
bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for ac-
crued annual leave is a salary payment. The 
payment isn't a disability payment. Include it in 
your income in the tax year you receive it.
Military and Government
Disability Pensions
Certain military and government disability pen-
sions aren't taxable.
Service-connected disability.  Y ou may be 
able to exclude from income amounts you re-
ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowance 
TIP
Page 18 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
18 Publication 525 (2023)

for personal injury or sickness resulting from ac-
tive service in one of the following government 
services.
• The armed forces of any country.
• The National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration.
• The Public Health Service.
• The Foreign Service.
Conditions for exclusion.  Don’t include 
the disability payments in your income if any of 
the following conditions apply.
1. Y ou were entitled to receive a disability 
payment before September 25, 1975.
2. Y ou were a member of a listed government 
service or its reserve component, or were 
under a binding written commitment to be-
come a member, on September 24, 1975.
3. Y ou receive the disability payments for a 
combat-related injury. This is a personal 
injury or sickness that:
a. Results directly from armed conflict;
b. T akes place while you're engaged in 
extra-hazardous service;
c. T akes place under conditions simulat-
ing war, including training exercises 
such as maneuvers; or
d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.
4. Y ou would be entitled to receive disability 
compensation from the VA if you filed an 
application for it. Y our exclusion under this 
condition is equal to the amount you would 
be entitled to receive from the VA.
Pension based on years of service.  If you 
receive a disability pension based on years of 
service, in most cases, you must include it in 
your income. However, if the pension qualifies 
for the exclusion for a service -connected disa-
bility (discussed earlier), don't include in income 
the part of your pension that you would have re-
ceived if the pension had been based on a per-
centage of disability. Y ou must include the rest 
of your pension in your income.
Retroactive VA determination.  If you re-
tire from the U.S. Armed Forces based on years 
of service and are later given a retroactive serv-
ice-connected disability rating by the VA, your 
retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-
cluded from income up to the amount of VA dis-
ability benefits you would have been entitled to 
receive. Y ou can claim a refund of any tax paid 
on the excludable amount (subject to the statute 
of limitations) by filing an amended return on 
Form 1040-X for each previous year during the 
retroactive period. Y ou must include with each 
Form 1040-X a copy of the official VA determi-
nation letter granting the retroactive benefit. The 
letter must show the amount withheld and the 
effective date of the benefit.
Generally, the VA determination letter will 
contain a table with five headings. The table on 
the letter must cover the same dates for the tax 
year reported on the Form 1040 -X. T o calculate 
the correct tax reduction, multiply the Effective 
Months by the Amount Withheld for the tax year. 
For example, Form 1040 -X filed for tax year 
2020. The table shows the Amount Withheld ef-
fective December 2019 is $320.00. T o calculate 
the amount for the tax reduction, multiply the 
2020 Effective Months by the Amount Withheld. 
In this case, January–December (2020) is 12 
months x $320.00 (Amount Withheld) = 
$3,840.00; this amount should be the amount 
claimed as a reduction on Line 1 Adjusted 
Gross Income (AGI), Column B, of the 2020 
Form 1040-X.
If you receive a lump -sum disability sever-
ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-
ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance 
benefit from your income. However, you must 
include in your income any lump -sum readjust-
ment or other nondisability severance payment 
you received on release from active duty, even if 
you're later given a retroactive disability rating 
by the VA.
Special statute of limitations. In most ca-
ses, under the statute of limitations a claim for 
credit or refund must be filed within 3 years from 
the time a return was filed. However, if you re-
ceive a retroactive service -connected disability 
rating determination, the statute of limitations is 
extended by a 1 -year period beginning on the 
date of the determination. This 1 -year extended 
period applies to claims for credit or refund filed 
after June 17, 2008, and doesn't apply to any 
tax year that began more than 5 years before 
the date of the determination.
Example 19.  Y ou retired in 2017 and re-
ceive a pension based on your years of service. 
On August 3, 2023, you receive a determination 
of service -connected disability retroactive to 
2017. Generally, you could claim a refund for 
the taxes paid on your pension for 2020, 2021, 
and 2022. However, under the special limitation 
period, you can also file a claim for 2019 as long 
as you file the claim by August 3, 2024. Y ou 
can't file a claim for 2017 and 2018 because 
those tax years began more than 5 years before 
the determination.
Combat-related special compensation. 
Combat-related special compensation, as de-
scribed under 10 U.S.C. section 1413a, is a 
specific entitlement payable to only retirees of 
the Uniformed Services. If you are in receipt of 
combat-related special compensation, you may 
exclude the amount of your combat-related spe-
cial compensation from your income. Other por-
tions of your military or disability retirement pay 
may still be included in your income.
Terrorist attack or military action.  Don’t in-
clude in your income disability payments you re-
ceive for injuries resulting directly from a terro-
rist or military action. In the case of the 
September 11 attacks, injuries eligible for cov-
erage by the September 11 Victim Compensa-
tion Fund are treated as incurred as a direct re-
sult of the attack. However, you must include in 
your income any amounts that you received that 
you would have received in retirement had you 
not become disabled as a result of a terrorist or 
military action. Accordingly, you must include in 
your income any payments you receive from a 
401(k), pension, or other retirement plan to the 
extent that you would have received the amount 
at the same or later time regardless of whether 
you had become disabled. Disability payments 
you receive for injuries not incurred as a direct 
result of a terrorist or military action or for ill-
nesses or diseases not resulting from an injury 
incurred as a direct result of a terrorist or mili-
tary action may be excludable from income for 
other reasons. See Pub. 907.
A terrorist action is one that is directed 
against the United States or any of its allies (in-
cluding a multinational force in which the United 
States is participating). A military action is one 
that involves the U.S. Armed Forces and is a re-
sult of actual or threatened violence or aggres-
sion against the United States or any of its al-
lies, but doesn't include training exercises.
Long-Term Care
Insurance Contracts
In most cases, long -term care insurance con-
tracts are treated as accident and health insur-
ance contracts. Amounts you receive from them 
(other than policyholder dividends or premium 
refunds) are excludable in most cases from in-
come as amounts received for personal injury 
or sickness. T o claim an exclusion for payments 
made on a per diem or other periodic basis un-
der a long -term care insurance contract, you 
must file Form 8853 with your return.
A long-term care insurance contract is an in-
surance contract that only provides coverage 
for qualified long -term care services. The con-
tract must:
• Be guaranteed renewable;
• Not provide for a cash surrender value or 
other money that can be paid, assigned, 
pledged, or borrowed;
• Provide that refunds, other than refunds on 
the death of the insured or complete sur-
render or cancellation of the contract, and 
dividends under the contract may be used 
only to reduce future premiums or increase 
future benefits; and
• In most cases, not pay or reimburse expen-
ses incurred for services or items that 
would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
cept where Medicare is a secondary payer 
or the contract makes per diem or other 
periodic payments without regard to ex-
penses.
Qualified long-term care services.  Qualified 
long-term care services are:
• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili-
tative services, and maintenance and per-
sonal care services; and
• Required by a chronically ill individual and 
provided pursuant to a plan of care prescri-
bed by a licensed health care practitioner.
Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill indi-
vidual is one who has been certified by a li-
censed health care practitioner within the previ-
ous 12 months as one of the following.
• An individual who, for at least 90 days, is 
unable to perform at least two activities of 
daily living without substantial assistance 
due to a loss of functional capacity. Activi-
ties of daily living are eating, toileting, 
transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-
nence.
• An individual who requires substantial su-
pervision to be protected from threats to 
health and safety due to severe cognitive 
impairment.
Page 19 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 19

Limit on exclusion.  The exclusion for pay-
ments made on a per diem or other periodic ba-
sis under a long-term care insurance contract is 
subject to a limit. The limit applies to the total of 
these payments and any accelerated death 
benefits made on a per diem or other periodic 
basis under a life insurance contract because 
the insured is chronically ill. (For more informa-
tion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In-
surance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous In-
come, later.)
Under this limit, the excludable amount for 
any period is figured by subtracting any reim-
bursement received (through insurance or oth-
erwise) for the cost of qualified long -term care 
services during the period from the larger of the 
following amounts.
• The cost of qualified long-term care serv-
ices during the period.
• The dollar amount for the period ($420 per 
day for any period in 2023).
See Section C of Form 8853 and its instructions 
for more information.
Workers' Compensation
Amounts you receive as workers' compensation 
for an occupational sickness or injury are fully 
exempt from tax if they're paid under a workers' 
compensation act or a statute in the nature of a 
workers' compensation act. The exemption also 
applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-
ever, doesn't apply to retirement plan benefits 
you receive based on your age, length of serv-
ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you 
retired because of an occupational sickness or 
injury.
If part of your workers' compensation 
reduces your social security or equiva-
lent railroad retirement benefits re-
ceived, that part is considered social security 
(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and 
may be taxable. See Pub. 554 and Pub. 915, 
Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retire-
ment Benefits, for more information.
Return to work.  If you return to work after 
qualifying for workers' compensation, salary 
payments you receive for performing light duties 
are taxable as wages.
Disability pension. If your disability pension is 
paid under a statute that provides benefits only 
to employees with service -connected disabili-
ties, part of it may be workers' compensation. 
That part is exempt from tax. The rest of your 
pension, based on years of service, is taxable 
as pension or annuity income. If you die, the 
part of your survivors' benefit that is a continua-
tion of the workers' compensation is exempt 
from tax.
Other Sickness
and Injury Benefits
In addition to disability pensions and annuities, 
you may receive other payments for sickness or 
injury.
Railroad sick pay.  Payments you receive as 
sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-
CAUTION
!
surance Act are taxable and you must include 
them in your income. However, don't include 
them in your income if they're for an on -the-job 
injury.
Black lung benefit payments.  These pay-
ments are similar to workers' compensation and 
aren't taxable in most cases.
Federal Employees' Compensation Act 
(FECA). Payments received under FECA for 
personal injury or sickness, including payments 
to beneficiaries in case of death, aren't taxable. 
However, you're taxed on amounts you receive 
under FECA as continuation of pay for up to 45 
days while a claim is being decided. Report this 
income on line 1a of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. 
Also, pay for sick leave while a claim is being 
processed is taxable and must be included in 
your income as wages.
If part of the payments you receive un-
der FECA reduces your social security 
or equivalent railroad retirement bene-
fits received, that part is considered social se-
curity (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits 
and may be taxable. See Pub. 554 for more in-
formation.
Qualified Indian health care benefit.  For 
benefits and coverage provided after March 23, 
2010, the value of any qualified Indian health 
care benefit isn't taxable. These benefits in-
clude any health service or benefits provided by 
the Indian Health Service, amounts to reim-
burse medical care expenses provided by an In-
dian tribe, coverage under accident or health in-
surance, and any other medical care provided 
by an Indian tribe.
Other compensation.  Many other amounts 
you receive as compensation for sickness or in-
jury aren't taxable. These include the following 
amounts.
• Compensatory damages you receive for 
physical injury or physical sickness, 
whether paid in a lump sum or in periodic 
payments. See Court awards and dam-
ages under Other Income, later.
• Benefits you receive under an accident or 
health insurance policy on which either you 
paid the premiums or your employer paid 
the premiums but you had to include them 
in your income.
• Disability benefits you receive for loss of in-
come or earning capacity as a result of in-
juries under a no-fault car insurance policy. 
• Compensation you receive for permanent 
loss or loss of use of a part or function of 
your body, or for your permanent disfigure-
ment. This compensation must be based 
only on the injury and not on the period of 
your absence from work. These benefits 
aren't taxable even if your employer pays 
for the accident and health plan that pro-
vides these benefits.
Reimbursement for medical care.  A reim-
bursement for medical care is generally not tax-
able. However, it may reduce your medical ex-
pense deduction. If you receive reimbursement 
for an expense you deducted in an earlier year, 
see Recoveries, later.
CAUTION
!
If you receive an advance reimbursement or 
loan for future medical expenses from your em-
ployer without regard to whether you suffered a 
personal injury or sickness or incurred medical 
expenses, that amount is included in your in-
come, whether or not you incur uninsured medi-
cal expenses during the year.
Reimbursements received under your em-
ployer's plan for expenses incurred before the 
plan was established are included in income.
Amounts you receive under a reimburse-
ment plan that provides for the payment of un-
used reimbursement amounts in cash or other 
benefits are included in your income. For de-
tails, see Pub. 969.
Miscellaneous Income
This section discusses various types of income. 
Y ou may have taxable income from certain 
transactions even if no money changes hands. 
For example, you may have taxable income if 
you lend money at a below -market interest rate 
or have a debt you owe canceled.
Bartering
Bartering is an exchange of property or serv-
ices. Y ou must include in your income, at the 
time received, the FMV of property or services 
you receive in bartering. If you exchange serv-
ices with another person and you both have 
agreed ahead of time on the value of the serv-
ices, that value will be accepted as FMV unless 
the value can be shown to be otherwise.
Generally, you report this income on Sched-
ule C (Form 1040). However, if the barter in-
volves an exchange of something other than 
services, such as in Example 23, later, you may 
have to use another form or schedule instead.
Example 20.  Y ou're a self-employed attor-
ney who performs legal services for a client, a 
small corporation. The corporation gives you 
shares of its stock as payment for your services. 
Y ou must include the FMV of the shares in your 
income on Schedule C (Form 1040) in the year 
you receive them.
Example 21.  Y ou're a self-employed ac-
countant. Y ou and a house painter are members 
of a barter club. Members contact each other 
directly and bargain for the value of the services 
to be performed. In return for accounting serv-
ices you provided, the house painter painted 
your home. Y ou must report as your income on 
Schedule C (Form 1040) the FMV of the house 
painting services you received. The house 
painter must include in income the FMV of the 
accounting services you provided.
Example 22.  Y ou're self-employed and a 
member of a barter club. The club uses credit 
units as a means of exchange. It adds credit 
units to your account for goods or services you 
provide to members, which you can use to pur-
chase goods or services offered by other mem-
bers of the barter club. The club subtracts credit 
units from your account when you receive 
goods or services from other members. Y ou 
must include in your income the value of the 
credit units that are added to your account, 
Page 20 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
20 Publication 525 (2023)

even though you may not actually receive goods 
or services from other members until a later tax 
year.
Example 23.  Y ou own a small apartment 
building. In return for 6 months rent -free use of 
an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art 
she created. Y ou must report as rental income 
on Schedule E (Form 1040) the FMV of the art-
work, and the artist must report as income on 
Schedule C (Form 1040) the fair rental value of 
the apartment.
Form 1099 -B from barter exchange.  If you 
exchanged property or services through a bar-
ter exchange, Form 1099 -B or a similar state-
ment from the barter exchange should be sent 
to you by February 15, 2024. It should show the 
value of cash, property, services, credits, or 
scrip you received from exchanges during 2023. 
The IRS will also receive a copy of Form 
1099-B.
Backup withholding.  In most cases, the in-
come you receive from bartering isn't subject to 
regular income tax withholding. However, 
backup withholding will apply in certain circum-
stances to ensure that income tax is collected 
on this income.
Under backup withholding, the barter ex-
change must withhold, as income tax, 24% of 
the income if:
• Y ou don't give the barter exchange your 
TIN, or
• The IRS notifies the barter exchange that 
you gave it an incorrect TIN. 
If you join a barter exchange, you must certify 
under penalties of perjury that your TIN is cor-
rect and that you aren't subject to backup with-
holding. If you don't make this certification, 
backup withholding may begin immediately. The 
barter exchange will give you a Form W -9, or a 
similar form, for you to make this certification. 
The barter exchange will withhold tax only up to 
the amount of any cash paid to you or deposited 
in your account and any scrip or credit issued to 
you (and converted to cash).
If tax is withheld from your barter in-
come, the barter exchange will report 
the amount of tax withheld on Form 
1099-B or similar statement.
Canceled Debts
In most cases, if a debt you owe is canceled or 
forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you 
must include the canceled amount in your in-
come. Y ou have no income from the canceled 
debt if it's intended as a gift to you. A debt in-
cludes any indebtedness for which you're liable 
or which attaches to property you hold.
If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the 
canceled amount on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8c. If it's a business debt, report the amount 
on Schedule C (Form 1040) or on Schedule F 
(Form 1040) if the debt is farm debt and you're a 
farmer.
Starting in 2014, you must include the in-
come you elected to defer in 2009 or 2010 from 
a cancellation, reacquisition, or modification of 
a business debt. For information on this 
TIP
election, see Revenue Procedure 2009 -37, 
available at IRS.gov/irb/
2009-36_IRB#RP-2009-37.
Form 1099-C. If a federal government agency, 
financial institution, or credit union cancels or 
forgives a debt you owe of $600 or more, you 
may receive a Form 1099 -C. Form 1099 -C, 
box 2, shows the amount of debt either actually 
or deemed discharged. If you don't agree with 
the amount reported in box 2, contact your 
creditor.
Interest included in canceled debt. If any 
interest is forgiven and included in the amount 
of canceled debt in box 2, the amount of inter-
est will also be shown in box 3. Whether or not 
you must include the interest portion of the can-
celed debt in your income depends on whether 
the interest would be deductible if you paid it. 
See Deductible debt under Exceptions, later.
If the interest would not be deductible (such 
as interest on a personal loan), include in your 
income the amount from box 2 of Form 1099 -C. 
If the interest would be deductible (such as on a 
business loan), include in your income the net 
amount of the canceled debt (the amount 
shown in box 2 less the interest amount shown 
in box 3).
Discounted mortgage loan.  If your financial 
institution offers a discount for the early pay-
ment of your mortgage loan, the amount of the 
discount is canceled debt. Y ou must include the 
canceled amount in your income.
Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-
tion. If you're personally liable for a mortgage 
(recourse debt), and you're relieved of the mort-
gage when you dispose of the property, you 
may realize gain or loss up to the FMV of the 
property. T o the extent the mortgage discharge 
exceeds the FMV of the property, it's income 
from discharge of indebtedness unless it quali-
fies for exclusion under Excluded debt , later. 
Report any income from discharge of indebted-
ness on nonbusiness debt that doesn't qualify 
for exclusion as other income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8c.
Y ou may be able to exclude part of the 
mortgage relief on your principal resi-
dence. See Excluded debt, later.
If you aren't personally liable for a mortgage 
(nonrecourse debt), and you're relieved of the 
mortgage when you dispose of the property 
(such as through foreclosure), that relief is inclu-
ded in the amount you realize. Y ou may have a 
taxable gain if the amount you realize exceeds 
your adjusted basis in the property. Report any 
gain on nonbusiness property as a capital gain.
See Pub. 4681 for more information.
Stockholder debt. If you're a stockholder in a 
corporation and the corporation cancels or for-
gives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a con-
structive distribution that is generally dividend 
income to you. For more information, see Pub. 
542.
If you're a stockholder in a corporation and 
you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-
tion, you generally don't realize income. This is 
because the canceled debt is considered as a 
contribution to the capital of the corporation 
TIP
equal to the amount of debt principal that you 
canceled.
Repayment of canceled debt.  If you inclu-
ded a canceled amount in your income and 
later pay the debt, you may be able to file a 
claim for refund for the year the amount was in-
cluded in income. Y ou can file a claim on Form 
1040-X if the statute of limitations for filing a 
claim is still open. The statute of limitations gen-
erally doesn't end until 3 years after the due 
date of your original return.
Exceptions
There are several exceptions to the inclusion of 
canceled debt in income. These are explained 
next.
Student loans. Generally, if you are responsi-
ble for making loan payments, and the loan is 
canceled or repaid by someone else, you must 
include the amount that was canceled or paid 
on your behalf in your gross income for tax pur-
poses. However, in certain circumstances, you 
may be able to exclude amounts from gross in-
come as a result of the cancellation or repay-
ment of certain student loans. These exclusions 
are for:
• Student loan cancellation due to meeting 
certain work requirements;
• Cancellation of certain loans after Decem-
ber 31, 2020, and before January 1, 2026 
(see Special rule for student loan dis-
charges for 2021 through 2025); or
• Certain student loan repayment assistance 
programs.
Exclusion for student loan cancellation due 
to meeting certain work requirements.  If 
your student loan is canceled in part or in whole 
in 2023 due to meeting certain work require-
ments, you may not have to include the can-
celed debt in your income. T o qualify for this 
work-related exclusion, your loan must have 
been made by a qualified lender to assist you in 
attending an eligible educational organization 
described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii). In addition, 
the cancellation must be pursuant to a provision 
in the student loan that all or part of the debt will 
be canceled if you work:
• For a certain period of time,
• In certain professions, and
• For any of a broad class of employers.
The cancellation of your loan won’t 
qualify for tax -free treatment if it was 
made by an educational organization or 
tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organization and 
was canceled because of the services you per-
formed for either organization. See Exception, 
later.
Educational organization described in 
section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii).  This is an educa-
tional organization that maintains a regular fac-
ulty and curriculum and normally has a regularly 
enrolled body of students in attendance at the 
place where it carries on its educational activi-
ties.
Qualified lenders.  These include the fol-
lowing.
CAUTION
!
Page 21 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 21

1. The United States, or an instrumentality or 
agency thereof.
2. A state or territory of the United States; or 
the District of Columbia; or any political 
subdivision thereof.
3. A public benefit corporation that is tax-ex-
empt under section 501(c)(3); and that 
has assumed control of a state, county, or 
municipal hospital; and whose employees 
are considered public employees under 
state law.
4. An educational organization described in 
section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii), if the loan is 
made:
a. As part of an agreement with an entity 
described in (1), (2), or (3) under 
which the funds to make the loan were 
provided to the educational organiza-
tion; or
b. Under a program of the educational 
organization that is designed to en-
courage its students to serve in occu-
pations with unmet needs or in areas 
with unmet needs where services pro-
vided by the students (or former stu-
dents) are for or under the direction of 
a governmental unit or a tax-exempt 
section 501(c)(3) organization.
Special rule for student loan discharges for 
2021 through 2025.  The American Rescue 
Plan Act of 2021 modified the treatment of stu-
dent loan forgiveness for discharges in 2021 
through 2025. Generally, if you are responsible 
for making loan payments, and the loan is can-
celed or repaid by someone else, you must in-
clude the amount that was canceled or paid on 
your behalf in your gross income for tax purpo-
ses. However, in certain circumstances you may 
be able to exclude this amount from gross in-
come if the loan was one of the following.
• A loan for postsecondary educational ex-
penses.
• A private education loan.
• A loan from an educational organization 
described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii).
• A loan from an organization exempt from 
tax under section 501(a) to refinance a stu-
dent loan.
See Pubs. 4681 and 970 for further details.
Loan for postsecondary educational expen-
ses.  This is any loan provided expressly for 
postsecondary education, regardless of 
whether provided through the educational or-
ganization or directly to the borrower, if such 
loan was made, insured, or guaranteed by one 
of the following.
• The United States, or an instrumentality or 
agency thereof.
• A state or territory of the United States; or 
the District of Columbia; or any political 
subdivision thereof.
• An eligible educational organization.
Eligible educational organization.  An eligi-
ble educational organization is generally any 
accredited public, nonprofit, or proprietary (pri-
vately owned profit -making) college, university, 
vocational school, or other postsecondary edu-
cational organization. Also, the organization 
must be eligible to participate in a student aid 
program administered by the U.S. Department 
of Education.
An eligible educational organization also in-
cludes certain educational organizations loca-
ted outside the United States that are eligible to 
participate in a student aid program adminis-
tered by the U.S. Department of Education.
The educational organization should 
be able to tell you if it is an eligible edu-
cational organization.
Private education loan.  A private education 
loan is a loan provided by a private educational 
lender that:
• Is not made, insured, or guaranteed under 
Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 
1965; and
• Is issued expressly for postsecondary edu-
cational expenses to a borrower, regard-
less of whether the loan is provided 
through the educational organization that 
the student attends or directly to the bor-
rower from the private educational lender. 
A private education loan does not include 
an extension of credit under an open end 
consumer credit plan, a reverse mortgage 
transaction, a residential mortgage trans-
action, or any other loan that is secured by 
real property or a dwelling.
Private educational lender.  A private educa-
tional lender is one of the following.
• A financial institution that solicits, makes, 
or extends private education loans.
• A federal credit union that solicits, makes, 
or extends private education loans.
• Any other person engaged in the business 
of soliciting, making, or extending private 
education loans.
The cancellation of your loan won’t 
qualify for tax-free treatment if it is can-
celed because of services you per-
formed for the private educational lender that 
made the loan or other organization that provi-
ded the funds.
Loan from an educational organization de-
scribed in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii).  This is 
any loan made by the organization if the loan is 
made:
• As part of an agreement with an entity de-
scribed earlier under which the funds to 
make the loan were provided to the educa-
tional organization; or
• Under a program of the educational organi-
zation that is designed to encourage its 
students to serve in occupations with un-
met needs or in areas with unmet needs 
where the services provided by the stu-
dents (or former students) are for or under 
the direction of a governmental unit or a 
tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organization.
Educational organization described in sec-
tion 170(b)(1)(A)(ii).  This is an educational 
organization that maintains a regular faculty and 
curriculum and normally has a regularly enrolled 
body of students in attendance at the place 
where it carries on its educational activities.
TIP
CAUTION
!
The cancellation of your loan won’t 
qualify for tax -free treatment if it was 
made by an educational organization, a 
tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organization, or a 
private education lender (as defined in section 
140(a)(7) of the T ruth in Lending Act) and was 
canceled because of the services you per-
formed for either such organization or private 
education lender. See Exception, later.
Section 501(c)(3) organization.  This is 
any corporation, community chest, fund, or 
foundation organized and operated exclusively 
for one or more of the following purposes.
• Charitable.
• Religious.
• Educational.
• Scientific.
• Literary.
• T esting for public safety.
• Fostering national or international amateur 
sports competition (but only if none of its 
activities involve providing athletic facilities 
or equipment).
• The prevention of cruelty to children or ani-
mals.
Exception. In most cases, the cancellation 
of a student loan made by an educational or-
ganization because of services you performed 
for that organization or another organization that 
provided the funds for the loan must be inclu-
ded in gross income on your tax return.
Refinanced loan.  If you refinanced a stu-
dent loan with another loan from an eligible ed-
ucational organization or a tax -exempt organi-
zation, that loan may also be considered as 
made by a qualified lender. The refinanced loan 
is considered made by a qualified lender if it’s 
made under a program of the refinancing organ-
ization that is designed to encourage students 
to serve in occupations with unmet needs or in 
areas with unmet needs where the services re-
quired of the students are for or under the direc-
tion of a governmental unit or a tax -exempt sec-
tion 501(c)(3) organization.
Student loan repayment assistance.  Stu-
dent loan repayments made to you are tax free 
if you received them for any of the following.
• The National Health Service Corps 
(NHSC) Loan Repayment Program.
• A state education loan repayment program 
eligible for funds under the Public Health 
Service Act.
• Any other state loan repayment or loan for-
giveness program that is intended to pro-
vide for the increased availability of health 
services in underserved or health profes-
sional shortage areas (as determined by 
such state).
Y ou can’t deduct the interest you paid 
on a student loan to the extent pay-
ments were made through your partici-
pation in any of the above programs.
Deductible debt.  Y ou don't have income from 
the cancellation of a debt if your payment of the 
debt would be deductible. This exception ap-
plies only if you use the cash method of ac-
counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of 
Pub. 334.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Page 22 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
22 Publication 525 (2023)

Price reduced after purchase.  In most ca-
ses, if the seller reduces the amount of debt you 
owe for property you purchased, you don't have 
income from the reduction. The reduction of the 
debt is treated as a purchase price adjustment 
and reduces your basis in the property.
Excluded debt. Don’t include a canceled debt 
in your gross income in the following situations.
• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case 
under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Pub. 
908. 
• The debt is canceled when you're insol-
vent. However, you can't exclude any 
amount of canceled debt that is more than 
the amount by which you're insolvent. See 
Pub. 908.
• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-
celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 
of Pub. 225. 
• The debt is qualified real property business 
debt. See chapter 5 of Pub. 334.
• The cancellation is intended as a gift.
• The debt is qualified principal residence in-
debtedness, discussed next.
Qualified principal residence indebted-
ness (QPRI).  This is debt secured by your 
principal residence that you took out to buy, 
build, or substantially improve your principal 
residence. QPRI can't be more than the cost of 
your principal residence plus improvements.
Y ou must reduce the basis of your principal 
residence by the amount excluded from gross 
income. T o claim the exclusion, you must file 
Form 982 with your tax return.
Principal residence.  Y our principal resi-
dence is the home where you ordinarily live 
most of the time. Y ou can have only one princi-
pal residence at any one time.
Amount eligible for exclusion.  The ex-
clusion applies only to debt discharged after 
2006 and in most cases before 2026. The maxi-
mum amount you can treat as QPRI is $750,000 
($375,000 if married filing separately). Y ou can't 
exclude debt canceled because of services per-
formed for the lender or on account of any other 
factor not directly related to a decline in the 
value of your residence or to your financial con-
dition.
Limitation.  If only part of a loan is QPRI, 
the exclusion applies only to the extent the can-
celed amount is more than the amount of the 
loan immediately before the cancellation that 
isn't QPRI.
Example 24.  Y ou file a joint return. Y our 
principal residence is secured by a debt of 
$900,000, of which $700,000 is QPRI. Y our resi-
dence is sold for $600,000 and $300,000 of 
debt is canceled. Only $100,000 of the can-
celed debt may be excluded from income (the 
$300,000 that was discharged minus the 
$200,000 of nonqualified debt).
Forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Pro-
gram (PPP) Loans.  The forgiveness of a PPP 
loan creates tax -exempt income, so although 
you don't need to report the income from the 
forgiveness of your PPP loan on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, you do need to report certain informa-
tion related to your PPP loan.
Rev. Proc. 2021-48, 2021-49 I.R.B. 835, per-
mits taxpayers to treat tax -exempt income re-
sulting from the forgiveness of a PPP loan as re-
ceived or accrued: (1) as, and to the extent that, 
eligible expenses are paid or incurred; (2) when 
you apply for forgiveness of the PPP loan; or (3) 
when forgiveness of the PPP loan is granted. If 
you have tax -exempt income resulting from the 
forgiveness of a PPP loan, attach a statement to 
your return reporting each taxable year for 
which you are applying Rev. Proc. 2021-48, and 
which section of Rev. Proc. 2021-48 you are ap-
plying—either section 3.01(1), (2), or (3). Any 
statement should include the following informa-
tion for each PPP loan.
1. Y our name, address, and ITIN or SSN;
2. A statement that you are applying or ap-
plied section 3.01(1), (2), or (3) of Rev. 
Proc. 2021-48, and for what taxable year;
3. The amount of tax-exempt income from 
forgiveness of the PPP loan that you are 
treating as received or accrued and for 
what taxable year; and
4. Whether forgiveness of the PPP loan has 
been granted as of the date you file your 
return.
Write “RP 2021 -48” at the top of your at-
tached statement.
Host
If you host a party or event at which sales are 
made, any gift or gratuity you receive for giving 
the event is a payment for helping a direct seller 
make sales. Y ou must report this item as in-
come at its FMV .
Y our out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-
ject to the 50% limit for meal expenses. For tax 
years beginning after 2017, no deduction is al-
lowed for any expenses related to activities gen-
erally considered entertainment, amusement, or 
recreation. T axpayers may continue to deduct 
50% of the cost of business meals if the tax-
payer (or an employee of the taxpayer) is 
present and the food or beverages aren’t con-
sidered lavish or extravagant. The meals may 
be provided to a current or potential business 
customer, client, consultant, or similar business 
contact. Food and beverages that are provided 
during entertainment events won’t be consid-
ered entertainment if purchased separately 
from the event.
For more information about the limit for meal 
expenses, see 50% Limit in Pub. 463.
Life Insurance Proceeds
Life insurance proceeds paid to you because of 
the death of the insured person aren't taxable 
unless the policy was turned over to you for a 
price. This is true even if the proceeds were 
paid under an accident or health insurance pol-
icy or an endowment contract issued on or be-
fore December 31, 1984. However, interest in-
come received as a result of life insurance 
proceeds may be taxable.
Proceeds not received in installments.  If 
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or 
other than at regular intervals, include in your in-
come only the benefits that are more than the 
amount payable to you at the time of the insured 
person's death. If the benefit payable at death 
isn't specified, you include in your income the 
benefit payments that are more than the present 
value of the payments at the time of death.
Proceeds received in installments.  If you 
receive life insurance proceeds in installments, 
you can exclude part of each installment from 
your income.
T o determine the excluded part, divide the 
amount held by the insurance company (gener-
ally, the total lump sum payable at the death of 
the insured person) by the number of install-
ments to be paid. Include anything over this ex-
cluded part in your income as interest.
Example 25.  The face amount of the pol-
icy is $75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose 
to receive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 
each. The excluded part of each installment is 
$625 ($75,000 ÷ 120), or $7,500 for an entire 
year. The rest of each payment, $375 a month 
(or $4,500 for an entire year), is interest income 
to you.
Installments for life.  If, as the beneficiary 
under an insurance contract, you're entitled to 
receive the proceeds in installments for the rest 
of your life without a refund or period -certain 
guarantee, you figure the excluded part of each 
installment by dividing the amount held by the 
insurance company by your life expectancy. If 
there is a refund or period -certain guarantee, 
the amount held by the insurance company for 
this purpose is reduced by the actuarial value of 
the guarantee.
Surviving spouse. If your spouse died be-
fore October 23, 1986, and insurance proceeds 
paid to you because of the death of your spouse 
are received in installments, you can exclude up 
to $1,000 a year of the interest included in the 
installments. If you remarry, you can continue to 
take the exclusion.
Employer-owned life insurance contract.  If 
you're the policyholder of an employer -owned 
life insurance contract, you must include in in-
come any life insurance proceeds received that 
are more than the premiums and any other 
amounts you paid on the policy. Y ou're subject 
to this rule if you have a trade or business, you 
own a life insurance contract on the life of your 
employee, and you (or a related person) are a 
beneficiary under the contract.
However, you may exclude the full amount of 
the life insurance proceeds if the following ap-
ply.
1. Before the policy is issued, you provide 
written notice about the insurance to the 
employee and the employee provides writ-
ten consent to be insured.
2. Either:
a. The employee was your employee 
within the 12-month period before 
death, or, at the time the contract was 
issued, was a director or highly com-
pensated employee; or
b. The amount is paid to the family or 
designated beneficiary of the em-
ployee.
Page 23 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 23

Interest option on insurance.  If an insurance 
company pays you interest only on proceeds 
from life insurance left on deposit, the interest 
you're paid is taxable.
If your spouse died before October 23, 
1986, and you chose to receive only the interest 
from your insurance proceeds, the $1,000 inter-
est exclusion for a surviving spouse doesn't ap-
ply. If you later decide to receive the proceeds 
from the policy in installments, you can take the 
interest exclusion from the time you begin to re-
ceive the installments.
Surrender of policy for cash.  If you surren-
der a life insurance policy for cash, you must in-
clude in income any proceeds that are more 
than the cost of the life insurance policy. In most 
cases, your cost (or investment in the contract) 
is the total of premiums that you paid for the life 
insurance policy, less any refunded premiums, 
rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that 
weren’t included in your income.
Y ou should receive a Form 1099-R showing 
the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report 
these amounts on lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 
or 1040-SR.
For information on when the proceeds 
are excluded from income, see Accel-
erated Death Benefits, later.
Split-dollar life insurance.  In most cases, a 
split-dollar life insurance arrangement is an ar-
rangement between an owner and a nonowner 
of a life insurance contract under which either 
party to the arrangement pays all or part of the 
premiums, and one of the parties paying the 
premiums is entitled to recover all or part of 
those premiums from the proceeds of the con-
tract. There are two mutually exclusive rules to 
tax split-dollar life insurance arrangements.
1. Under the economic benefit rule, the 
owner of the life insurance contract is trea-
ted as providing current life insurance pro-
tection and other taxable economic bene-
fits to the nonowner of the contract.
2. Under the loan rule, the nonowner of the 
life insurance contract is treated as loaning 
premium payments to the owner of the 
contract.
Only one of these rules applies to any one pol-
icy. For more information, see sections 1. 61-22 
and 1.7872-15 of the regulations.
Endowment Contract Proceeds
An endowment contract is a policy under which 
you're paid a specified amount of money on a 
certain date unless you die before that date, in 
which case the money is paid to your designa-
ted beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid in a 
lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only if 
the proceeds are more than the cost (invest-
ment in the contract) of the policy. T o determine 
your cost, subtract any amount that you previ-
ously received under the contract and excluded 
from your income from the total premiums (or 
other consideration) paid for the contract. In-
clude the part of the lump payment that is more 
than your cost in your income.
TIP
Endowment proceeds that you choose to re-
ceive in installments instead of a lump sum pay-
ment at the maturity of the policy are taxed as 
an annuity. This is explained in Pub. 575. For 
this treatment to apply, you must choose to re-
ceive the proceeds in installments before re-
ceiving any part of the lump sum. This election 
must be made within 60 days after the 
lump-sum payment first becomes payable to 
you.
Accelerated Death Benefits
Certain amounts paid as accelerated death 
benefits under a life insurance contract or viati-
cal settlement before the insured's death are ex-
cluded from income if the insured is terminally 
or chronically ill.
Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign-
ment of any part of the death benefit under a life 
insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-
vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person 
who regularly engages in the business of buy-
ing or taking assignment of life insurance con-
tracts on the lives of insured individuals who are 
terminally or chronically ill and who meets the 
requirements of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the In-
ternal Revenue Code.
Exclusion for terminal illness.  Accelerated 
death benefits are fully excludable if the insured 
is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who 
has been certified by a physician as having an 
illness or physical condition that can reasonably 
be expected to result in death within 24 months 
from the date of the certification.
Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insured is 
a chronically ill individual who isn't terminally ill, 
accelerated death benefits paid on the basis of 
costs incurred for qualified long -term care serv-
ices are fully excludable. Accelerated death 
benefits paid on a per diem or other periodic ba-
sis are excludable up to a limit. For 2023, this 
limit is $420. It applies to the total of the accel-
erated death benefits and any periodic pay-
ments received from long -term care insurance 
contracts. For information on the limit and the 
definitions of chronically ill individual, qualified 
long-term care services, and long -term care in-
surance contracts, see Long-T erm Care Insur-
ance Contracts under Sickness and Injury Ben-
efits, earlier.
Exception.  The exclusion doesn't apply to any 
amount paid to a person (other than the in-
sured) who has an insurable interest in the life 
of the insured because the insured:
• Is a director, officer, or employee of the 
person; or
• Has a financial interest in the person's 
business.
Form 8853. T o claim an exclusion for acceler-
ated death benefits made on a per diem or 
other periodic basis, you must file Form 8853 
with your return. Y ou don't have to file Form 
8853 to exclude accelerated death benefits paid 
on the basis of actual expenses incurred.
Recoveries
A recovery is a return of an amount you deduc-
ted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The 
most common recoveries are refunds, reim-
bursements, and rebates of itemized deduc-
tions. Y ou may also have recoveries of nonitem-
ized deductions (such as payments on 
previously deducted bad debts) and recoveries 
of items for which you previously claimed a tax 
credit.
Tax benefit rule. Y ou must include a recovery 
in your income in the year you receive it up to 
the amount by which the deduction or credit you 
took for the recovered amount reduced your tax 
in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-
crease to an amount carried over to the current 
year that resulted from the deduction or credit is 
considered to have reduced your tax in the ear-
lier year.
Federal income tax refund.  Refunds of fed-
eral income taxes aren't included in your in-
come because they're never allowed as a de-
duction from income.
State tax refund. If you received a state or lo-
cal income tax refund (or credit or offset) in 
2023, you must generally include it in income if 
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The 
payer should send Form 1099 -G to you by Jan-
uary 31, 2024. The IRS will also receive a copy 
of the Form 1099 -G. If you file Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, use the worksheet in the 2023 In-
structions for Schedule 1 (Form 1040) to figure 
the amount (if any) to include in your income. 
See Itemized Deduction Recoveries , later, for 
when you must use Worksheet 2 , later in this 
publication.
If you could choose to deduct for a tax year 
either:
• State and local income taxes, or
• State and local general sales taxes, then
the maximum refund that you may have to in-
clude in income is limited to the excess of the 
tax you chose to deduct for that year over the 
tax you didn't choose to deduct for that year.
Example 26.  For 2022, you can choose a 
$10,000 state income tax deduction or a $9,000 
state general sales tax deduction. Y ou choose 
to deduct the state income tax. In 2023, you re-
ceive a $2,500 state income tax refund. The 
maximum refund that you may have to include 
in income is $1,000, because you could have 
deducted $9,000 in state general sales tax.
Example 27.  For 2022, you can choose a 
$9,500 state general sales tax deduction based 
on actual expenses or a $9,200 state income 
tax deduction. Y ou choose to deduct the gen-
eral sales tax deduction. In 2023, you return an 
item you had purchased and receive a $500 
sales tax refund. In 2023, you also receive a 
$1,500 state income tax refund. The maximum 
refund that you may have to include in income is 
$500, because it's less than the excess of the 
tax deducted ($9,500) over the tax you didn't 
choose to deduct ($9,200 − $1,500 = $7,700). 
Because you didn't choose to deduct the state 
income tax, you don't include the state income 
tax refund in income.
Page 24 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
24 Publication 525 (2023)

Mortgage interest refund.  If you received a 
refund or credit in 2023 of mortgage interest 
paid in an earlier year, the amount should be 
shown in Form 1098, box 4. Don’t subtract the 
refund amount from the interest you paid in 
2023. Y ou may have to include it in your income 
under the rules explained in the following dis-
cussions.
Interest on recovery.  Interest on any of the 
amounts you recover must be reported as inter-
est income in the year received. For example, 
report any interest you received on state or local 
income tax refunds on Form 1040, 1040 -SR, or 
1040-NR, line 2b.
Recovery and expense in same year.  If the 
refund or other recovery and the expense occur 
in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-
duction or credit and isn't reported as income.
Recovery for 2 or more years.  If you receive 
a refund or other recovery that is for amounts 
you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must 
allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovered 
amount between the years in which you paid it. 
This allocation is necessary to determine the 
amount of recovery from any earlier years and 
to determine the amount, if any, of your allowa-
ble deduction for this item for the current year.
Example 28.  Y ou paid 2022 estimated 
state income tax of $4,000 in four equal pay-
ments. Y ou made your fourth payment in Janu-
ary 2023. Y ou had no state income tax withheld 
during 2022. In 2023, you received a $400 tax 
refund based on your 2022 state income tax re-
turn. Y ou claimed itemized deductions each 
year on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Y ou must allocate the $400 refund between 
2022 and 2023, the years in which you paid the 
tax on which the refund is based. Y ou paid 75% 
($3,000 ÷ $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2022, 
so 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for 
amounts you paid in 2022 and is a recovery 
item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item, 
you'll include $300 on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 1, for 2023, and attach a copy of your calcu-
lation showing why that amount is less than the 
amount shown on the Form 1099 -G you re-
ceived from the state.
The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is for 
your January 2023 estimated tax payment. 
When you figure your deduction for state and lo-
cal income taxes paid during 2023, you'll re-
duce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Y our 
deduction for state and local income taxes paid 
during 2023 will include the January net amount 
of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimated 
state income taxes paid in 2023 for 2023, and 
any state income tax withheld during 2023.
Joint state or local income tax return.  If you 
filed a joint state or local income tax return in an 
earlier year and you aren't filing a joint Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR with the same person for 
2023, any refund of a deduction claimed on that 
state or local income tax return must be alloca-
ted to the person that paid the expense. If both 
persons paid a portion of the expense, allocate 
the refund based on your individual portion. For 
example, if you paid 25% of the expense, then 
you would use 25% of the refund to figure if you 
must include any portion of the refund in your in-
come.
Registered domestic partners (RDPs) domi-
ciled in community property states.  For the 
rules that apply to RDPs who are domiciled in 
community property states, see Pub. 555 and 
Form 8958.
Deductions not itemized.  If you didn't item-
ize deductions for the year for which you re-
ceived the recovery of an expense that was de-
ductible only if you itemized, don't include any 
of the recovery amount in your income.
Example 29.  Y ou claimed the standard de-
duction on your 2022 federal income tax return. 
In 2023, you received a refund of your 2022 
state income tax. Don’t report any of the refund 
as income because you didn't itemize deduc-
tions for 2022.
Itemized Deduction Recoveries
The following discussion explains how to deter-
mine the amount to include in your income from 
a recovery of an amount deducted in an earlier 
year as an itemized deduction. However, you 
generally don't need to use this discussion if 
you file Form 1040 or 1040-SR and the recovery 
is for state or local income taxes paid in 2022. 
Instead, use the State and Local Income T ax 
Refund Worksheet—Schedule 1, Line 1, in the 
2023 Instructions for Schedule 1 (Form 1040) 
for line 1 to figure the amount (if any) to include 
in your income. See the Instructions for Forms 
1040 and 1040-SR.
Y ou can't use the State and Local Income 
T ax Refund Worksheet—Schedule 1, Line 1, 
and must use this discussion if you're a nonresi-
dent alien (discussed later) or any of the follow-
ing statements are true.
1. Y ou received a refund in 2023 that is for a 
tax year other than 2022.
2. Y ou received a refund other than an in-
come tax refund, such as a general sales 
tax or real property tax refund, in 2023 of 
an amount deducted or credit claimed in 
an earlier year.
3. The amount on your 2022 Form 1040, 
line 13, was more than the amount on your 
2022 Form 1040, line 11 minus line 12.
4. Y ou had taxable income on your 2022 
Form 1040, line 15, but no tax on your 
Form 1040, line 16, because of the 0% tax 
rate on net capital gains and qualified divi-
dends in certain situations. See Capital 
gains, later.
5. Y our 2022 state and local income tax re-
fund is more than your 2022 state and lo-
cal income tax deduction minus the 
amount you could have deducted as your 
2022 state and local general sales taxes.
6. Y ou made your last payment of 2022 esti-
mated state or local income tax in 2023.
7. Y ou owed AMT in 2022.
8. Y ou couldn't use the full amount of credits 
you were entitled to in 2022 because the 
total credits were more than the amount 
shown on your 2022 Form 1040, line 18.
9. Y ou could be claimed as a dependent by 
someone else in 2022.
10. Y ou received a refund because of a jointly 
filed state or local income tax return, but 
you aren't filing a joint 2023 Form 1040 or 
1040-SR with the same person.
If you also recovered an amount de-
ducted as a nonitemized deduction, fig-
ure the amount of that recovery to in-
clude in your income and add it to your adjusted 
gross income (AGI) before applying the rules 
explained here. See Nonitemized Deduction 
Recoveries, later.
Nonresident aliens.  If you're a nonresident 
alien and file Form 1040-NR, you can't claim the 
standard deduction. If you recover an itemized 
deduction that you claimed in an earlier year, 
you must generally include the full amount of 
the recovery in your income in the year you re-
ceive it. However, if you had no taxable income 
in that earlier year (see Negative taxable in-
come, later), you should complete Worksheet 2 
to determine the amount you must include in in-
come. If any other statement under T otal recov-
ery included in income isn't true, see the discus-
sion referenced in the statement to determine 
the amount to include in income.
Capital gains.  If you determined your tax in 
the earlier year by using the Schedule D T ax 
Worksheet, or the Qualified Dividends and Cap-
ital Gain T ax Worksheet, and you receive a re-
fund in 2023 of a deduction claimed in that year, 
you'll have to refigure your tax for the earlier 
year to determine if the recovery must be inclu-
ded in your income. If inclusion of the recovery 
doesn't change your total tax, you don't include 
the recovery in income. However, if your total 
tax increases by any amount, you must include 
the recovery in your income up to the amount of 
the deduction that reduced your tax in the ear-
lier year.
Total recovery included in income.  If you re-
cover any itemized deduction that you claimed 
in an earlier year, you must generally include 
the full amount of the recovery in your income in 
the year you receive it. This rule applies if, for 
the earlier year, all of the following statements 
are true.
1. Y our itemized deductions exceeded the 
standard deduction by at least the amount 
of the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-
tions didn't exceed the standard deduction 
by at least the amount of the recovery, see 
Standard deduction limit, later.)
2. Y ou had taxable income. (If you had no 
taxable income, see Negative taxable in-
come, later.)
3. Y our deduction for the item recovered 
equals or exceeds the amount recovered. 
(If your deduction was less than the 
amount recovered, see Recovery limited 
to deduction, later.)
4. Y ou had no unused tax credits. (If you had 
unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred-
its, later.)
CAUTION
!
Page 25 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 25

5. Y ou weren’t subject to AMT . (If you were 
subject to AMT , see Subject to AMT, later.)
If any of the earlier statements aren’t true, 
see T otal recovery not included in income, later.
State tax refund.  In addition to the previ-
ous five items, you must include in your income 
the full amount of a refund of state or local in-
come tax or general sales tax if the excess of 
the tax you deducted over the tax you didn't de-
duct is more than the refund of the tax deduc-
ted.
If the refund is more than the excess, see 
T otal recovery not included in income, later.
Where to report.  Enter your state or local 
income tax refund on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 1, and the total of all other recoveries as 
other income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z.
Example 30.  For 2022, you filed a joint re-
turn on Form 1040. Y our taxable income was 
$60,000 and you weren’t entitled to any tax 
credits. Y our standard deduction was $25,900, 
and you had itemized deductions of $27,400. In 
2023, you received the following recoveries for 
amounts deducted on your 2022 return.
Medical expenses ................... $200 
State and local income tax refund ......... 400 
Refund of mortgage interest ............ 325 
Total recoveries............... $925 
None of the recoveries were more than the 
deductions taken for 2022. The difference be-
tween the state and local income tax you de-
ducted and your local general sales tax you 
could have deducted was more than $400.
Y our total recoveries are less than the 
amount by which your itemized deductions ex-
ceeded the standard deduction ($27,400 − 
$25,900 = $1,500), so you must include your to-
tal recoveries in your income for 2023. Report 
the state and local income tax refund of $400 
on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 1, and the bal-
ance of your recoveries, $525, on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8z.
Total recovery not included in income.  If 
one or more of the five statements listed earlier 
under T otal recovery included in income  isn't 
true, you may be able to exclude at least part of 
the recovery from your income. See the discus-
sion referenced in the statement. Y ou may be 
able to use Worksheet 2 to determine the part 
of your recovery to include in your income. Y ou 
can also use Worksheet 2 to determine the part 
of a state tax refund  (discussed earlier) to in-
clude in income.
Allocating the included part.  If you aren't 
required to include all of your recoveries in your 
income, and you have both a state income tax 
refund and other itemized deduction recoveries, 
you must allocate the taxable recoveries be-
tween the state income tax refund you report on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040 or 1040 -NR), line 1, 
and the amount you report as other income on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040 or 1040 -NR), line 8z. If 
you don't use Worksheet 2, make the allocation 
as follows.
1. Divide your state income tax refund by the 
total of all your itemized deduction 
recoveries.
2. Multiply the amount of taxable recoveries 
by the percentage in (1). This is the 
amount you report as a state income tax 
refund.
3. Subtract the result in (2) above from the 
amount of taxable recoveries. This is the 
amount you report as other income.
Example 31.  In 2023, you recovered 
$2,500 of your 2022 itemized deductions 
claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040), but the re-
coveries you must include in your 2023 income 
are only $1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, 
$500 was due to your state income tax refund. 
Y our state income tax was more than your state 
general sales tax by $600. The amount you re-
port as a state tax refund on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 1, is $300 [($500 ÷ $2,500) × 
$1,500]. The balance of the taxable recoveries, 
$1,200, is reported as other income on Sched-
ule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z.
Standard deduction limit.  Y ou are generally 
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you 
don't itemize your deductions. Only your item-
ized deductions that are more than your stand-
ard deduction are subject to the recovery rule 
(unless you're required to itemize your deduc-
tions). If your total deductions on the earlier 
year return weren’t more than your income for 
that year, include in your income this year the 
lesser of:
• Y our recoveries, or
• The amount by which your itemized deduc-
tions exceeded the standard deduction.
Standard deduction for earlier years.  T o 
determine if amounts recovered in the current 
year must be included in your income, you must 
know the standard deduction for your filing sta-
tus for the year the deduction was claimed. 
Look in the instructions for your tax return from 
prior years to locate the standard deduction for 
the filing status for that prior year. If you filed 
Form 1040-NR, you couldn't claim the standard 
deduction except for certain nonresident aliens 
from India (see Pub. 519).
Example 32.  Y ou filed a joint return on 
Form 1040 for 2022 with taxable income of 
$45,000. Y our itemized deductions were 
$26,150. The standard deduction that you could 
have claimed was $25,900. In 2023, you recov-
ered $2,100 of your 2022 itemized deductions. 
None of the recoveries were more than the ac-
tual deductions for 2022. Include $250 of the re-
coveries in your 2023 income. This is the 
smaller of your recoveries ($2,100) or the 
amount by which your itemized deductions were 
more than the standard deduction ($26,150 − 
$25,900 = $250).
Negative taxable income.  If your taxable in-
come for the prior year ( Worksheet 2, line 10) 
was a negative amount, the recovery you must 
include in income is reduced by that amount. 
Y ou have a negative taxable income for 2022 if 
your:
• Form 1040, the sum of lines 12 and 13, 
was more than line 11; or
• Form 1040-NR, line 14, was more than 
line 11.
Example 33.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 32, except line 14 was $200 more than 
line 11 on your 2022 Form 1040, giving you a 
negative taxable income of $200. Y ou must in-
clude $50 in your 2023 income, rather than 
$250.
Recovery limited to deduction.  Y ou don't in-
clude in your income any amount of your recov-
ery that is more than the amount you deducted 
in the earlier year. The amount you include in 
your income is limited to the smaller of:
• The amount deducted, or
• The amount recovered.
Example 34.  For 2022, you paid $1,700 for 
medical expenses. Because of the limit on de-
ducting medical expenses, you deducted only 
$200 as an itemized deduction. In 2023, you re-
ceived a $500 reimbursement from your medi-
cal insurance for your 2022 expenses. The only 
amount of the $500 reimbursement that must 
be included in your income for 2023 is $200, the 
amount actually deducted.
Overall limitation on itemized deductions 
no longer applies.  For tax years beginning 
after 2017, there is no limitation on itemized de-
ductions based on your AGI.
T o determine the part of the recovery you 
must include in income, follow the two steps be-
low.
1. Figure the greater of:
a. The standard deduction for the earlier 
year, or
b. The amount of itemized deductions 
you would have been allowed for the 
earlier year if you had figured them us-
ing only the net amount of the recov-
ery item. The net amount is the 
amount you actually paid reduced by 
the recovery amount.
Note. If you were required to itemize 
your deductions in the earlier year, use 
step 1b and not step 1a.
2. Subtract the amount in step 1 from the 
amount of itemized deductions actually al-
lowed in the earlier year after applying the 
limit on itemized deductions.
The result of step 2 is the amount of the recov-
ery to include in your income for the year you re-
ceive the recovery. If your taxable income for 
the earlier year was a negative amount, reduce 
your recovery by the negative amount.
If you had unused tax credits in the earlier 
year, see Unused tax credits, later.
For more information on this calculation, see 
Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is in Cumula-
tive Bulletin 1993-2.
Page 26 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
26 Publication 525 (2023)

Worksheet 2a. Computations for Worksheet 2, lines 1a and 1b
Keep for Y our Records
To determine amounts to enter on lines 1a and 1b of Worksheet 2, complete the following.
1. Enter the income tax refund from Form(s) 1099-G (or similar statement) ...................... 1.  
2. Enter the refunds received for state and local real estate taxes and state and local personal 
property taxes ...................................................................... 2.  
3. T otal state and local refunds. Add lines 1 and 2. But don’t enter more than the amount of your state 
and local taxes shown on your 2022 Schedule A, line 5d ................................... 3.  
4. Is the amount of state and local income taxes (or general sales taxes), real estate taxes, and 
personal property taxes paid in 2022 (generally, this is the amount reported on your 2022 
Schedule A, line 5d) more than the amount on your 2022 Schedule A, line 5e?
 
 No. Enter the amount from line 3 on line 4 and go to line 5.
 
 Yes. Subtract the amount on your 2022 Schedule A, line 5e, from the amount of state and local 
income taxes (or general sales taxes), real estate taxes, and personal property taxes paid in 2022 
(generally, this is the amount reported on your 2022 Schedule A, line 5d). Enter the result 
here .............................................................................. 4.  
5. Is the amount on line 3 more than the amount on line 4?
 
 No. [STOP] None of the refunds on line 1 or 2 are taxable.
 
 Yes. Subtract line 4 from line 3 and enter the result here ................................. 5.  
6. Add lines 1 and 2 and enter the result here .............................................. 6.  
7. Divide line 1 by line 6. Then multiply by the amount on line 5 and enter the result here and on 
Worksheet 2, line 1a ................................................................. 7.  
8. Divide line 2 by line 6. Then multiply by the amount on line 5 and enter the result here and on 
Worksheet 2, line 1b ................................................................. 8.  
Page 27 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 27

Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions
Keep for Y our Records
T o determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in income on your 2023 
tax return, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If you recovered amounts from more than 1 year, such as a state income tax refund 
from 2022 and a casualty loss reimbursement from 2021, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use information from your 
tax return for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year (year of the 
deduction). If you were subject to the AMT or your tax credits reduced your tax to zero, see Unused tax credits and Subject to AMT 
under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your recovery was for an itemized deduction that was limited, you should read Itemized 
deductions limited under Itemized Deduction Recoveries.
NOTE: Before completing lines 1a and 1b, see Worksheet 2a, Computations for Worksheet 2, lines 1a and 1b. 
1a. State/local income tax refund or credit1a ................................................. 1a.  
1b. State/local real estate and personal property taxes1a ...................................... 1b.  
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements 
(excluding the amounts you entered on lines 1a and 1b)2 ................................... 2.  
3. Add lines 1a, 1b, and 2 .............................................................. 3.  
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year. For 2022: 
• Form 1040, Schedule A, line 17 ................ ................
• Form 1040-NR, Schedule A, line 8 ............... ............... 4.  
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you 
(don't enter an amount from line 1a or line 1b or line 2) ............... 5.  
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4 ....................................... 6.  
7. Standard deduction for the prior year.3 If you filed Form 1040-NR, 
enter -0- ...................................................... 7.  
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here. 
The amounts on lines 1a, 1b, and 2 aren't taxable ........................................ 8.  
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8 ..................................................... 9.  
10. T axable income for prior year4 (2022 Form 1040, line 15; or 2022 Form 
1040-NR, line 15) .............................................. 10.  
11. Amount to include in income for 2023:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result 
(but not less than zero)5 ............................. ............................. 11.  
If line 11 equals line 3—
   Enter the amount from line 1a on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 1.
   Enter the amounts from lines 1b and 2 on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1a or line 1b or line 2 is zero—
   If there is an amount on line 1a, enter the amount from line 11 on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 1.
   If there is an amount on lines 1b and/or 2, enter the amount from line 11 on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on line 1a and on line 1b or 2, complete the following 
worksheet.
A.Divide the amount on line 1a by the amount on line 3. Enter the 
percentage .................................................. A.  
B.Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A. 
Enter the result here and on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 1 .............................. B.  
C.Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11. 
Enter the result here and on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z ............................. C.  
1a Don’t enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. Don’t enter more than the excess of your state and local income tax deduction over your 
state and local general sales taxes you could have deducted. 
2 Don’t enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. If you deducted state and local general sales taxes and received a refund of those taxes, 
include the amount on line 2, but don't enter more than the excess of your sales tax deduction over your state and local income tax you could have 
deducted.
3 See the instructions for prior year forms at IRS.gov for prior year standard deduction.
4 If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Don’t enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. See Negative taxable 
income. T axable income will have to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Pub. 536.
5 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Unused tax credits. If you recover an item de-
ducted in an earlier year in which you had un-
used tax credits, you must refigure the earlier 
year's tax to determine if you must include the 
recovery in your income. T o do this, add the 
amount of the recovery to your earlier year's 
taxable income and refigure the tax and the 
credits on the refigured amount. If the refigured 
tax, after application of the credits, is more than 
the actual tax in the earlier year, include the re-
covery in your income up to the amount of the 
deduction that reduced the tax in the earlier 
Page 28 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28 Publication 525 (2023)

year. For this purpose, any increase to a credit 
carried over to the current year that resulted 
from deducting the recovered amount in the 
earlier year is considered to have reduced your 
tax in the earlier year. If the recovery is for an 
itemized deduction claimed in a year in which 
the deductions were limited, see Itemized de-
ductions limited, earlier.
If your tax, after application of the credits, 
doesn't change, you didn't have a tax benefit 
from the deduction. Don’t include the recovery 
in your income.
Example 35.  In 2022, you filed as head of 
household and itemized your deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). Y our taxable income 
was $5,260 and your tax was $528. Y ou 
claimed a child care credit of $1,200. The credit 
reduced your tax to zero, and you had an un-
used tax credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). In 
2023, you recovered $1,000 of your itemized 
deductions. Y ou reduce your 2022 itemized de-
ductions by $1,000 and refigure that year's tax 
on taxable income of $6,260. However, the child 
care credit exceeds the refigured tax of $628. 
Y our tax liability for 2022 isn't changed by re-
ducing your deductions by the recovery. Y ou 
didn't have a tax benefit from the recovered de-
duction and don’t include any of the recovery in 
your income for 2023.
Subject to AMT.  If you were subject to the 
AMT in the year of the deduction, you'll have to 
refigure your tax for the earlier year to determine 
if the recovery must be included in your income. 
This will require a refiguring of your regular tax, 
as shown in Example 35 , and a refiguring of 
your AMT . If inclusion of the recovery doesn't 
change your total tax, you don't include the re-
covery in your income. However, if your total tax 
increases by any amount, you received a tax 
benefit from the deduction and you must in-
clude the recovery in your income up to the 
amount of the deduction that reduced your tax 
in the earlier year.
Nonitemized Deduction Recoveries
This section discusses recovery of deductions 
other than itemized deductions.
Total recovery included in income.  If you re-
cover an amount that you deducted in an earlier 
year when you were figuring your AGI, you must 
generally include the full amount of the recovery 
in your income in the year received.
Total recovery not included in income.  If 
any part of the deduction you took for the recov-
ered amount didn't reduce your tax, you may be 
able to exclude at least part of the recovery from 
your income. Y ou must include the recovery in 
your income only up to the amount of the de-
duction that reduced your tax in the year of the 
deduction. (See T ax benefit rule, earlier.)
Negative taxable income.  If your taxable in-
come for the prior year was a negative amount, 
the recovery you must include in income is re-
duced by that amount. Y ou have a negative tax-
able income for 2022 if your:
• Form 1040, the sum of lines 12 and 13, 
was more than line 11; or
• Form 1040-NR, line 14, was more than 
line 11.
If you had a net operating loss (NOL) in a prior 
year, you'll have to adjust your taxable income 
for any NOL carryover. See Pub. 536 for more 
information.
Unused tax credits. If you recover an item de-
ducted in an earlier year in which you had un-
used tax credits, you must refigure the earlier 
year's tax to determine if you must include the 
recovery in your income. T o do this, add the 
amount of the recovery to your earlier year's 
taxable income and refigure the tax and the 
credits on the refigured amount. If the refigured 
tax, after application of the credits, is more than 
the actual tax in the earlier year, include the re-
covery in your income up to the amount of the 
deduction that reduced the tax in the earlier 
year. For this purpose, any increase to a credit 
carried over to the current year that resulted 
from deducting the recovered amount in the 
earlier year is considered to have reduced your 
tax in the earlier year.
If your tax, after application of the credits, 
doesn't change, you didn't have a tax benefit 
from the deduction. Don’t include the recovery 
in your income.
Capital gains.  If you determined your tax in 
the earlier year by using the Schedule D T ax 
Worksheet, or the Qualified Dividends and Cap-
ital Gain T ax Worksheet, and you receive a re-
fund in 2023 of a deduction claimed in that year, 
you'll have to refigure your tax for the earlier 
year to determine if the recovery must be inclu-
ded in your income. If inclusion of the recovery 
doesn't change your total tax, you don't include 
the recovery in income. However, if your total 
tax increases by any amount, you must include 
the recovery in your income up to the amount of 
the deduction that reduced your tax in the ear-
lier year.
Amounts Recovered for Credits
If you received a recovery in 2023 for an item for 
which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier year, 
you must increase your 2022 tax by the amount 
of the recovery, up to the amount by which the 
credit reduced your tax in the earlier year. Y ou 
had a recovery if there was a downward price 
adjustment or similar adjustment on the item for 
which you claimed a credit.
This rule doesn't apply to the investment 
credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries of 
these credits are covered by other provisions of 
the law. See Pub. 514 or Form 4255 for details.
Sharing/Gig Economy
A sharing economy is one in which assets are 
shared between individuals for a fee, usually 
through the internet. For example, you rent out 
your car when you don’t need it, or you share 
your wi-fi account for a fee.
A gig economy is one in which a short -term 
contract or freelance work is the norm, as op-
posed to a permanent job. For example, you 
drive for a ride -sharing service, or work as a fit-
ness trainer, babysitter, or tutor.
Generally, if you have income from sharing 
economy transactions, or you did gig work, you 
must include all income received whether you 
received a Form 1099 -K, Payment Card and 
Third Party Network T ransactions, or not. See 
the Instructions for Schedule C (Form 1040) 
and the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 
1040).
Survivor Benefits
In most cases, payments made by or for an em-
ployer because of an employee's death must be 
included in income. The following discussions 
explain the tax treatment of certain payments 
made to survivors. For additional information, 
see Pub. 559.
Lump-sum payments.  Lump-sum payments 
you receive from a decedent's employer as the 
surviving spouse or beneficiary may be accrued 
salary payments; distributions from employee 
profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or stock bonus 
plans; or other items that should be treated sep-
arately for tax purposes. The tax treatment of 
these lump-sum payments depends on the type 
of payment.
Salary or wages.  Salary or wages re-
ceived after the death of the employee are usu-
ally ordinary income to you.
Qualified employee retirement plans. 
Lump-sum distributions from qualified em-
ployee retirement plans are subject to special 
tax treatment. For information on these distribu-
tions, see Pub. 575 (or Pub. 721 if you're the 
survivor of a federal employee or retiree).
Public safety officer killed in the line of 
duty. If you're a survivor of a public safety offi-
cer who was killed in the line of duty, you can 
exclude from income any amount received as a 
survivor annuity on account of the death of a 
public safety officer killed in the line of duty.
For this purpose, the term “public safety offi-
cer” includes law enforcement officers, firefight-
ers, chaplains, and rescue squad and ambu-
lance crew members. For more information, see 
Pub. 559.
Unemployment Benefits
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits 
you receive depends on the type of program 
paying the benefits.
Unemployment compensation.  Generally, 
you must include in income all unemployment 
compensation you receive. Y ou should receive 
a Form 1099 -G showing in box 1 the total un-
employment compensation paid to you. In most 
cases, you enter unemployment compensation 
on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 7.
If you received unemployment com-
pensation but didn't receive Form 
1099-G, Certain Government Pay-
ments, through the mail, you may need to ac-
cess your information through your state’s web-
site to get your electronic Form 1099-G.
Types of unemployment compensation. 
Unemployment compensation generally 
CAUTION
!
Page 29 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 29

includes any amount received under an unem-
ployment compensation law of the United 
States or of a state. It includes the following 
benefits.
• Benefits paid by a state or the District of 
Columbia from the Federal Unemployment 
T rust Fund.
• State unemployment insurance benefits.
• Railroad unemployment compensation 
benefits.
• Disability payments from a government 
program paid as a substitute for unemploy-
ment compensation. (Amounts received as 
workers' compensation for injuries or ill-
ness aren't unemployment compensation. 
See Workers' Compensation under Sick-
ness and Injury Benefits, earlier.) 
• T rade readjustment allowances under the 
T rade Act of 1974.
• Unemployment assistance under the Dis-
aster Relief and Emergency Assistance 
Act of 1974.
• Unemployment assistance under the Air-
line Deregulation Act of 1978 Program.
Governmental program.  If you contribute 
to a governmental unemployment compensa-
tion program and your contributions aren't de-
ductible, amounts you receive under the pro-
gram aren't included as unemployment 
compensation until you recover your contribu-
tions. If you deducted all of your contributions to 
the program, the entire amount you receive un-
der the program is included in your income.
Repayment of unemployment compen-
sation.  If you repaid in 2023 unemployment 
compensation you received in 2023, subtract 
the amount you repaid from the total amount 
you received and enter the difference on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 7. On the dotted 
line next to your entry, enter “Repaid” and the 
amount you repaid. If you repaid unemployment 
compensation in 2023 that you included in your 
income in an earlier year and the amount is 
more than $3,000, you can deduct the amount 
repaid on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16, if 
you itemize deductions or you can take a credit 
against your tax on Schedule 3 (Form 1040), 
line 13b. See Repayments, later.
Tax withholding. Y ou can choose to have 
federal income tax withheld from your unem-
ployment compensation. T o make this choice, 
complete Form W -4V and give it to the paying 
office. T ax will be withheld at 10% of your pay-
ment.
If you don't choose to have tax withheld 
from your unemployment compensa-
tion, you may be liable for estimated 
tax. If you don't pay enough tax, either through 
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination 
of both, you may have to pay a penalty. For 
more information, see Pub. 505.
Supplemental unemployment benefits. 
Benefits received from an employer -financed 
fund (to which the employees didn't contribute) 
aren't unemployment compensation. They're 
taxable as wages and are subject to withholding 
for income tax. They may be subject to social 
security and Medicare taxes. For more informa-
tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefits 
CAUTION
!
in section 5 of Pub. 15 -A. Report these pay-
ments on line 1a of Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Repayment of benefits.  Y ou may have to 
repay some of your supplemental unemploy-
ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment 
allowances under the T rade Act of 1974. If you 
repay supplemental unemployment benefits in 
the same year you receive them, reduce the to-
tal benefits by the amount you repay. If you re-
pay the benefits in a later year, you must include 
the full amount of the benefits in your income for 
the year you received them.
Deduct the repayment in the later year as an 
adjustment to gross income on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. Include the repayment on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 24e. If the amount you repay 
in a later year is more than $3,000, you may be 
able to take a credit against your tax for the later 
year instead of deducting the amount repaid. 
For information on this, see Repayments, later.
Private unemployment fund.  Unemployment 
benefit payments from a private (nonunion) fund 
to which you voluntarily contribute are taxable 
only if the amounts you receive are more than 
your total payments into the fund. Report the 
taxable amount on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z.
Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you as 
an unemployed member of a union from regular 
union dues are included in your income on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. However, if 
you contribute to a special union fund and your 
payments to the fund aren't deductible, the un-
employment benefits you receive from the fund 
are includible in your income only to the extent 
they're more than your contributions.
Guaranteed annual wage.  Payments you re-
ceive from your employer during periods of un-
employment, under a union agreement that 
guarantees you full pay during the year, are tax-
able as wages. Include them on line 1a of Form 
1040 or 1040-SR.
State employees.  Payments similar to a 
state's unemployment compensation may be 
made by the state to its employees who aren't 
covered by the state's unemployment compen-
sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-
able, don't report them as unemployment com-
pensation. Report these payments on Schedule 
1 (Form 1040), line 8z.
Welfare and Other
Public Assistance Benefits
Don’t include in your income governmental ben-
efit payments from a public welfare fund based 
upon need, such as payments due to blindness. 
Payments from a state fund for the victims of 
crime shouldn't be included in the victims' in-
comes if they're in the nature of welfare pay-
ments. Don’t deduct medical expenses that are 
reimbursed by such a fund. Y ou must include in 
your income any welfare payments that are 
compensation for services or that are obtained 
fraudulently.
Work-training program.  Payments you re-
ceive from a state welfare agency for taking part 
in a work -training program aren't included in 
your income, as long as the payments (exclu-
sive of extra allowances for transportation or 
other costs) don't total more than the public wel-
fare benefits you would have received other-
wise. If the payments are more than the welfare 
benefits you would have received, the entire 
amount must be included in your income as wa-
ges.
Reemployment Trade Adjustment Assis-
tance (RTAA) payments.  Payments you re-
ceive from a state agency under the RTAA must 
be included in your income. The state must 
send you Form 1099 -G to advise you of the 
amount you should include in income. The 
amount should be reported on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8z.
Persons with disabilities.  If you have a disa-
bility, you must include in income compensation 
you receive for services you perform unless the 
compensation is otherwise excluded. However, 
you don't include in income the value of goods, 
services, and cash that you receive, not in re-
turn for your services, but for your training and 
rehabilitation because you have a disability. Ex-
cludable amounts include payments for trans-
portation and attendant care, such as inter-
preter services for the deaf, reader services for 
the blind, and services to help individuals with 
an intellectual disability do their work.
Disaster relief grants.  Don’t include post -dis-
aster grants received under the Disaster Relief 
and Emergency Assistance Act in your income 
if the grant payments are made to help you 
meet necessary expenses or serious needs for 
medical, dental, housing, personal property, 
transportation, or funeral expenses. Don’t de-
duct casualty losses or medical expenses that 
are specifically reimbursed by these disaster re-
lief grants. If you have deducted a casualty loss 
for the loss of your personal residence and you 
later receive a disaster relief grant for the loss of 
the same residence, you may have to include 
part or all of the grant in your taxable income. 
See Recoveries, earlier. Unemployment assis-
tance payments under the Act are taxable un-
employment compensation. See Unemploy-
ment compensation  under Unemployment 
Benefits, earlier.
Disaster relief payments.  Y ou can exclude 
from income any amount you receive that is a 
qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis-
aster relief payment is an amount paid to you:
1. T o reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
essary personal, family, living, or funeral 
expenses that result from a qualified dis-
aster;
2. T o reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
essary expenses incurred for the repair or 
rehabilitation of your home or repair or re-
placement of its contents to the extent it’s 
due to a qualified disaster;
3. By a person engaged in the furnishing or 
sale of transportation as a common carrier 
because of the death or personal physical 
injuries incurred as a result of a qualified 
disaster; or
4. By a federal, state, or local government, or 
agency or instrumentality in connection 
Page 30 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
30 Publication 525 (2023)

with a qualified disaster in order to pro-
mote the general welfare.
Y ou can exclude this amount only to the extent 
any expense it pays for isn't paid for by insur-
ance or otherwise. The exclusion doesn't apply 
if you were a participant or conspirator in a ter-
rorist action or a representative of one.
A qualified disaster is:
• A disaster that results from a terrorist or 
military action;
• A federally declared disaster; or
• A disaster that results from an accident in-
volving a common carrier, or from any 
other event, which is determined to be 
catastrophic by the Secretary of the T reas-
ury or his or her delegate.
For amounts paid under item 4, a disaster is 
qualified if it's determined by an applicable fed-
eral, state, or local authority to warrant assis-
tance from the federal, state, or local govern-
ment, agency, or instrumentality.
Disaster mitigation payments.  Y ou can 
also exclude from income any amount you re-
ceive that is a qualified disaster mitigation pay-
ment. Qualified disaster mitigation payments 
are commonly paid to you in the period immedi-
ately following damage to property as a result of 
a natural disaster. However, disaster mitigation 
payments are used to mitigate (reduce the se-
verity of) potential damage from future natural 
disasters. They're paid to you through state and 
local governments based on the provisions of 
the Robert T . Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer-
gency Assistance Act or the National Flood In-
surance Act.
Y ou can't increase the basis or adjusted ba-
sis of your property for improvements made with 
nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.
Home Affordable Modification Program 
(HAMP). If you benefit from Pay -for-Perform-
ance Success Payments under HAMP , the pay-
ments aren't taxable.
Hardest Hit Fund and Emergency Home-
owners' Loan Program. If you receive or ben-
efit from payments made under:
• A State Housing Finance agency (State 
HFA) Hardest Hit Fund program in which 
program payments can be used to pay 
mortgage interest, or
• An Emergency Homeowners' Loan Pro-
gram (EHLP) administered by the Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD) or a state,
• The Homeowner Assistance Fund (HAF) 
program in which program payments are 
used to provide financial assistance to eli-
gible homeowners for purposes of paying 
certain expenses related to their principal 
residence to prevent mortgage delinquen-
cies, defaults, foreclosures, loss of utilities 
or home energy services, and also dis-
placements of homeowners experiencing 
financial hardship after January 21, 2020,
the payments aren't included in gross income 
and aren't taxable.
For more details about the HAF program, go 
to Home.T reasury.gov/Policy-Issues/
Coronavirus/Assistance-for-State-Local-and-
T ribal-Governments/Homeowner-Assistance-
Fund.
If you are a tribal member and wish more de-
tails about the HAF program, go to IRS.gov/
Newsroom/FAQs-for-Payments-by-Indian- T ribal-
Governments-and-Alaska-Native-Corporations-
to-Individuals-Under-Covid-Relief-Legislation.
Mortgage assistance payments under sec-
tion 235 of the National Housing Act.  Pay-
ments made under section 235 of the National 
Housing Act for mortgage assistance aren't in-
cluded in the homeowner's income. Interest 
paid for the homeowner under the mortgage as-
sistance program can't be deducted.
Replacement housing payments.  Replace-
ment housing payments made under the Uni-
form Relocation Assistance and Real Property 
Acquisition Policies Act for Federal and Feder-
ally Assisted Programs aren't includible in gross 
income, but are includible in the basis of the 
newly acquired property.
Relocation payments and home rehabilita-
tion grants.  A relocation payment under sec-
tion 105(a)(11) of the Housing and Community 
Development Act made by a local jurisdiction to 
a displaced individual moving from a flood-dam-
aged residence to another residence isn't in-
cludible in gross income. Home rehabilitation 
grants received by low -income homeowners in 
a defined area under the same Act are also not 
includible in gross income.
Indian financing grants.  Nonreimbursable 
grants under title IV of the Indian Financing Act 
of 1974 to Indians to expand profit -making In-
dian-owned economic enterprises on or near 
reservations aren't includible in gross income.
Indian general welfare benefit.  Gross in-
come doesn't include the value of any Indian 
general welfare benefit. “Indian general welfare 
benefit” includes any payment made or services 
provided to or on behalf of a member (or any 
spouse or dependent of that member) of an In-
dian tribe or Alaska Native Corporation under 
an Indian tribal government program, but only if:
1. The program is administered under speci-
fied guidelines and doesn't discriminate in 
favor of members of the governing body of 
the Indian tribe or Alaska Native Corpora-
tion; and
2. The benefits provided under the program 
(a) are available to any tribal member who 
meets guidelines, (b) are for the promotion 
of general welfare, (c) aren't lavish or ex-
travagant, and (d) aren't compensation for 
services.
Generally, any items of cultural significance, 
reimbursement of costs, or cash honorarium for 
participation in cultural or ceremonial activities 
for the transmission of tribal culture aren't trea-
ted as compensation for services.
Note.  The above exclusion was enacted by 
the T ribal General Welfare Exclusion Act of 
2014, September 26, 2014. The exclusion ap-
plies to tax years for which the period of limita-
tion on refund or credit under section 6511 has 
not expired (generally, within 3 years from the 
time the return was filed or 2 years from the time 
the tax was paid, whichever expires later). Addi-
tionally, a claim for the above exclusion will be 
allowed if made within 1 year of the enactment 
of the exclusion.
Note.  The enactment of the above exclusion 
generally codifies the exclusion afforded under 
Revenue Procedure 2014 -35, June 4, 2014. 
See Revenue Procedure 2014 -35 for more de-
tails.
Medicare. Medicare benefits received under ti-
tle XVIII of the Social Security Act aren't includi-
ble in the gross income of the individuals for 
whom they're paid. This includes basic (Part A 
(Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged)) and 
supplementary (Part B (Supplementary Medical 
Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).
Social security benefits (including 
lump-sum payments attributable to prior 
years), Supplemental Security Income (SSI) 
benefits, and lump -sum death benefits. 
The Social Security Administration (SSA) pro-
vides benefits such as old -age benefits, bene-
fits to disabled workers, and benefits to spou-
ses and dependents. These benefits may be 
subject to federal income tax depending on 
your filing status and other income. See Pub. 
915 for more information. An individual origi-
nally denied benefits, but later approved, may 
receive a lump -sum payment for the period 
when benefits were denied (which may be prior 
years). See Pub. 915 for information on how to 
make a lump -sum election, which may reduce 
your tax liability. There are also other types of 
benefits paid by the SSA. However, SSI benefits 
and lump -sum death benefits (one -time pay-
ment to spouse and children of deceased) 
aren't subject to federal income tax. For more 
information on these benefits, go to SSA.gov.
Form SSA-1099. If you received social se-
curity benefits during the year, you'll receive 
Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State-
ment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed with 
your Form SSA -1099. This notice includes a 
worksheet you can use to figure whether any of 
your benefits are taxable.
For an explanation of the information found 
on your Form SSA-1099, see Pub. 915.
Form RRB-1099. If you received equivalent 
railroad retirement or special guaranty benefits 
during the year, you'll receive Form RRB -1099, 
Payments by the Railroad Retirement Board.
For an explanation of the information found 
on your Form RRB-1099, see Pub. 915.
Joint return.  If you're married and file a 
joint return, you and your spouse must combine 
your incomes and your social security and 
equivalent railroad retirement benefits when fig-
uring whether any of your combined benefits 
are taxable. Even if your spouse didn't receive 
any benefits, you must add your spouse's in-
come to yours when figuring if any of your bene-
fits are taxable.
Taxable amount.  Use the worksheet in the 
Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR instruction package 
to determine the amount of your benefits to in-
clude in your income. Pub. 915 also has work-
sheets you can use. However, you must use the 
Page 31 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 31

worksheets in Pub. 915 if any of the following 
situations apply.
• Y ou received a lump-sum benefit payment 
during the year that is for one or more 
earlier years.
• Y ou exclude employer-provided adoption 
benefits or interest from qualified U.S. sav-
ings bonds.
• Y ou take the foreign earned income exclu-
sion, the foreign housing exclusion or de-
duction, the exclusion of income from 
American Samoa, or the exclusion of in-
come from Puerto Rico by bona fide resi-
dents of Puerto Rico.
Benefits may affect your IRA deduction. 
Y ou must use the special worksheets in Appen-
dix B of Pub. 590 -A to figure your taxable bene-
fits and your IRA deduction if all of the following 
conditions apply.
• Y ou receive social security or equivalent 
railroad retirement benefits.
• Y ou have taxable compensation.
• Y ou contribute to your IRA.
• Y ou or your spouse is covered by a retire-
ment plan at work.
How to report.  If any of your benefits are 
taxable, you must use Form 1040 or 1040-SR to 
report the taxable part. Report your net benefits 
(as shown on your Forms SSA -1099 and 
RRB-1099) on line 6a of Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. Report the taxable part on line 6b of 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If you elect to use the 
lump-sum election method, check the box on 
line 6c of Form 1040 or 1040-SR and see the in-
structions.
Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Food ben-
efits you receive under the Nutrition Program for 
the Elderly aren't taxable. If you prepare and 
serve free meals for the program, include in 
your income as wages the cash pay you re-
ceive, even if you're also eligible for food bene-
fits.
Payments to reduce cost of winter energy. 
Payments made by a state to qualified people to 
reduce their cost of winter energy use aren't 
taxable.
Other Income
The following brief discussions are arranged in 
alphabetical order. Other income items briefly 
discussed below are referenced to publications 
that provide more information.
Activity not for profit.  Y ou must include on 
your return income from an activity from which 
you don't expect to make a profit. An example of 
this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you op-
erate mostly for recreation and pleasure. Enter 
this income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8j. 
Deductions for expenses related to the activity 
are limited. They can't total more than the in-
come you report and can be taken only if you 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend.  If you re-
ceived a payment from Alaska's mineral income 
fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report 
it as income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8g. The state of Alaska sends each recipi-
ent a document that shows the amount of the 
payment with the check. The amount is also re-
ported to the IRS.
Alimony. Include in your income on Schedule 
1 (Form 1040), line 2a, any taxable alimony pay-
ments you receive. Amounts you receive for 
child support aren't income to you. For com-
plete information, see Pub. 504 and the Instruc-
tions for Forms 1040 and 1040-SR.
Don’t include alimony payments you re-
ceive under a divorce or separation in-
strument (1) executed after 2018, or (2) 
executed before 2019 but modified after 2018, if 
the modification expressly states the alimony 
isn’t deductible to the payer or includible in your 
income.
Below-market loans. A below-market loan is a 
loan on which no interest is charged or on which 
the interest is charged at a rate below the appli-
cable federal rate. If you make a below -market 
gift or demand loan, you must include the for-
gone interest (at the federal rate) as interest in-
come on your return. These loans are consid-
ered a transaction in which you, the lender, are 
treated as having made:
• A loan to the borrower in exchange for a 
note that requires the payment of interest 
at the applicable federal rate; and
• An additional payment to the borrower, 
which the borrower transfers back to you 
as interest.
Depending on the transaction, the additional 
payment to the borrower is treated as a:
• Gift,
• Dividend,
• Contribution to capital,
• Payment of compensation, or
• Another type of payment.
The borrower may have to report this payment 
as income, depending on its classification.
For more information on below -market 
loans, see chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in your 
income.
Campaign contributions. These contributions 
aren't income to a candidate unless they're di-
verted to the candidate’s personal use. T o be 
exempt from tax, the contributions must be 
spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund 
for use in future campaigns. However, interest 
earned on bank deposits, dividends received on 
contributed securities, and net gains realized on 
sales of contributed securities are taxable and 
must be reported on Form 1120 -POL. Excess 
campaign funds transferred to an office account 
must be included in the officeholder's income 
on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, in the year 
transferred.
Canceled sales contract.  If you sell property 
(such as land or a residence) under a contract, 
but the contract is canceled and you return the 
buyer's money in the same tax year as the origi-
nal sale, you have no income from the sale. If 
the contract is canceled and you return the buy-
er's money in a later tax year, you must include 
your gain in your income for the year of the sale. 
When you return the money and take back the 
CAUTION
!
property in the later year, you treat the transac-
tion as a purchase that gives you a new basis in 
the property equal to the funds you return to the 
buyer.
Special rules apply to the reacquisition of 
real property where a secured indebtedness 
(mortgage) to the original seller is involved. For 
further information, see Repossession in Pub. 
537.
Carpools. Don’t include in your income 
amounts you receive from the passengers for 
driving a car in a carpool to and from work. 
These amounts are considered reimbursement 
for your expenses. However, this rule doesn't 
apply if you have developed carpool arrange-
ments into a profit -making business of trans-
porting workers for hire.
Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive from 
a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy isn't 
income, but you must reduce your basis by the 
amount of the rebate.
Example 36.  Y ou buy a new car for 
$24,000 cash and receive a $2,000 rebate 
check from the manufacturer. The $2,000 isn't 
income to you. Y our basis in the car is $22,000. 
This is the basis on which you figure gain or 
loss if you sell the car, and figure depreciation if 
you use it for business.
Casualty insurance and other reimburse-
ments. Y ou generally shouldn't report these re-
imbursements on your return unless you're fig-
uring gain or loss from the casualty or theft. See 
Pub. 547.
Charitable gift annuities.  If you're the benefi-
ciary of a charitable gift annuity, you must in-
clude the yearly annuity or fixed percentage 
payment in your income.
The payer will report the types of income 
you received on Form 1099-R. Report the gross 
distribution from box 1 on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 5a, and the part taxed as ordinary 
income (box 2a minus box 3) on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 5b. Report the portion taxed as 
capital gain as explained in the Instructions for 
Schedule D (Form 1040).
Child support payments. Y ou shouldn't report 
these payments on your return. See Pub. 504 
for more information.
Court awards and damages.  T o determine if 
settlement amounts you receive by compromise 
or judgment must be included in your income, 
you must consider the item that the settlement 
replaces. The character of the income as ordi-
nary income or capital gain depends on the na-
ture of the underlying claim. Include the follow-
ing as ordinary income.
1. Interest on any award.
2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits 
in most cases.
3. Punitive damages in most cases. It doesn't 
matter if they relate to a physical injury or 
physical sickness.
4. Amounts received in settlement of pension 
rights (if you didn't contribute to the plan).
5. Damages for:
Page 32 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
32 Publication 525 (2023)

a. Patent or copyright infringement,
b. Breach of contract, or
c. Interference with business operations.
6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
tress received to satisfy a claim under title 
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin-
gent fees) where the underlying recovery 
is included in gross income.
8. Attorney fees and costs relating to whistle-
blower awards where the underlying re-
covery is included in gross income.
Don’t include in your income compensatory 
damages for personal physical injury or physical 
sickness (whether received in a lump sum or in-
stallments).
Emotional distress.  Emotional distress it-
self isn't a physical injury or physical sickness, 
but damages you receive for emotional distress 
due to a physical injury or sickness are treated 
as received for the physical injury or sickness. 
Don’t include them in your income.
If the emotional distress is due to a personal 
injury that isn't due to a physical injury or sick-
ness (for example, unlawful discrimination or in-
jury to reputation), you must include the dam-
ages in your income, except for any damages 
you receive for medical care due to that emo-
tional distress. Emotional distress includes 
physical symptoms that result from emotional 
distress, such as headaches, insomnia, and 
stomach disorders.
Deduction for costs involved in unlawful 
discrimination suits. Y ou may be able to de-
duct attorney fees and court costs paid to re-
cover a judgment or settlement for a claim of 
unlawful discrimination under various provisions 
of federal, state, and local law listed in section 
62(e), a claim against the U.S. Government, or 
a claim under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the So-
cial Security Act. Y ou can claim this deduction 
as an adjustment to income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 24h. The following rules apply.
• The attorney fees and court costs may be 
paid by you or on your behalf in connection 
with the claim for unlawful discrimination, 
the claim against the U.S. Government, or 
the claim under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of 
the Social Security Act.
• The deduction you're claiming can't be 
more than the amount of the judgment or 
settlement you're including in income for 
the tax year.
• The judgment or settlement to which your 
attorney fees and court costs apply must 
occur after October 22, 2004.
Pre-existing agreement.  If you receive 
damages under a written binding agreement, 
court decree, or mediation award that was in ef-
fect (or issued on or before) September 13, 
1995, don't include in income any of those dam-
ages received on account of personal injuries or 
sickness.
Credit card insurance.  In most cases, if you 
receive benefits under a credit card disability or 
unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are 
taxable to you. These plans make the minimum 
monthly payment on your credit card account if 
you can't make the payment due to injury, ill-
ness, disability, or unemployment. Report on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, the amount of 
benefits you received during the year that is 
more than the amount of the premiums you paid 
during the year.
Down payment assistance.  If you purchase 
a home and receive assistance from a nonprofit 
corporation to make the down payment, that as-
sistance isn't included in your income. If the cor-
poration qualifies as a tax -exempt charitable or-
ganization, the assistance is treated as a gift 
and is included in your basis of the house. If the 
corporation doesn't qualify, the assistance is 
treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchase 
price and isn't included in your basis.
Employment agency fees.  If you get a job 
through an employment agency, and the fee is 
paid by your employer, the fee isn't includible in 
your income if you aren't liable for it. However, if 
you pay it and your employer reimburses you for 
it, it’s includible in your income.
Energy conservation subsidies. Y ou can ex-
clude from gross income any subsidy provided, 
either directly or indirectly, by public utilities for 
the purchase or installation of an energy con-
servation measure for a dwelling unit.
Energy conservation measure.  This in-
cludes installations or modifications that are pri-
marily designed to reduce consumption of elec-
tricity or natural gas, or improve the 
management of energy demand.
Dwelling unit.  This includes a house, 
apartment, condominium, mobile home, boat, 
or similar property. If a building or structure con-
tains both dwelling and other units, any subsidy 
must be properly allocated.
Estate and trust income.  An estate or trust, 
unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal in-
come tax. If you're a beneficiary of an estate or 
trust, you may be taxed on your share of its in-
come distributed or required to be distributed to 
you. However, there is never a double tax. Es-
tates and trusts file their returns on Form 1041, 
and your share of the income is reported to you 
on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041).
Current income required to be distrib-
uted.  If you're the beneficiary of an estate or 
trust that must distribute all of its current in-
come, you must report your share of the distrib-
utable net income, whether or not you actually 
received it.
Current income not required to be dis-
tributed.  If you're the beneficiary of an estate 
or trust and the fiduciary has the choice of 
whether to distribute all or part of the current in-
come, you must report all income that is re-
quired to be distributed to you, whether or not 
it's actually distributed, plus all other amounts 
actually paid or credited to you, up to the 
amount of your share of distributable net in-
come.
How to report.  T reat each item of income 
the same way that the estate or trust would treat 
it. For example, if a trust's dividend income is 
distributed to you, you report the distribution as 
dividend income on your return. The same rule 
applies to distributions of tax -exempt interest 
and capital gains.
The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell 
you the type of items making up your share of 
the estate or trust income and any credits you're 
allowed on your individual income tax return.
Losses.  Losses of estates and trusts gen-
erally aren't deductible by the beneficiaries.
Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantor 
trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-
ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over 
the trust. (The grantor is the one who transfer-
red property to the trust.) This rule applies if the 
property (or income from the property) put into 
the trust will or may revert (be returned) to the 
grantor or the grantor's spouse.
Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the 
grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at 
the date of transfer) at more than 5% of the 
value of the transferred property, or has certain 
other powers.
Expenses paid by another.  If your personal 
expenses are paid for by another person, such 
as a corporation, the payment may be taxable 
to you depending upon your relationship with 
that person and the nature of the payment. But 
if the payment makes up for a loss caused by 
that person, and only restores you to the posi-
tion you were in before the loss, the payment 
isn't includible in your income.
Exxon Valdez settlement income.  Include in 
your income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z, any qualified settlement income you re-
ceive as a qualified taxpayer. See Statement, 
later. Qualified settlement income is any interest 
and punitive damage awards that are:
• Otherwise includible in taxable income, 
and
• Received in connection with the civil action 
In re Exxon Valdez, No. 89-095-CV (HRH) 
(Consolidated) (D. Alaska).
Y ou're a qualified taxpayer if you were a 
plaintiff in the civil action mentioned earlier or 
you were a beneficiary of the estate of your 
spouse or a close relative who was such a 
plaintiff and from whom you acquired the right to 
receive qualified settlement income.
The income can be received as a lump sum 
or as periodic payments. Y ou'll receive a Form 
1099-MISC showing the gross amount of the 
settlement income paid to you in the tax year.
Contributions to eligible retirement plan. 
If you're a qualified taxpayer, you can contribute 
all or part of your qualified settlement income, 
up to $100,000, to an eligible retirement plan, 
including an IRA. Contributions to eligible retire-
ment plans, other than a Roth IRA or a designa-
ted Roth account, reduce the qualified settle-
ment income that you must include in income. 
See Statement, later. For more information on 
these contributions, see Pubs. 575 and 590-A.
Legal expenses. For tax years after 2017, 
you can no longer deduct legal expenses that 
were subject to the 2% -of-adjusted-gross-in-
come floor. If the qualified settlement income 
was received in connection with your trade or 
business (other than as an employee), you can 
reduce the taxable amount of qualified settle-
ment income by these expenses.
Page 33 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 33

Statement. If you report on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8z, qualified settlement in-
come that is less than the gross amount shown 
on Form 1099 -MISC, you must attach a state-
ment to your tax return. The statement must 
identify and show the gross amount of the quali-
fied settlement income, the reductions for the 
amount contributed to an eligible retirement 
plan, and the net amount.
Income averaging. For purposes of the in-
come averaging rules that apply to an individual 
engaged in a farming or fishing business, quali-
fied settlement income is treated as attributable 
to a fishing business for the tax year in which it's 
received. See Schedule J (Form 1040) and its 
instructions for more information.
Fees for services.  Include all fees for your 
services in your income. Examples of these 
fees are amounts you receive for services you 
perform as:
• A corporate director;
• An executor, administrator, or personal 
representative of an estate;
• A manager of a trade or business you op-
erated before declaring chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy;
• A notary public; or
• An election precinct official.
If you aren't an employee and the fees 
for your services from a single payer in 
the course of the payer's trade or busi-
ness total $600 or more for the year, the payer 
should send you Form 1099-MISC.
Corporate director.  Corporate director 
fees are self-employment income. Report these 
payments on Schedule C (Form 1040).
Personal representatives.  All personal 
representatives must include in their gross in-
come fees paid to them from an estate. If you 
aren't in the trade or business of being an exec-
utor (for instance, you're the executor of a 
friend's or relative's estate), report these fees on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. If you're in the 
trade or business of being an executor, report 
these fees as self -employment income on 
Schedule C (Form 1040). The fee isn't includi-
ble in income if it's waived.
Manager of trade or business for bank-
ruptcy estate.  Include in your income all pay-
ments received from your bankruptcy estate for 
managing or operating a trade or business that 
you operated before you filed for bankruptcy. 
Report this income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z.
Notary public.  Report payments for these 
services on Schedule C (Form 1040). These 
payments aren't subject to self-employment tax. 
See the separate Instructions for Schedule SE 
(Form 1040) for details.
Election precinct official.  Y ou should re-
ceive a Form W -2 showing payments for serv-
ices performed as an election official or election 
worker. Report these payments on line 1a of 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Food program payments to daycare provid-
ers. If you operate a daycare service and re-
ceive payments under the Child and Adult Care 
TIP
Food Program administered by the Department 
of Agriculture that aren't for your services, the 
payments aren't included in your income in 
most cases. However, you must include in your 
income any part of the payments you don't use 
to provide food to individuals eligible for help 
under the program.
Foreign currency transactions. If you have a 
gain on a personal foreign currency transaction 
because of changes in exchange rates, you 
don't have to include that gain in your income 
unless it's more than $200. If the gain is more 
than $200, report it as a capital gain.
Foster care providers.  Generally, payment 
you receive from a state, political subdivision, or 
a qualified foster care placement agency for 
caring for a qualified foster individual in your 
home is excluded from your income. However, 
you must include in your income payment to the 
extent it's received for the care of more than 5 
qualified foster individuals age 19 years or 
older.
A qualified foster individual is a person who:
1. Is living in a foster family home; and
2. Was placed there by:
a. An agency of a state or one of its polit-
ical subdivisions, or
b. A qualified foster care placement 
agency.
Difficulty-of-care payments.  These are 
payments that are designated by the payer as 
compensation for providing the additional care 
that is required for physically, mentally, or emo-
tionally handicapped qualified foster individuals. 
A state must determine that the additional com-
pensation is needed, and the care for which the 
payments are made must be provided in the 
foster care provider's home in which the quali-
fied foster individual was placed.
Certain Medicaid waiver payments are trea-
ted as difficulty -of-care payments when re-
ceived by an individual care provider for caring 
for an eligible individual (whether related or un-
related) living in the provider's home. See No-
tice 2014 -7, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2014-4_IRB#NOT -2014-7, and related ques-
tions and answers, available at IRS.gov/
Individuals/Certain-Medicaid-Waiver-Payments-
May-Be-Excludable-From-Income, for more in-
formation.
Y ou must include in your income diffi-
culty-of-care payments to the extent they're re-
ceived for more than:
• 10 qualified foster individuals under age 
19, or
• Five qualified foster individuals age 19 or 
older.
Maintaining space in home.  If you're paid 
to maintain space in your home for emergency 
foster care, you must include the payment in 
your income.
Reporting taxable payments.  If you re-
ceive payments that you must include in your in-
come and you're in business as a foster care 
provider, report the payments on Schedule C 
(Form 1040). See Pub. 587 to help you deter-
mine the amount you can deduct for the use of 
your home.
Found property. If you find and keep property 
that doesn't belong to you that has been lost or 
abandoned (treasure trove), it's taxable to you 
at its FMV in the first year it's your undisputed 
possession.
Free tour.  If you received a free tour from a 
travel agency for organizing a group of tourists, 
you must include its value in your income. Re-
port the FMV of the tour on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 8z, if you aren't in the trade or busi-
ness of organizing tours. Y ou can't deduct your 
expenses in serving as the voluntary leader of 
the group at the group's request. If you organize 
tours as a trade or business, report the tour's 
value on Schedule C (Form 1040).
Gambling winnings.  Y ou must include your 
gambling winnings in your income on Schedule 
1 (Form 1040), line 8b. Winnings from fantasy 
sports leagues are gambling winnings. If you 
itemize your deductions on Schedule A (Form 
1040), you can deduct gambling losses you had 
during the year, but only up to the amount of 
your winnings. If you're in the trade or business 
of gambling, use Schedule C (Form 1040). For 
tax years 2018 through 2025, professional gam-
bling losses and expenses are limited to the 
amount of your winnings.
Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lotter-
ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-
tion to cash winnings, you must include in your 
income the FMV of bonds, cars, houses, and 
other noncash prizes. However, the difference 
between the FMV and the cost of an oil and gas 
lease obtained from the government through a 
lottery isn't includible in income.
Installment payments.  Generally, if you 
win a state lottery prize payable in installments, 
you must include in your gross income the an-
nual payments and any amounts you receive 
designated as interest on the unpaid install-
ments. If you sell future lottery payments for a 
lump sum, you must report the amount you re-
ceive from the sale as ordinary income (on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8b) in the year 
you receive it.
Form W -2G. Y ou may have received a 
Form W-2G showing the amount of your gam-
bling winnings and any tax taken out of them. 
Include the amount from box 1 on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8b. Include the amount shown 
in box 4 on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 25c, as 
federal income tax withheld.
Gifts and inheritances.  In most cases, prop-
erty you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheri-
tance isn't included in your income. However, if 
property you receive this way later produces in-
come such as interest, dividends, or rents, that 
income is taxable to you. If property is given to a 
trust and the income from it is paid, credited, or 
distributed to you, that income is also taxable to 
you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the in-
come from the property, that income is taxable 
to you.
Inherited pension or IRA.  If you inherited 
a pension or an IRA, you may have to include 
part of the inherited amount in your income. See 
Survivors and Beneficiaries  in Pub. 575 if you 
inherited a pension. See What if Y ou Inherit an 
Page 34 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
34 Publication 525 (2023)

IRA? in Pubs. 590 -A and 590 -B if you inherited 
an IRA.
Expected inheritance. If you sell an inter-
est in an expected inheritance from a living per-
son, include the entire amount you receive in 
gross income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z.
Bequest for services.  If you receive cash 
or other property as a bequest for services you 
performed while the decedent was alive, the 
value is taxable compensation.
Gulf oil spill. If you received payments for lost 
wages or income, property damage, or physical 
injury due to the Gulf oil spill, the payment may 
be taxable.
Lost wages or income.  Payments you re-
ceived for lost wages, lost business income, or 
lost profits are taxable.
Property damage.  Payments you received 
for property damage aren't taxable if the pay-
ments aren't more than your adjusted basis in 
the property. If the payments are more than your 
adjusted basis, you'll realize a gain. If the dam-
age was due to an involuntary conversion, you 
may defer the tax on the gain if you purchase 
qualified replacement property. See Pub. 544.
If the payments (including insurance pro-
ceeds) you received, or expect to receive, are 
less than your adjusted basis, you may be able 
to claim a casualty deduction. See Pub. 547.
Physical injury.  Payments you received 
for personal physical injuries or physical sick-
ness aren't taxable. This includes payments for 
emotional distress that is attributable to per-
sonal physical injuries or physical sickness. 
Payments for emotional distress that aren't at-
tributable to personal physical injuries or physi-
cal sickness are taxable.
More information.  For the most recent 
guidance, go to IRS.gov and enter “Gulf Oil 
Spill” in the search box.
Historic preservation grants. Don’t include in 
your income any payment you receive under the 
National Historic Preservation Act to preserve a 
historically significant property.
Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby aren't de-
ductible from other income. A hobby is an activ-
ity from which you don't expect to make a profit. 
See Activity not for profit , earlier, under Other 
Income.
If you collect stamps, coins, or other 
items as a hobby for recreation and 
pleasure, and you sell any of the items, 
your gain is taxable as a capital gain. However, 
if you sell items from your collection at a loss, 
you can't deduct the loss.
Holocaust victims restitution.  Restitution 
payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (or 
the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest 
earned on the payments aren't taxable. Exclud-
able interest is earned by escrow accounts or 
settlement funds established for holding funds 
prior to the settlement. Y ou also don't include 
the restitution payments and interest the funds 
earned prior to disbursement in any calculation 
CAUTION
!
in which you ordinarily would add excludable in-
come to your AGI, such as the calculation to de-
termine the taxable part of social security bene-
fits. If the payments are made in property, your 
basis in the property is its FMV when you re-
ceive it.
Excludable restitution payments are pay-
ments or distributions made by any country or 
any other entity because of persecution of an 
individual on the basis of race, religion, physical 
or mental disability, or sexual orientation by Nazi 
Germany, any other Axis regime, or any other 
Nazi-controlled or Nazi -allied country, whether 
the payments are made under a law or as a re-
sult of a legal action. They include compensa-
tion or reparation for property losses resulting 
from Nazi persecution, including proceeds un-
der insurance policies issued before and during 
World War II by European insurance compa-
nies.
Illegal activities. Income from illegal activities, 
such as money from dealing illegal drugs, must 
be included in your income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8z, or on Schedule C (Form 
1040) if from your self-employment activity.
Indian fishing rights.  If you're a member of a 
qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights se-
cured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of 
Congress as of March 17, 1988, don't include in 
your income amounts you receive from activities 
related to those fishing rights. The income isn't 
subject to income tax, self -employment tax, or 
employment taxes.
Indian money account litigation settlement. 
Amounts received by an individual Indian as a 
lump sum or periodic payment pursuant to the 
Class Action Settlement Agreement dated De-
cember 7, 2009, aren't included in gross in-
come. This amount won't be used to figure AGI 
or MAGI in applying any Internal Revenue Code 
provision that takes into account excludable in-
come.
Interest on frozen deposits.  In general, you 
exclude from your income the amount of inter-
est earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is fro-
zen if, at the end of the calendar year, you can't 
withdraw any part of the deposit because:
• The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
solvent, or
• The state where the institution is located 
has placed limits on withdrawals because 
other financial institutions in the state are 
bankrupt or insolvent.
Excludable amount.  The amount of inter-
est you exclude from income for the year is the 
interest that was credited on the frozen deposit 
for that tax year minus the sum of:
1. The net amount withdrawn from the de-
posit during that year, and
2. The amount that could have been with-
drawn at the end of that tax year (not re-
duced by any penalty for premature with-
drawals of a time deposit).
The excluded part of the interest is included in 
your income in the tax year it becomes with-
drawable.
Interest on qualified savings bonds.  Y ou 
may be able to exclude from income the interest 
from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if 
you pay qualified higher education expenses in 
the same year. Qualified higher education ex-
penses are those you pay for tuition and re-
quired fees at an eligible educational institution 
for you, your spouse, or your dependent. A 
qualified U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond 
issued after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond 
must have been issued to you when you were 
24 years of age or older. For more information 
on this exclusion, see Education Savings Bond 
Program in chapter 1 of Pub. 550 and in chap-
ter 10 of Pub. 970.
Interest on state and local government obli-
gations. This interest is usually exempt from 
federal tax. However, you must show the 
amount of any tax -exempt interest on your fed-
eral income tax return. For more information, 
see State or Local Government Obligations  in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
Job interview expenses. If a prospective em-
ployer asks you to appear for an interview and 
either pays you an allowance or reimburses you 
for your transportation and other travel expen-
ses, the amount you receive isn't taxable in 
most cases. Y ou include in income only the 
amount you receive that is more than your ac-
tual expenses.
Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must be 
included in your income on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 8h. If you must give the pay to your 
employer because your employer continues to 
pay your salary while you serve on the jury, you 
can deduct the amount turned over to your em-
ployer as an adjustment to income. Enter the 
amount you repay your employer on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 24a.
Kickbacks. Y ou must include kickbacks, side 
commissions, push money, or similar payments 
you receive in your income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8z, or on Schedule C (Form 
1040) if from your self-employment activity.
Example 37.  Y ou sell cars and help ar-
range car insurance for buyers. Insurance brok-
ers pay back part of their commissions to you 
for referring customers to them. Y ou must in-
clude the kickbacks in your income.
Manufacturer incentive payments. Y ou must 
include as other income on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 8z (or Schedule C (Form 1040) if 
you're self-employed), incentive payments from 
a manufacturer that you receive as a salesper-
son. This is true whether you receive the pay-
ment directly from the manufacturer or through 
your employer.
Example 38.  Y ou sell cars for an automo-
bile dealership and receive incentive payments 
from the automobile manufacturer every time 
you sell a particular model of car. Y ou report the 
incentive payments on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z.
Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs 
and Medicare Advantage MSAs). In most ca-
ses, you don't include in income amounts you 
Page 35 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 35

withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare 
Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay for 
qualified medical expenses. Generally, qualified 
medical expenses are those you can deduct on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). For more information 
about Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage 
MSAs, see Pub. 969.
Moving expense reimbursements.  For tax 
years beginning after 2017, reimbursements for 
certain moving expenses are no longer exclu-
ded from the gross income of nonmilitary tax-
payers.
Prizes and awards.  If you win a prize in a 
lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz 
program, beauty contest, or other event, you 
must include it in your income. For example, if 
you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, 
you must report this income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8i. If you refuse to accept a 
prize, don't include its value in your income.
Prizes and awards in goods or services 
must be included in your income at their FMV .
Employee awards or bonuses.  Cash 
awards or bonuses given to you by your em-
ployer for good work or suggestions must gen-
erally be included in your income as wages. 
However, certain noncash employee achieve-
ment awards can be excluded from income. 
See Bonuses and awards under Miscellaneous 
Compensation, earlier.
Prize points.  If you're a salesperson and 
receive prize points redeemable for merchan-
dise that are awarded by a distributor or manu-
facturer to employees of dealers, you must in-
clude their FMV in your income. The prize 
points are taxable in the year they're paid or 
made available to you, rather than in the year 
you redeem them for merchandise.
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.  If you 
were awarded a prize in recognition of accom-
plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-
tistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you 
must generally include the value of the prize in 
your income. However, you don't include this 
prize in your income if you meet all of the follow-
ing requirements.
1. Y ou were selected without any action on 
your part to enter the contest or proceed-
ing.
2. Y ou aren't required to perform substantial 
future services as a condition for receiving 
the prize or award.
3. The prize or award is transferred by the 
payer directly to a governmental unit or 
tax-exempt charitable organization as des-
ignated by you. The following conditions 
apply to the transfer.
a. Y ou can't use the prize or award be-
fore it's transferred.
b. Y ou should provide the designation 
before the prize or award is presented 
to prevent a disqualifying use. The 
designation should contain:
i. The purpose of the designation 
by making a reference to section 
74(b)(3);
ii. A description of the prize or 
award;
iii. The name and address of the or-
ganization to receive the prize or 
award;
iv. Y our name, address, and TIN; 
and
v. Y our signature and the date 
signed.
c. In the case of an unexpected presen-
tation, you must return the prize or 
award before using it (or spending, 
depositing, or investing it, etc., in the 
case of money) and then prepare the 
statement as described in (b) above.
d. After the transfer, you should receive 
from the payer a written response 
stating when and to whom the desig-
nated amounts were transferred.
These rules don't apply to scholarship or fel-
lowship awards. See Scholarships and fellow-
ships, later.
Qualified opportunity fund (QOF).  Effective 
December 22, 2017, section 1400Z -2 provides 
a temporary deferral of inclusion in gross in-
come for eligible gains invested in QOFs, and a 
stepped-up basis to fair market value of the in-
vestment in the QOF at time of sale or ex-
change, if the investment is held for at least 10 
years. See the Form 8949 instructions on how 
to report your election to defer eligible gains in-
vested in a QOF . See Form 8997, Initial and An-
nual Statement of Qualified Opportunity Fund 
(QOF) Investments, and its instructions for re-
porting information. For additional information, 
see Opportunity Zones Frequently Asked Ques-
tions, available at IRS.gov/Newsroom/
Opportunity-Zones-Frequently-Asked-
Questions.
Qualified tuition program (QTP).  A QTP 
(also known as a 529 program) is a program set 
up to allow you to either prepay or contribute to 
an account established for paying a student's 
qualified higher education expenses at an eligi-
ble educational institution. A program can be 
established and maintained by a state, an 
agency or instrumentality of a state, or an eligi-
ble educational institution.
The part of a distribution representing the 
amount paid or contributed to a QTP isn't inclu-
ded in income. This is a return of the investment 
in the program.
In most cases, the beneficiary doesn't in-
clude in income any earnings distributed from a 
QTP if the total distribution is less than or equal 
to adjusted qualified higher education expen-
ses. See Pub. 970 for more information.
Railroad retirement annuities.  The following 
types of payments are treated as pension or an-
nuity income and are taxable under the rules 
explained in Pub. 575.
• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are 
more than the social security equivalent 
benefit.
• Tier 2 benefits.
• Vested dual benefits.
Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing 
information, include it in your income.
Sale of home.  Y ou may be able to exclude 
from income all or part of any gain from the sale 
or exchange of your main home. See Pub. 523.
Sale of personal items.  If you sold an item 
you owned for personal use, such as a car, re-
frigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or silver-
ware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain. Re-
port it as explained in the Instructions for 
Schedule D (Form 1040). Y ou can't deduct a 
loss.
However, if you sold an item you held for in-
vestment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins, 
or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain 
and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.
Example 39.  Y ou sold a painting on an on-
line auction website for $100. Y ou bought the 
painting for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Re-
port your $80 gain as a capital gain as ex-
plained in the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 
1040).
Scholarships and fellowships.  A candidate 
for a degree can exclude amounts received as a 
qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified 
scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-
ceive that is for:
• T uition and fees required to enroll at or at-
tend an eligible educational institution; or
• Course-related expenses, such as fees, 
books, and equipment that are required for 
courses at the eligible educational institu-
tion. These items must be required of all 
students in your course of instruction.
Amounts used for room and board don't qualify 
for the exclusion. See Pub. 970 for more infor-
mation on qualified scholarships and fellowship 
grants.
Payment for services.  Generally, you 
can't exclude from your gross income the part of 
any scholarship or fellowship that represents 
payment for teaching, research, or other serv-
ices required as a condition for receiving the 
scholarship. This applies even if all candidates 
for a degree must perform the services to re-
ceive the degree.
Exceptions.  Y ou don't have to include in 
income the part of any scholarship or fellowship 
that represents payment for teaching, research, 
or other services if you receive the amount un-
der:
• The National Health Services Corps Schol-
arship Program,
• The Armed Forces Health Professions 
Scholarship and Financial Assistance Pro-
gram, or
• A comprehensive student work-learn-
ing-service program (as defined in section 
448(e) of the Higher Education Act of 
1965) operated by a work college (as de-
fined in that section).
For information about the rules that apply to 
a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to 
employees and their families by an educational 
institution, see Pub. 970.
VA payments. Allowances paid by the VA 
for education, training, or subsistence under 
Page 36 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
36 Publication 525 (2023)

any law administered by the Department of Vet-
erans Affairs, aren't included in your income. 
These allowances aren't considered scholar-
ship or fellowship grants.
Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contest 
aren't scholarships or fellowships if you don't 
have to use the prizes for educational purposes. 
Y ou must include these amounts in your income 
on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8i, whether or 
not you use the amounts for educational purpo-
ses.
Smallpox vaccine injuries.  If you're an eligi-
ble individual who receives benefits under the 
Smallpox Emergency Personnel Protection Act 
of 2003 for a covered injury resulting from a 
covered countermeasure, you can exclude the 
payment from your income (to the extent it isn't 
allowed as a medical and dental expense de-
duction on Schedule A (Form 1040)). Eligible in-
dividuals include health care workers, emer-
gency personnel, and first responders in a 
smallpox emergency who have received a 
smallpox vaccination.
State tax payments. Do not include payments 
on your tax return made by states under legisla-
tively provided social benefit programs for the 
promotion of the general welfare. T o qualify for 
the general welfare exclusion, state payments 
must be paid from a governmental fund, be for 
the promotion of general welfare (that is, based 
on the need of the individual or family receiving 
such payments), and not represent compensa-
tion for services.
Spillover payments under certain 2022 
state tax payment programs.  In 2022, some 
states implemented programs to provide state 
payments to certain individuals residing in their 
states. Many of these programs were related to 
the various consequences of the COVID -19 
pandemic. Some of those 2022 programs provi-
ded for payments to be made in early 2023. For 
special tax refunds or payments that were ex-
cluded from federal income in 2022, the same 
tax treatment applies to the special tax refund or 
payments received in 2023. This means taxpay-
ers who didn’t get a payment under the program 
during 2022 may exclude from federal income a 
state payment provided under the 2022 pro-
gram even if they actually received the payment 
in 2023. See IRS News Release IR-2023-158 at 
IRS.gov/Newsroom/IRS-Issues-Guidance-on-
State- T ax-Payments for more information.
Stolen property.  If you steal property, you 
must report its FMV in your income in the year 
you steal it, unless in the same year you return it 
to its rightful owner.
Transporting school children.  Don’t include 
in your income a school board mileage allow-
ance for taking children to and from school if 
you aren't in the business of taking children to 
school. Y ou can't deduct expenses for providing 
this transportation.
Union benefits and dues.  Amounts deducted 
from your pay for union dues, assessments, 
contributions, or other payments to a union can't 
be excluded from your income.
For tax years beginning after 2017, you can 
no longer deduct job -related expenses or other 
miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to 
the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income floor.
Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits paid 
to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits, 
including both cash and the FMV of other prop-
erty, are usually included in your income as 
compensation. Y ou can exclude these benefits 
from your income only when the facts clearly 
show that the union intended them as gifts to 
you.
Reimbursed union convention expen-
ses. If you're a delegate of your local union 
chapter and you attend the annual convention 
of the international union, don't include in your 
income amounts you receive from the interna-
tional union to reimburse you for expenses of 
traveling away from home to attend the conven-
tion. Y ou can't deduct the reimbursed expenses, 
even if you're reimbursed in a later year. If you're 
reimbursed for lost salary, you must include that 
reimbursement in your income.
Utility rebates. If you're a customer of an elec-
tric utility company and you participate in the 
utility's energy conservation program, you may 
receive on your monthly electric bill either:
• A reduction in the purchase price of elec-
tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or
• A nonrefundable credit against the pur-
chase price of the electricity.
The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefunda-
ble credit isn't included in your income.
Whistleblower's award. If you receive a whis-
tleblower's award from the IRS, you must in-
clude it in your income. Any deduction allowed 
for attorney fees and court costs paid by you, or 
on your behalf, in connection with the award are 
deducted as an adjustment to income, but can't 
be more than the amount included in income for 
the tax year.
Repayments
If you had to repay an amount that you included 
in your income in an earlier year, you may be 
able to deduct the amount repaid from your in-
come for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if 
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you 
may be able to take a credit against your tax for 
the year in which you repaid it. In most cases, 
you can claim a deduction or credit only if the 
repayment qualifies as an expense or loss in-
curred in your trade or business or in a for -profit 
transaction.
Type of deduction.  The type of deduction 
you're allowed in the year of repayment de-
pends on the type of income you included in the 
earlier year. In most cases, you deduct the re-
payment on the same form or schedule on 
which you previously reported it as income. For 
example, if you reported it as self -employment 
income, deduct it as a business expense on 
Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 
1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, de-
duct it as a capital loss as explained in the In-
structions for Schedule D (Form 1040). If you 
reported it as wages, unemployment compen-
sation, or other nonbusiness income, you may 
be able to deduct it as an other itemized deduc-
tion if the amount repaid is over $3,000.
For tax years beginning after 2017, you 
can no longer claim any miscellaneous 
itemized deductions; so, if the amount 
repaid was $3,000 or less, you aren’t able to de-
duct it from your income in the year you repaid 
it.
Repaid social security benefits.  If you re-
paid social security or equivalent railroad retire-
ment benefits, see Pub. 915.
Repayment over $3,000.  If the amount you 
repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct 
the repayment as an other itemized deduction 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16, if you in-
cluded the income under a claim of right. This 
means that at the time you included the income, 
it appeared that you had an unrestricted right to 
it. However, you can choose to take a credit for 
the year of repayment. Figure your tax under 
both methods and compare the results. Use the 
method (deduction or credit) that results in less 
tax.
When determining whether the amount 
you repaid was less than $3,000, con-
sider the total amount being repaid on 
the return. Each instance of repayment isn't 
considered separately.
Method 1.  Figure your tax for the year of 
repayment claiming a deduction for the repaid 
amount.
Method 2.  Figure your tax for the year of 
repayment claiming a credit for the repaid 
amount. Follow these steps.
1. Figure your tax for the year of repayment 
without deducting the repaid amount.
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year 
without including in income the amount 
you repaid in the year of repayment.
3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown 
on your return for the earlier year. This is 
the credit.
4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for 
the year of repayment figured without the 
deduction (step 1).
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the 
amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax, 
claim the credit figured in (3) above on Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR. (If the year of repayment is 
2022, and you're taking the credit, enter the 
credit on Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 13b, and 
see the instructions for it.)
Example 40.  For 2022, you filed a return 
and reported your income on the cash method. 
In 2023, you repaid $5,000 included in your 
2022 income under a claim of right. Y our filing 
status in 2023 and 2022 is single. Y our income 
and tax for both years are as follows.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Page 37 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 37

2022
 With Income  Without Income
T axable 
Income $15,000 $10,000 
T ax $1,598 $1,003
2023
Without Deduction With Deduction
T axable 
Income $49,950 $44,950 
T ax $6,297 $5,197
Y our tax under method 1 is $5,197. Y our tax 
under method 2 is $6,297, figured as follows.
T ax previously determined for 2022 ....... $1,598
Less: T ax as refigured ................ − 1,003 
Decrease in 2022 tax ............ $ 595 
Regular tax liability for 2023 ............ $6,297
Less: Decrease in 2022 tax ............ − 595
Refigured tax for 2023 ........... $5,702
Y ou pay less tax using method 1, so you should 
take a deduction for the repayment in 2023.
Repaid wages subject to social security 
and Medicare taxes.  If you had to repay an 
amount that you included in your wages or com-
pensation in an earlier year on which social se-
curity, Medicare, or tier 1 RRTA taxes were paid, 
ask your employer to refund the excess amount 
to you. If the employer refuses to refund the 
taxes, ask for a statement indicating the amount 
of the overcollection to support your claim. File 
a claim for refund using Form 843.
Repaid wages subject to Additional Medi-
care Tax.  Employers can't make an adjust-
ment or file a claim for refund for Additional 
Medicare T ax withholding when there is a re-
payment of wages received by an employee in a 
prior year because the employee determines li-
ability for Additional Medicare T ax on the em-
ployee's income tax return for the prior year. If 
you had to repay an amount that you included in 
your wages or compensation in an earlier year, 
and on which Additional Medicare T ax was 
paid, you may be able to recover the Additional 
Medicare T ax paid on the amount. T o recover 
Additional Medicare T ax on the repaid wages or 
compensation, you must file Form 1040 -X for 
the prior year in which the wages or compensa-
tion were originally received. See the Instruc-
tions for Form 1040-X.
Repayment rules don’t apply.  This discus-
sion doesn't apply to:
• Deductions for bad debts;
• Deductions for theft losses due to criminal 
fraud or embezzlement in a transaction en-
tered into for profit;
• Deductions from sales to customers, such 
as returns and allowances, and similar 
items; or
• Deductions for legal and other expenses of 
contesting the repayment.
Year of deduction (or credit).  If you use the 
cash method, you can take the deduction (or 
credit, if applicable) for the tax year in which you 
actually make the repayment. If you use any 
other accounting method, you can deduct the 
repayment or claim a credit for it only for the tax 
year in which it’s a proper deduction under your 
accounting method. For example, if you use an 
accrual method, you're entitled to the deduction 
or credit in the tax year in which the obligation 
for the repayment accrues.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue; need 
help preparing your tax return; or want to down-
load free publications, forms, or instructions, go 
to IRS.gov to find resources that can help you 
right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After 
receiving all your wage and earnings state-
ments (Forms W-2, W-2G, 1099-R, 1099-MISC, 
1099-NEC, etc.); unemployment compensation 
statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 
1099-G); and interest, dividend, and retirement 
statements from banks and investment firms 
(Forms 1099), you have several options to 
choose from to prepare and file your tax return. 
Y ou can prepare the tax return yourself, see if 
you qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax 
professional to prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation.  Y our op-
tions for preparing and filing your return online 
or in your local community, if you qualify, include 
the following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare 
and file your federal individual income tax 
return for free using software or Free File 
Fillable Forms. However, state tax prepara-
tion may not be available through Free File. 
Go to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if you qualify 
for free online federal tax preparation, e-fil-
ing, and direct deposit or payment options.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income T ax Assis-
tance (VITA) program offers free tax help to 
people with low-to-moderate incomes, per-
sons with disabilities, and limited-Eng-
lish-speaking taxpayers who need help 
preparing their own tax returns. Go to 
IRS.gov/VITA, download the free IRS2Go 
app, or call 800-906-9887 for information 
on free tax return preparation.
• TCE. The T ax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program offers free tax help for all 
taxpayers, particularly those who are 60 
years of age and older. TCE volunteers 
specialize in answering questions about 
pensions and retirement-related issues 
unique to seniors. Go to IRS.gov/TCE or 
download the free IRS2Go app for informa-
tion on free tax return preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed 
Forces and qualified veterans may use Mil-
T ax, a free tax service offered by the De-
partment of Defense through Military One-
Source. For more information, go to 
MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/
MilT ax).
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, 
which can be completed online and then 
e-filed regardless of income.
Using online tools to help prepare your re-
turn.  Go to IRS.gov/T ools for the following.
• The Earned Income T ax Credit Assistant 
(IRS.gov/EITCAssistant) determines if 
you’re eligible for the earned income credit 
(EIC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) 
helps you get an employer identification 
number (EIN) at no cost.
• The T ax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/
W4App) makes it easier for you to estimate 
the federal income tax you want your em-
ployer to withhold from your paycheck. 
This is tax withholding. See how your with-
holding affects your refund, take-home pay, 
or tax due.
• The First- Time Homebuyer Credit Account 
Look-up (IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool pro-
vides information on your repayments and 
account balance.
• The Sales T ax Deduction Calculator 
(IRS.gov/SalesT ax) figures the amount you 
can claim if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax ques-
tions. On IRS.gov, you can get 
up-to-date information on current 
events and changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you 
get answers to some of the most common 
tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive T ax Assistant, 
a tool that will ask you questions and, 
based on your input, provide answers on a 
number of tax topics.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, 
and publications. Y ou will find details on 
the most recent tax changes and interac-
tive links to help you find answers to your 
questions.
• Y ou may also be able to access tax infor-
mation in your e-filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return? 
There are various types of tax return preparers, 
including enrolled agents, certified public ac-
countants (CPAs), accountants, and many oth-
ers who don’t have professional credentials. If 
you choose to have someone prepare your tax 
return, choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax 
preparer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall sub-
stantive accuracy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax iden-
tification number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs 
the return, you're ultimately responsible 
for providing all the information re-
quired for the preparer to accurately prepare 
your return and for the accuracy of every item 
reported on the return. Anyone paid to prepare 
tax returns for others should have a thorough 
understanding of tax matters. For more informa-
tion on how to choose a tax preparer, go to Tips 
for Choosing a T ax Preparer on IRS.gov.
Employers can register to use Business 
Services Online.  The Social Security Admin-
istration (SSA) offers online service at SSA.gov/
CAUTION
!
Page 38 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
38 Publication 525 (2023)

employer for fast, free, and secure W-2 filing op-
tions to CPAs, accountants, enrolled agents, 
and individuals who process Form W -2, Wage 
and T ax Statement, and Form W-2c, Corrected 
Wage and T ax Statement.
IRS social media.  Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia 
to see the various social media tools the IRS 
uses to share the latest information on tax 
changes, scam alerts, initiatives, products, and 
services. At the IRS, privacy and security are 
our highest priority. We use these tools to share 
public information with you. Don’t post your so-
cial security number (SSN) or other confidential 
information on social media sites. Always pro-
tect your identity when using any social net-
working site.
The following IRS Y ouT ube channels provide 
short, informative videos on various tax -related 
topics in English, Spanish, and ASL.
• Y outube.com/irsvideos.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio pre-
sentations for individuals, small businesses, 
and tax professionals.
Online tax information in other languages. 
Y ou can find information on IRS.gov/
MyLanguage if English isn’t your native lan-
guage.
Free Over-the-Phone Interpreter (OPI) Serv-
ice.  The IRS is committed to serving taxpayers 
with limited -English proficiency (LEP) by offer-
ing OPI services. The OPI Service is a federally 
funded program and is available at T axpayer 
Assistance Centers (TACs), most IRS offices, 
and every VITA/TCE tax return site. The OPI 
Service is accessible in more than 350 lan-
guages.
Accessibility Helpline available for taxpay-
ers with disabilities.  T axpayers who need in-
formation about accessibility services can call 
833-690-0598. The Accessibility Helpline can 
answer questions related to current and future 
accessibility products and services available in 
alternative media formats (for example, braille, 
large print, audio, etc.). The Accessibility Help-
line does not have access to your IRS account. 
For help with tax law, refunds, or account -rela-
ted issues, go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp.
Note.  Form 9000, Alternative Media Prefer-
ence, or Form 9000(SP) allows you to elect to 
receive certain types of written correspondence 
in the following formats.
• Standard Print.
• Large Print.
• Braille.
• Audio (MP3).
• Plain T ext File (TXT).
• Braille Ready File (BRF).
Disasters.  Go to IRS.gov/DisasterRelief to re-
view the available disaster tax relief.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Forms to view, download, or print all 
the forms, instructions, and publications you 
may need. Or, you can go to IRS.gov/
OrderForms to place an order.
Getting tax publications and instructions in 
eBook format.  Download and view most tax 
publications and instructions (including the In-
structions for Form 1040) on mobile devices as 
eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks.
IRS eBooks have been tested using Apple's 
iBooks for iPad. Our eBooks haven’t been tes-
ted on other dedicated eBook readers, and 
eBook functionality may not operate as inten-
ded.
Access your online account (individual tax-
payers only).  Go to IRS.gov/Account to se-
curely access information about your federal tax 
account.
• View the amount you owe and a break-
down by tax year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a 
new payment plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 years of pay-
ment history and any pending or sched-
uled payments.
• Access your tax records, including key 
data from your most recent tax return, and 
transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from 
the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests 
from tax professionals.
• View your address on file or manage your 
communication preferences.
Get a transcript of your return.  With an on-
line account, you can access a variety of infor-
mation to help you during the filing season. Y ou 
can get a transcript, review your most recently 
filed tax return, and get your adjusted gross in-
come. Create or access your online account at 
IRS.gov/Account.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets your tax pro-
fessional submit an authorization request to ac-
cess your individual taxpayer IRS online ac-
count. For more information, go to IRS.gov/
T axProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The safest and easiest 
way to receive a tax refund is to e -file and 
choose direct deposit, which securely and elec-
tronically transfers your refund directly into your 
financial account. Direct deposit also avoids the 
possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
destroyed, or returned undeliverable to the IRS. 
Eight in 10 taxpayers use direct deposit to re-
ceive their refunds. If you don’t have a bank ac-
count, go to IRS.gov/DirectDeposit for more in-
formation on where to find a bank or credit 
union that can open an account online.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related 
identity theft issues. 
• T ax-related identity theft happens when 
someone steals your personal information 
to commit tax fraud. Y our taxes can be af-
fected if your SSN is used to file a fraudu-
lent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with tax-
payers by email, text messages (including 
shortened links), telephone calls, or social 
media channels to request or verify per-
sonal or financial information. This includes 
requests for personal identification num-
bers (PINs), passwords, or similar informa-
tion for credit cards, banks, or other finan-
cial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Iden-
tity Theft Central webpage, for information 
on identity theft and data security protec-
tion for taxpayers, tax professionals, and 
businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of 
tax-related identity theft, you can learn 
what steps you should take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP 
PINs are six-digit numbers assigned to tax-
payers to help prevent the misuse of their 
SSNs on fraudulent federal income tax re-
turns. When you have an IP PIN, it pre-
vents someone else from filing a tax return 
with your SSN. T o learn more, go to 
IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your 
mobile device to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 
800-829-1954.
The IRS can’t issue refunds before 
mid-February for returns that claimed 
the EIC or the additional child tax credit 
(ACTC). This applies to the entire refund, not 
just the portion associated with these credits.
Making a tax payment.  Payments of U.S. tax 
must be remitted to the IRS in U.S. dollars. 
Digital assets are not accepted. Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for information on how to make a pay-
ment using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill 
or estimated tax payment directly from your 
checking or savings account at no cost to 
you.
• Debit Card, Credit Card, or Digital Wallet: 
Choose an approved payment processor 
to pay online or by phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Schedule a 
payment when filing your federal taxes us-
ing tax return preparation software or 
through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal T ax Payment System: 
Best option for businesses. Enrollment is 
required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment 
to the address listed on the notice or in-
structions.
• Cash: Y ou may be able to pay your taxes 
with cash at a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: Y ou may be able to do 
same-day wire from your financial institu-
tion. Contact your financial institution for 
availability, cost, and time frames.
Note.  The IRS uses the latest encryption 
technology to ensure that the electronic pay-
ments you make online, by phone, or from a 
mobile device using the IRS2Go app are safe 
and secure. Paying electronically is quick, easy, 
and faster than mailing in a check or money or-
der.
CAUTION
!
Page 39 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 39

What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for more information about your 
options.
• Apply for an online payment agreement 
(IRS.gov/OPA) to meet your tax obligation 
in monthly installments if you can’t pay 
your taxes in full today. Once you complete 
the online process, you will receive imme-
diate notification of whether your agree-
ment has been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier 
to see if you can settle your tax debt for 
less than the full amount you owe. For 
more information on the Offer in Compro-
mise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  Go to IRS.gov/
Form1040X for information and updates.
Checking the status of your amended re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status 
of Form 1040-X amended returns.
It can take up to 3 weeks from the date 
you filed your amended return for it to 
show up in our system, and processing 
it can take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter 
you’ve received. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to find 
additional information about responding to an 
IRS notice or letter.
Responding to an IRS notice or letter.  Y ou 
can now upload responses to all notices and 
letters using the Document Upload T ool. For no-
tices that require additional action, taxpayers 
will be redirected appropriately on IRS.gov to 
take further action. T o learn more about the tool, 
go to IRS.gov/Upload.
Note.  Y ou can use Schedule LEP (Form 
1040), Request for Change in Language Prefer-
ence, to state a preference to receive notices, 
letters, or other written communications from 
the IRS in an alternative language. Y ou may not 
immediately receive written communications in 
the requested language. The IRS’s commitment 
to LEP taxpayers is part of a multi -year timeline 
that began providing translations in 2023. Y ou 
will continue to receive communications, includ-
ing notices and letters, in English until they are 
translated to your preferred language.
CAUTION
!
Contacting your local TAC.  Keep in mind, 
many questions can be answered on IRS.gov 
without visiting a TAC. Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp 
for the topics people ask about most. If you still 
need help, TACs provide tax help when a tax is-
sue can’t be handled online or by phone. All 
TACs now provide service by appointment, so 
you’ll know in advance that you can get the 
service you need without long wait times. Be-
fore you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to find 
the nearest TAC and to check hours, available 
services, and appointment options. Or, on the 
IRS2Go app, under the Stay Connected tab, 
choose the Contact Us option and click on “Lo-
cal Offices.”
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) Is Here To 
Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the 
IRS that helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer 
rights. TAS strives to ensure that every taxpayer 
is treated fairly and that you know and under-
stand your rights under the T axpayer Bill of 
Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your 
Taxpayer Rights?
The T axpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic 
rights that all taxpayers have when dealing with 
the IRS. Go to T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to 
help you understand what these rights mean to 
you and how they apply. These are your rights. 
Know them. Use them.
What Can TAS Do for You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you 
can’t resolve with the IRS. And their service is 
free. If you qualify for their assistance, you will 
be assigned to one advocate who will work with 
you throughout the process and will do every-
thing possible to resolve your issue. TAS can 
help you if:
• Y our problem is causing financial difficulty 
for you, your family, or your business;
• Y ou face (or your business is facing) an im-
mediate threat of adverse action; or
• Y ou’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico . T o find your advo-
cate’s number:
• Go to T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-
Us;
• Download Pub. 1546, The T axpayer Advo-
cate Service Is Y our Voice at the IRS, avail-
able at IRS.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p1546.pdf;
• Call the IRS toll free at 800-TAX-FORM 
(800-829-3676) to order a copy of Pub. 
1546;
• Check your local directory; or
• Call TAS toll free at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help 
Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that 
affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of 
these broad issues, report it to TAS at IRS.gov/
SAMS. Be sure to not include any personal tax-
payer information.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics 
(LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS and TAS. 
LITCs represent individuals whose income is 
below a certain level and who need to resolve 
tax problems with the IRS. LITCs can represent 
taxpayers in audits, appeals, and tax collection 
disputes before the IRS and in court. In addi-
tion, LITCs can provide information about tax-
payer rights and responsibilities in different lan-
guages for individuals who speak English as a 
second language. Services are offered for free 
or a small fee. For more information or to find an 
LITC near you, go to the LITC page at 
T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/LITC or see IRS 
Pub. 4134, Low Income T axpayer Clinic List, at 
IRS.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p4134.pdf.
T o help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
1231 property sale 17
401(k) plans 9
Excess contributions 11
403(b) plans 9
Limit for 10
457 plans 9
Limit for deferrals under 10
501(c)(18)(D) plans 9
Contributions 10
529 program 36
83(b) election 14
A
Academic health centers:
Meals and lodging when 
teaching and research 
organization 8
Accelerated death benefits 24
Accident insurance 5
Accidental death benefits 6
Accrual method taxpayers 2
Accrued leave payment:
At time of retirement or 
resignation 4
Disability retirement 18
Activity not for profit 32
Adoption:
Employer assistance 5
Advance commissions 3
Advance payments 2
Aircraft 9
Airlines:
No-additional-cost services 8
Valuation of flights on 
employer-provided aircraft 9
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividend 32
Alien status, waiver of 16
Aliens:
Nonresident 25
Alimony 32
Alternative minimum tax (AMT):
Recoveries, refiguring of 29
Stock options 12
Annuities:
Charitable gift 32
Railroad retirement 36
T ax-sheltered10
Archer MSAs 5, 35
Armed forces 16
Combat zone bonus 16
Disability 16
Disability pensions 18
Health professions 
scholarship 9
Military action as cause of 
disability injuries 19
Page 40 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
40 Publication 525 (2023)

Qualified reservist 
distribution 16
Rehabilitative program 
payments 16
Retirement pay 16
Veterans benefits 16
Assistance (See T ax help)
Athletic facilities, 
employer-provided 5
Automobile (See Vehicle, 
employer-provided)
Awards (See Damages from 
lawsuits)
B
Babysitting 3
Back pay, award for 3
Backup withholding:
Barter exchange transactions 21
Bankruptcy 3
Canceled debt not deemed to be 
income 23
Barter income 20
Below-market loans 32
Bequest for services 35
Bitcoin 4
Black lung benefit payments 20
Bonuses 3, 36
Breach of contract:
Damages as income 33
Bribes 32
Business expenses:
Reimbursements 3
Business income 17, 18
C
Cafeteria plans 18
Campaign contributions 32
Campus lodging 8
Cancellation of debt 21
Cancellation of sales 
contracts 32
Capital gains:
Recoveries 25, 29
Capital gains or losses:
Employee stock option plans 
(ESOPs) 13
ISOs (ISOs) 13
Sale of personal property 36
Car (See Vehicle, employer-
provided)
Carpools 32
Cash or deferred arrangements 
(CODAs) 9
Cash rebates 32
Casualty insurance:
Reimbursements from 32
Catch-up contributions 10
Charitable gift annuities 32
Child and Adult Care Food 
Program:
Payments to daycare 
providers 34
Child support payments 32
Childcare providers 3, 34
Chronic illness 19
Accelerated death benefits paid 
to 24
Citizens outside U.S.:
Exclusion of foreign income 2
Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII:
Back pay and damages for 
emotional distress under 32
Clergy 15
Coal 17
Colleges and universities:
Faculty lodging 8
Scholarships and fellowships 36
Commissions:
Advance 3
Commuter highway vehicles 8
Compensation:
Employee 3
Miscellaneous 3
Unemployment 29
Workers' 20
Compensatory damages 20, 33
Constructive receipt of income 2
Copyrights:
Infringement damages 33
Royalties 17
Corporate directors 34
Cost-of-living allowances 4
Court awards 32
(See also Damages from lawsuits)
Credit card Insurance 33
Credits:
Recoveries, refiguring of unused 
credits 28, 29
Currency transactions, 
foreign 34
D
Damages from lawsuits 32
Back pay awards 3
Breach of contract 33
Compensatory damages 20, 33
Emotional distress under Title 
VII, Civil Rights Act of 
1964 32
Punitive damages 32
Daycare providers 3
(See also Childcare providers)
Food program payments to 34
De minimis (minimal) benefits 5, 
8
Death benefits 23
(See also Life insurance)
Accelerated 24
Debts:
Canceled 21
Excluded debt 23
Nonrecourse debts 21
Recourse 21
Stockholder's 21
Deduction:
Costs of discrimination suits 33
Deferred compensation:
Nonqualified plans 4
Dependent care benefits 5
Depletion allowance 17
Differential wage payments 4
Armed forces 16
Digital Assets 4
Directors' fees 34
Disability:
Military 16
Pensions 18
Workers' compensation 20
Person with 30
Unemployment compensation, 
paid as substitute for 30
Disaster relief:
Disaster mitigation payments 31
Disaster Relief and Emergency 
Assistance Act:
Grants 30
Unemployment benefits 29
Payments 30
Discounts:
Employee discounts 6
Employee stock purchase 
plans 13
Mortgage loan for early 
payment 21
Dividends:
Restricted stock 15
Divorced taxpayers:
Stock options exercised incident 
to divorce 12
Down payment assistance 33
E
Educational assistance:
Employer-provided 6
Scholarships and fellowships 36
Educational institutions:
Faculty lodging 8
Elderly persons:
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 32
T ax Counseling for the 
Elderly 17
Election precinct officials 34
Elective deferrals 9
Catch-up contributions 10
Excess annual additions 11
Excess contributions 11
Excess deferrals 11
Increased limit for last 3 years 
prior to retirement age 10
Limit on 9
Reporting by employer 10
Emergency Homeowners' Loan 
Program 31
Emotional distress damages 33
Employee achievement awards 4
Employee awards or bonuses 36
Employee compensation 3-15
Fringe benefits 4-9
Restricted property 14, 15
Retirement plan contributions 9
Stock options 11-13
Employee discounts 6
Employee stock purchase 
plans 12, 13
Employer-owned life 
insurance 23
Employer-provided:
Educational assistance 6
Vehicles 9
Employer, foreign 16
Employment:
Abroad 16
Agency fees 33
Contracts:
Severance pay for 
cancellation of 4
Endowment proceeds 24
Energy:
Assistance 32
Conservation:
Subsidies 33
Utility rebates 37
Estate income 33
Estimated tax:
Unemployment 
compensation 30
Excess:
Annual additions 11
Contributions 11
Deferrals 11
Expected inheritance 35
Expenses paid by another 33
Exxon Valdez settlement 33
Eligible retirement plan 33
Income averaging 34
Legal expenses 33
Reporting 
requirement-statement 34
F
Faculty lodging 8
Fair Market Value (FMV) 3
Farming:
Qualified farm debt, cancellation 
of 23
Federal employees:
Accrued leave payment 4
Compensation Act (FECA) 
payments 20
Cost-of-living allowances 4
Disability pensions 18
Thrift Savings Plan for 9
Federal income tax:
Refunds 24
Fees for services 34
Financial counseling fees 6
Fellowships 36
FICA withholding:
Foreign employers, U.S. citizens 
working for in U.S. 16
Paid by employer 4
Fiduciaries:
Fees for services 34
Financial counseling fees 6
(See also Retirement planning 
services)
Fitness programs:
Employer-provided 5
Flights:
Employer-provided aircraft 9
No-additional-cost services 8
Food benefits:
Daycare providers, food program 
payments to 34
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 32
Foreign:
Currency transactions 34
Employment 16
Governments, employees of 16
Income 2
Service 19
Form 1040:
Excess contributions to elective 
deferrals 11
Recoveries 26
Unemployment 
compensation 29
Wages from Form W-2 3
Form 1040, Schedule A:
Repayment of commissions paid 
in advance 3
Form 1040, Schedule B:
Restricted stock dividends 15
Form 1040, Schedule C:
Bartering 20
Childcare providers to use 3
Personal property rental, 
reporting income from 17
Royalties 17
Form 1040, Schedule D:
Stock options 13
Stock options reported on 12
Form 1040, Schedule E:
Partner's return 17
Royalties 17
Page 41 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 41

Form 1041:
Estates and trusts 33
Form 1041, Schedule K-1:
Beneficiary's share of income, 
deductions, credits, etc. 33
Form 1065:
Partnership return 17
Form 1065, Schedule K-1:
Partner's share of income 17, 18
Form 1098:
Mortgage interest statement 25
Form 1099-B:
Barter exchange transactions 21
Form 1099-C:
Cancellation of debt 21
Form 1099-DIV:
Restricted stock dividends 15
Form 1099-G:
State tax refunds 24
Unemployment 
compensation 29
Form 1099-K:
Sharing/Gig economy 29
Form 1099-MISC:
Services totaling $600 or 
more 34
Stock options exercised incident 
to divorce 12
Form 1099-R:
Charitable gift annuities 32
Excess annual additions 11
Excess deferral amounts 11
Surrender of life insurance policy 
for cash 24
Form 1120-POL:
Political organizations 32
Form 1120-S:
S corporation return 18
Form 1120-S, Schedule K-1:
Shareholder's share of income, 
credits, deductions, etc. 18
Form 2441:
Child and dependent care 
expenses 6
Form 4255:
Recapture of investment 
credit 29
Form 6251:
Alternative minimum tax 12
Form 8839:
Adoption assistance 5
Form 8853:
Accelerated death benefits 24
Archer MSAs and long-term care 
insurance contracts 5
Form 8919:
Uncollected social security and 
Medicare tax on wages 3
Form RRB-1099:
Railroad retirement board 
payments 31
Form SSA-1099:
Social security benefit 
statement 31
Form W-2:
501(c)(18)(D) contributions 10
Accrued leave payment at time of 
retirement or resignation 4
Back pay awards 3
Bonuses or awards 3
Elective deferrals, reporting by 
employer 10
Failure to receive from 
employer 3
Fringe benefits reported on 5
Stock options from 
employers 12
Wage and tax statement 3
Form W-2G:
Gambling winnings 34
Form W-4V:
Unemployment compensation, 
voluntary withholding 
request 30
Form W-9:
Request for taxpayer 
identification number 21
Foster care 34
Foster Grandparent Program 17
Found property 34
Fringe benefit FMV 9
Fringe benefits 4
Accident and health insurance 5
Adoption, employer 
assistance 5
Athletic facilities 5
Commuter highway vehicles 8
De minimis benefits 5, 8
Dependent care benefits 5
Educational assistance 6
Employee discounts 6
Faculty lodging 8
Financial counseling fees 6
Holiday gifts 5
Meals and lodging 8
Moving expenses (See Moving 
expenses)
No-additional-cost services 8
Retirement planning 
(See Retirement planning 
services)
T ransit pass8
T uition reduction9
Valuation of 9
Vehicle 9
Working condition benefits 9
Frozen deposits:
Interest on 35
G
Gambling winnings and 
losses 34
Gas:
Royalties from 17
Gifts 34
Holiday gifts from employer 5
Government employees 
(See Federal employees; State 
employees)
Grantor trusts 33
Group-term life insurance:
Worksheets 6, 7
Gulf oil spill 35
H
HAMP:
Home affordable modification 
program:
Pay-for-performance success 
payments 31
Hardest Hit Fund Program 31
Health:
Flexible spending 
arrangement 5
Insurance 5
Reimbursement arrangement 5
Savings account 5
Highly compensated employees:
Excess contributions to elective 
deferrals 11
Historic preservation grants 35
Hobby losses 35
Holding period requirement 13
Holiday gifts 5
Holocaust victims restitution 35
Home, sale of 36
Host 23
Hotels:
No-additional-cost services 8
Housing (See Lodging)
I
Illegal activities 35
Income:
Assigned 2
Business and investment 17, 18
Constructive receipt of 2
Estate and trust 33
Foreign employers 16
Illegal 35
Miscellaneous 20
Other 32
Partnership 17
Prepaid 2
S corporation 18
Indian fishing rights 35
Indian money account 35
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs):
Deduction 32
Inherited IRA 34
Inheritance 34
IRA 34
Property not substantially 
vested 15
Injury benefits 18-20
Insurance
Credit card 33
Health 5
Life (See Life insurance)
Long-term care (See Long-term 
care insurance)
Interest:
Canceled debt including 21
Frozen deposits 35
Mortgage refunds 25
Option on insurance 24
Recovery amounts 25
Savings bond 35
State and local government 
obligations 35
Interference with business 
operations:
Damages as income 33
International organizations, 
employees of 16
Interview expenses 35
Investment counseling fees 6
(See also Retirement planning 
services)
Investment income 17, 18
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Iron ore 17
ISOs (ISOs) 12, 13
Itemized deductions:
Recoveries 24, 25
J
Job interview expenses 35
Joint returns:
Social security benefits or 
railroad retirement 
payments 31
Joint state/local tax return:
Recoveries 25
Jury duty pay 35
K
Kickbacks 35
L
Labor unions:
Convention expenses, 
reimbursed 37
Dues 37
Strike and lockout benefits 37
Unemployment benefits paid 
from 30
Last day of tax year, income 
received on 2
Leave (See Accrued leave 
payment)
Length-of-service awards 4
Life insurance:
Employer-owned 23
Proceeds 23
Surrender of policy for cash 24
Loans 21
(See also Mortgage)
Below-market 32
Paycheck Protection 
Program 23
Student 21
Lockout benefits 37
Lodging:
Campus lodging 8
Clergy 15
Employer-paid or reimbursed 8
Faculty lodging 8
Replacement housing 
payments 31
Long-term care insurance 5, 19
Lotteries and raffles 34
Lump-sum distributions:
Survivor benefits 29
M
Manufacturer incentive 
payments 35
Meals:
Employer-paid or reimbursed 8
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 32
Medicaid waiver payments 2, 34
Medical:
Care reimbursements 20
Savings accounts 35
Medicare:
Advantage MSAs 35
Benefits 31
T ax paid by employer4
Medicare tax (See Social security 
and Medicare taxes)
Military (See Armed forces)
Minerals:
Royalties from 17
Miscellaneous:
Compensation 3
Income 20
Missing children, photographs 
of 2
Mortgage:
Assistance payment (under sec. 
235 of National Housing 
Act) 31
Discounted loan 21
Interest refund 25
Page 42 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
42 Publication 525 (2023)

Qualified principal residence 
indebtedness 23
Relief 21
Motor vehicle, 
employer-provided 9
Moving expenses:
Reimbursements 3, 36
MSAs (Medical savings 
accounts) 35
N
National Health Service Corps 
Scholarship Program 9
National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric 
Administration 19
National Senior Service 
Corps 16, 17
No-additional-cost services 8
No-fault car insurance:
Disability benefits under 20
Nobel prize 36
Nonrecourse debt 21
Nonstatutory stock options 11
Nontaxable income 2
Not-for-profit activities 32
Notary fees 34
Notes received for services 4
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 32
O
Oil:
Royalties from 17
Options, stock 11, 13
Outplacement services 4
Overseas work 2
P
Parking fees:
Employer-paid or reimbursed 8
Partner and partnership 
income 17
Patents:
Infringement damages 33
Royalties 17
Paycheck Protection Program 
loans 23
Peace Corps 16
Pensions:
Clergy 15
Disability pensions 18
Inherited pensions 34
Military 16
Personal property:
Rental income and expense 17
Sale of 36
Personal representatives 
(See Fiduciaries)
Prepaid income 2
Price reduced after purchase 23
Prizes and awards 3, 36
Achievement awards 4
Employee awards or 
bonuses 36
Length-of-service awards 4
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar 
prizes 36
Safety achievement 4
Scholarship prizes 37
Profit-sharing plan 18
Public assistance benefits 30
Public Health Service 19
Public safety officers killed in 
line of duty 29
Public transportation passes, 
employer-provided 8
Publications (See T ax help)
Pulitzer prize 36
Punitive damages 32
Q
Qualified tuition program 
(QTP) 36
R
Raffles 34
Railroad:
Retirement annuities 36
Sick pay 20
Unemployment compensation 
benefits 30
Real estate:
Qualified real property business 
debt, cancellation of 23
Rebates:
Cash 32
Utility 37
Recovery of amounts previously 
deducted 24, 26
Itemized deductions 24, 25
Non-itemized deductions 29
Unused tax credits, refiguring 
of 28, 29
Worksheet of itemized 
deductions (Worksheet 
2) 27, 28
Refunds:
Federal income tax 24
Mortgage interest 25
State tax 24
Rehabilitative program 
payments 16
Reimbursements:
Business expenses 3
Casualty losses 32
Meals and lodging 8
Medical expenses 20
Moving expenses 3, 36
Related party transactions:
Stock option transfer 12
Religious order members 15
Rental income and expenses:
Personal property rental 17
Reporting of 17
Repayments 37, 38
Repossession 32
Restricted property 14, 15
Retired Senior Volunteer 
Program (RSVP) 17
Retirement:
Settlement 2
Retirement planning services 6, 
8
Retirement plans 16
(See also Pensions)
Automatic contribution 
arrangements 9
Contributions 9, 11, 12
Elective deferrals (See Elective 
deferrals)
Rewards 36
Roth contributions 10
Royalties 17
S
S corporations 18
Safety achievement awards 4
Salary reduction simplified 
employee pension plans 
(See SARSEPs)
Sale of home 36
Sales contracts:
Cancellation of 32
SARSEPs 9
Excess contributions 11
Savings bonds 35
Savings incentive match plans 
for employees (See SIMPLE 
plans)
Scholarships and fellowships 36
Self-employed persons:
U.S. citizens working for foreign 
employers in U.S. treated 
as 16
Senior Companion Program 17
Service Corps of Retired 
Executives (SCORE) 17
Severance pay 4
Outplacement services 4
Sick pay 4
Sickness and injury benefits 20
SIMPLE plans 9
Limit for deferrals under 10
Smallpox vaccine injuries 37
Social security and Medicare 
taxes:
Foreign employers, U.S. citizens 
working for in U.S. 16
Paid by employer 4
Standard deduction:
Recoveries 26
State employees:
Unemployment benefits paid 
to 30
State or local governments:
Interest on obligations of 35
State or local taxes:
Refunds 24
State tax payments 37
Statutory stock option holding 
period 13
Stock appreciation rights 4
Stock options 11, 13
Stock options, nonstatutory:
Exercise or transfer 12
Grant 11
Sale 12
Stock options, statutory:
Exercise 12
Grant 12
Sale 13
Stockholder debts 21
Stolen property 37
Strike benefits 37
Student loans:
Cancellation of debt 21
Substantial risk of forfeiture 14
Substantially vested property 14
Supplemental unemployment 
benefits 30
Surviving spouse:
Life insurance proceeds paid 
to 23
Survivor benefits 29
T
Tables and figures:
Group-term life insurance 
(T able 1)7
Tax benefit rule 24
Tax Counseling for the 
Elderly 17
Tax help 38
Tax-sheltered annuity plans 
(403(b) plans) 9
Limit for 10
Terminal illness 24
Terrorist attacks:
Disability payments for injuries 
from 19
T ax relief for victims2, 18
Thrift Savings Plan 9
Title VII, Civil Rights Act of 1964:
Back pay and damages for 
emotional distress under 32
Tour guides, free tours for 34
Trade Act of 1974:
T rade readjustment allowances 
under 30
Transferable property 14
Transit passes 8
Travel agencies:
Free tour to organizer of group of 
tourists 34
Travel and transportation 
expenses:
Free tours from travel 
agencies 34
Fringe benefits 8
Reimbursements 3
School children, transporting 
of 37
Trusts:
Grantor trusts 33
Income 33
Tuition program, qualified 
(QTP) 36
Tuition reduction 9
U
Unemployment 
compensation 29
Unions (See Labor unions)
Unlawful discrimination suits:
Deduction for costs 33
V
VA payments 36
Valuation:
Fringe benefits 9
Stock options 11
Vehicle:
Commuter highway 8
Employer-provided 9
Veterans benefits 16
Disability compensation 19
Retroactive VA determination 19
Special statute of limitations 19
Viatical settlements 24
Volunteer work 16
T ax counseling (Volunteer 
Income T ax Assistance 
Program) 17
Volunteers in Service to America 
(VISTA) 16
W
W-2 form (See Form W-2)
Welfare benefits 30
Whistleblower 37
Winter energy payments 32
Withholding:
Barter exchange transactions 21
Unemployment 
compensation 30
Work-training programs 30
Workers' compensation 20
Working condition benefits 9
Page 43 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2023) 43

Worksheets:
Computations for Worksheet 2, 
lines 1a and 1b (Worksheet 
2a) 27
Group-term life insurance 
(Worksheet 1) 6, 7
Recoveries of itemized 
deductions (Worksheet 
2) 27, 28
Page 44 of 44  Fileid: … tions/p525/2023/a/xml/cycle07/source 12:13 - 16-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
44 Publication 525 (2023)