Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 10  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 38  13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department of the T reasury
Internal Revenue Service
Publication 527
Cat. No. 15052W
Residential
Rental
Property
(Including Rental of 
Vacation Homes)
For use in preparing
2023 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Contents
What’s New ............................... 2
Reminders ............................... 2
Introduction .............................. 2
Chapter 1. Rental Income and Expenses (If No 
Personal Use of Dwelling) ................ 3
Rental Income .......................... 4
Rental Expenses ........................ 5
Chapter 2. Depreciation of Rental Property ..... 8
The Basics ............................. 9
Special Depreciation Allowance ............. 12
MACRS Depreciation .................... 12
Claiming the Correct Amount of Depreciation ... 18
Chapter 3. Reporting Rental Income, 
Expenses, and Losses .................. 18
Which Forms T o Use..................... 18
Limits on Rental Losses .................. 19
At-Risk Rules ....................... 20
Passive Activity Limits ................. 20
Casualties and Thefts .................... 22
Example ............................. 22
Chapter 4. Special Situations ............... 23
Condominiums ......................... 23
Cooperatives .......................... 23
Property Changed to Rental Use ............ 24
Renting Part of Property .................. 25
Not Rented for Profit ..................... 25
Example—Property Changed to Rental Use .... 25
Chapter 5. Personal Use of Dwelling Unit 
(Including Vacation Home) ............... 26
Dividing Expenses ...................... 27
Dwelling Unit Used as a Home .............. 27
Reporting Income and Deductions ........... 29
Worksheet 5-1. Worksheet for Figuring 
Rental Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used 
as a Home .......................... 30
Chapter 6. How To Get Tax Help ............. 33
Index .................................. 37
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to 
Pub. 527, such as legislation enacted after it was 
published, go to IRS.gov/Pub527.
Jan 24, 2024

Page 2 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What’s New
Standard mileage rate. For 2023, the standard mileage 
rate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or 
panel truck increased to 65.5 cents a mile.
Section 179 deduction dollar limits.  For tax years be-
ginning in 2023, the maximum section 179 expense de-
duction is $1,160,000. This limit is reduced by the amount 
by which the cost of section 179 property placed in serv-
ice during the tax year exceeds $2,890,000.
Qualified paid sick leave and qualified paid family 
leave payroll tax credit.  Generally, the credit for quali-
fied sick and family leave wages, as enacted under the 
Families First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA) and 
amended and extended by the COVID -related T ax Relief 
Act of 2020, for leave taken after March 31, 2020, and be-
fore April 1, 2021, and the credit for qualified sick and fam-
ily leave wages under sections 3131, 3132, and 3133 of 
the Internal Revenue Code, as enacted under the Ameri-
can Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (the ARP), for leave taken 
after March 31, 2021, and before October 1, 2021, have 
expired. However, employers that pay qualified sick and 
family leave wages in 2023 for leave taken after March 31, 
2020, and before October 1, 2021, are eligible to claim a 
credit for qualified sick and family leave wages in the quar-
ter of 2023 in which the qualified wages were paid. For 
more information, see Form 941, lines 11b, 11d, 13c, and 
13e; and Form 944, lines 8b, 8d, 10d, and 10f. Y ou must 
include the full amount (both the refundable and nonre-
fundable portions) of the credit for qualified sick and family 
leave wages in gross income on line 3 or 4 of Schedule E 
(Form 1040), as applicable, for the tax year that includes 
the last day of any calendar quarter with respect to which 
a credit is allowed. A credit is available only if the leave 
was taken after March 31, 2020, and before October 1, 
2021, and only after the qualified leave wages were paid, 
which might, under certain circumstances, not occur until 
a quarter after September 30, 2021, including qualifying 
quarterly payments made during 2023. Accordingly, all 
lines related to qualified sick and family leave wages re-
main on the employment tax returns for 2023.
Note. A credit is available only if the leave was taken 
after March 31, 2020, and before October 1, 2021, and 
only after the qualified leave wages were paid, which 
might, under certain circumstances, not occur until a quar-
ter after September 30, 2021, including qualifying quar-
terly payments made during 2023. Accordingly, all lines re-
lated to qualified sick and family leave wages remain on 
the employment tax returns for 2023.
Commercial clean vehicle credit.  Businesses that buy 
a qualified commercial clean vehicle may qualify for a 
clean vehicle tax credit. See Form 8936 and its instruc-
tions for more information.
Bonus depreciation. The bonus depreciation deduction 
under section 168(k) begins its phaseout in 2023 with a 
reduction of the applicable limit from 100% to 80%.
Reminders
Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT). Y ou may be subject 
to the NIIT . NIIT is a 3.8% tax on the lesser of net invest-
ment income or the excess of modified adjusted gross in-
come (MAGI) over the threshold amount. Net investment 
income may include rental income and other income from 
passive activities. Use Form 8960 to figure this tax. For 
more information on NIIT , go to IRS.gov/NIIT.
Form 7205, Energy Efficient Commercial Buildings 
Deduction. This form and its separate instructions are 
used to claim the section 179D deduction for qualifying 
energy efficient commercial building expense(s).
Excess business loss limitation. If you report a loss on 
line 26, 32, 37, or 39 of your Schedule E (Form 1040), you 
may be subject to a business loss limitation. The disal-
lowed loss resulting from the limitation will not be reflected 
on line 26, 32, 37, or 39 of your Schedule E. Instead, use 
Form 461 to determine the amount of your excess busi-
ness loss, which will be included as income on Schedule 
1 (Form 1040), line 8p. Any disallowed loss resulting from 
this limitation will be treated as a net operating loss that 
must be carried forward and deducted in a subsequent 
year.
See Form 461 and its instructions for details on the ex-
cess business loss limitation.
Photographs of missing children.  The Internal Reve-
nue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for 
Missing & Exploited Children® (NCMEC) . Photographs of 
missing children selected by the Center may appear in 
this publication on pages that would otherwise be blank. 
Y ou can help bring these children home by looking at the 
photographs and calling 1 -800-THE-LOST 
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Introduction
Do you own a second house that you rent out all the time? 
Do you own a vacation home that you rent out when you 
or your family isn't using it?
These are two common types of residential rental activ-
ities discussed in this publication. In most cases, all rental 
income must be reported on your tax return, but there are 
differences in the expenses you are allowed to deduct and 
in the way the rental activity is reported on your return.
Chapter 1  discusses rental -for-profit activity in which 
there is no personal use of the property. It examines some 
common types of rental income and when each is repor-
ted, as well as some common types of expenses and 
which are deductible.
Chapter 2 discusses depreciation as it applies to your 
rental real estate activity —what property can be depreci-
ated and how much it can be depreciated.
Chapter 3  covers the reporting of your rental income 
and deductions, including casualties and thefts, limitations 
on losses, and claiming the correct amount of deprecia-
tion.
2 Publication 527 (2023)

Page 3 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 discusses special rental situations. These in-
clude condominiums, cooperatives, property changed to 
rental use, renting only part of your property, and a 
not-for-profit rental activity.
Chapter 5 discusses the rules for rental income and ex-
penses when there is also personal use of the dwelling 
unit, such as a vacation home.
Finally, chapter 6 explains how to get tax help from the 
IRS.
Sale or exchange of rental property.  For information 
on how to figure and report any gain or loss from the sale, 
exchange, or other disposition of your rental property, see 
Pub. 544.
Sale of main home used as rental property.  For in-
formation on how to figure and report any gain or loss from 
the sale or other disposition of your main home that you 
also used as rental property, see Pub. 523.
Tax-free exchange of rental property occasionally 
used for personal purposes.  If you meet certain quali-
fying use standards, you may qualify for a tax -free ex-
change (a like -kind or section 1031 exchange) of one 
piece of rental property you own for a similar piece of 
rental property, even if you have used the rental property 
for personal purposes.
For information on the qualifying use standards, see 
Revenue Procedure 2008 -16, 2008-10 I.R.B. 547, availa-
ble at IRS.gov/irb/2008-10_IRB#RP-2008-16. For more in-
formation on like -kind exchanges, see chapter 1 of Pub. 
544.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and suggestions for future 
editions.
Y ou can send us comments through IRS.gov/
FormComments. Or, you can write to the Internal Revenue 
Service, T ax Forms and Publications, 1111 Constitution 
Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments and suggestions as we revise 
our tax forms, instructions, and publications. Don’t send 
tax questions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Getting answers to your tax questions.  If you have 
a tax question not answered by this publication or the How 
T o Get T ax Help section at the end of this publication, go 
to the IRS Interactive T ax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the search 
feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/Forms to download current and prior -year 
forms, instructions, and publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to order current forms, instruc-
tions, and publications; call 800 -829-3676 to order 
prior-year forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon as possible. 
Don’t resubmit requests you’ve already sent us. Y ou can 
get forms and publications faster online.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
463 T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses
523 Selling Y our Home
534 Depreciating Property Placed in Service Before 
1987
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
551 Basis of Assets
925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
946 How T o Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
461 Excess Business Loss Limitation
4562 Depreciation and Amortization
5213 Election T o Postpone Determination as T o 
Whether the Presumption Applies That an 
Activity Is Engaged in for Profit
7205 Energy Efficient Commercial Buildings 
Deduction
8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
8960 Net Investment Income T ax—Individuals, 
Estates, and T rusts
Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental Income 
and Loss
1.
Rental Income and 
Expenses (If No Personal 
Use of Dwelling)
This chapter discusses the various types of rental income 
and expenses for a residential rental activity with no per-
sonal use of the dwelling. Generally, each year, you will re-
port all income and deduct all out -of-pocket expenses in 
full. The deduction to recover the cost of your rental prop-
erty—depreciation—is taken over a prescribed number of 
years, and is discussed in chapter 2.
  463
  523
  534
  544
  547
  551
  925
  946
  461 
  4562
  5213
  7205
  8582
  8960
  Schedule E (Form 1040)
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal 
Use of Dwelling)
3

Page 4 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your rental income is from property you also use 
personally or rent to someone at less than a fair 
rental price, first read chapter 5.
Rental Income
In most cases, you must include in your gross income all 
amounts you receive as rent. Rental income is any pay-
ment you receive for the use or occupation of property. It 
isn’t limited to amounts you receive as normal rental pay-
ments.
When To Report
When you report rental income on your tax return gener-
ally depends on whether you are a cash or an accrual ba-
sis taxpayer. Most individual taxpayers use the cash 
method.
Cash method.  Y ou are a cash basis taxpayer if you re-
port income on your return in the year you actually or con-
structively receive it, regardless of when it was earned. 
Y ou constructively receive income when it is made availa-
ble to you, for example, by being credited to your bank ac-
count.
Accrual method.  If you are an accrual basis taxpayer, 
you generally report income when you earn it, rather than 
when you receive it. Y ou generally deduct your expenses 
when you incur them, rather than when you pay them.
More information.  See Pub. 538, Accounting Periods 
and Methods, for more information about when you con-
structively receive income and accrual methods of ac-
counting.
Types of Income
The following are common types of rental income.
Advance rent. Advance rent is any amount you receive 
before the period that it covers. Include advance rent in 
your rental income in the year you receive it regardless of 
the period covered or the method of accounting you use.
Example. On March 18, 2023, you signed a 10 -year 
lease to rent your property. During 2023, you received 
$9,600 for the first year's rent and $9,600 as rent for the 
last year of the lease. Y ou must include $19,200 in your 
rental income in 2023.
Canceling a lease.  If your tenant pays you to cancel a 
lease, the amount you receive is rent. Include the payment 
in your rental income in the year you receive it regardless 
of your method of accounting.
Expenses paid by tenant.  If your tenant pays any of 
your expenses, those payments are rental income. Be-
cause you must include this amount in income, you can 
also deduct the expenses if they are deductible rental ex-
penses. For more information, see Rental Expenses, later.
CAUTION
!
Example 1.  Y our tenant pays the water and sewage 
bill for your rental property and deducts the amount from 
the normal rent payment. Under the terms of the lease, 
your tenant doesn’t have to pay this bill. Include the utility 
bill paid by the tenant and any amount received as a rent 
payment in your rental income. Y ou can deduct the utility 
payment made by your tenant as a rental expense.
Example 2. While you are out of town, the furnace in 
your rental property stops working. Y our tenant pays for 
the necessary repairs and deducts the repair bill from the 
rent payment. Include the repair bill paid by the tenant and 
any amount received as a rent payment in your rental in-
come. Y ou can deduct the repair payment made by your 
tenant as a rental expense.
Property or services. If you receive property or services 
as rent, instead of money, include the fair market value 
(FMV) of the property or services in your rental income.
If the services are provided at an agreed upon or speci-
fied price, that price is the FMV unless there is evidence to 
the contrary.
Example. Y our tenant is a house painter. He offers to 
paint your rental property instead of paying 2 months rent. 
Y ou accept his offer.
Include in your rental income the amount the tenant 
would have paid for 2 months rent. Y ou can deduct that 
same amount as a rental expense for painting your prop-
erty.
Security deposits.  Don’t include a security deposit in 
your income when you receive it if you plan to return it to 
your tenant at the end of the lease. But if you keep part or 
all of the security deposit during any year because your 
tenant doesn’t live up to the terms of the lease, include the 
amount you keep in your income in that year.
If an amount called a security deposit is to be used as a 
final payment of rent, it is advance rent. Include it in your 
income when you receive it.
Other Sources of Rental Income
Lease with option to buy.  If the rental agreement gives 
your tenant the right to buy your rental property, the pay-
ments you receive under the agreement are generally 
rental income. If your tenant exercises the right to buy the 
property, the payments you receive for the period after the 
date of sale are considered part of the selling price.
Part interest. If you own a part interest in rental property, 
you must report your part of the rental income from the 
property.
Rental of property also used as your home. If you rent 
property that you also use as your home and you rent it 
less than 15 days during the tax year, don’t include the 
rent you receive in your income. Also, expenses from this 
activity are not considered rental expenses. For more in-
formation, see Used as a home but rented less than 15 
days under Reporting Income and Deductions  in chap-
ter 5.
4 Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal 
Use of Dwelling)
Publication 527 (2023)

Page 5 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rental Expenses
In most cases, the expenses of renting your property, such 
as maintenance, insurance, taxes, and interest, can be 
deducted from your rental income.
Personal use of rental property.  If you sometimes use 
your rental property for personal purposes, you must di-
vide your expenses between rental and personal use. 
Also, your rental expense deductions may be limited. See 
chapter 5.
Part interest. If you own a part interest in rental property, 
you can deduct expenses you paid according to your per-
centage of ownership.
Example. Roger owns a one -half undivided interest in 
a rental house. Last year, he paid $968 for necessary re-
pairs on the property. Roger can deduct $484 (50% (0. 50) 
× $968) as a rental expense. He is entitled to reimburse-
ment for the remaining half from the co-owner.
When To Deduct
Y ou generally deduct your rental expenses in the year you 
pay them.
If you use the accrual method, see Pub. 538 for more 
information.
Types of Expenses
Listed below are the most common rental expenses.
• Advertising.
• Auto and travel expenses.
• Cleaning and maintenance.
• Commissions.
• Depreciation.
• Insurance.
• Interest (other).
• Legal and other professional fees.
• Local transportation expenses.
• Management fees.
• Mortgage interest paid to banks, etc.
• Points.
• Rental payments.
• Repairs.
• T axes.
• Utilities.
Some of these expenses, as well as other less common 
ones, are discussed below.
Depreciation. Depreciation is a capital expense. It is the 
mechanism for recovering your cost in an income -produc-
ing property and must be taken over the expected life of 
the property.
Y ou can begin to depreciate rental property when it is 
ready and available for rent. See Placed in Service  under 
When Does Depreciation Begin and End? in chapter 2.
Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you pay an in-
surance premium for more than 1 year in advance, you 
can’t deduct the total premium in the year you pay it. For 
each year of coverage, you can deduct only the part of the 
premium payment that applies to that year.
Interest expense. Y ou can deduct mortgage interest you 
pay on your rental property. When you refinance a rental 
property for more than the previous outstanding balance, 
the portion of the interest allocable to loan proceeds not 
related to rental use generally can’t be deducted as a 
rental expense.
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.  Certain ex-
penses you pay to obtain a mortgage on your rental prop-
erty can’t be deducted as interest. These expenses, which 
include mortgage commissions, abstract fees, and record-
ing fees, are capital expenses that are part of your basis in 
the property.
Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement.  If you 
paid $600 or more of mortgage interest on your rental 
property to any one person, you should receive a Form 
1098 or similar statement showing the interest you paid for 
the year. If you and at least one other person (other than 
your spouse if you file a joint return) were liable for, and 
paid interest on, the mortgage, and the other person re-
ceived the Form 1098, report your share of the interest on 
Schedule E (Form 1040), line 13. Attach a statement to 
your return showing the name and address of the other 
person. On the dotted line next to line 13, enter “See at-
tached.”
Legal and other professional fees.  Y ou can deduct, as 
a rental expense, legal and other professional expenses 
such as tax return preparation fees you paid to prepare 
Schedule E, Part I. For example, on your 2023 Sched-
ule E, you can deduct fees paid in 2023 to prepare Part I 
of your 2022 Schedule E. Y ou can also deduct, as a rental 
expense, any expense (other than federal taxes and pen-
alties) you paid to resolve a tax underpayment related to 
your rental activities.
Local benefit taxes.  In most cases, you can’t deduct 
charges for local benefits that increase the value of your 
property, such as charges for putting in streets, sidewalks, 
or water and sewer systems. These charges are nonde-
preciable capital expenditures and must be added to the 
basis of your property. However, you can deduct local 
benefit taxes that are for maintaining, repairing, or paying 
interest charges for the benefits.
Local transportation expenses. Y ou may be able to de-
duct your ordinary and necessary local transportation ex-
penses if you incur them to collect rental income or to 
manage, conserve, or maintain your rental property. How-
ever, transportation expenses incurred to travel between 
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal 
Use of Dwelling)
5

Page 6 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your home and a rental property generally constitute non-
deductible commuting costs unless you use your home as 
your principal place of business. See Pub. 587, Business 
Use of Y our Home, for information on determining if your 
home office qualifies as a principal place of business.
Generally, if you use your personal car, pickup truck, or 
light van for rental activities, you can deduct the expenses 
using one of two methods: actual expenses or the stand-
ard mileage rate. For 2023, the standard mileage rate is 
65.5 cents a mile. For more information, see chapter 4 of 
Pub. 463. 
T o deduct car expenses under either method, you 
must keep records that follow the rules in chap-
ter 5 of Pub. 463. In addition, you must complete 
Form 4562, Part V , and attach it to your tax return.
Pre-rental expenses. Y ou can deduct your ordinary and 
necessary expenses for managing, conserving, or main-
taining rental property from the time you make it available 
for rent.
Rental of equipment.  Y ou can deduct the rent you pay 
for equipment that you use for rental purposes. However, 
in some cases, lease contracts are actually purchase con-
tracts. If so, you can’t deduct these payments. Y ou can re-
cover the cost of purchased equipment through deprecia-
tion.
Rental of property. Y ou can deduct the rent you pay for 
property that you use for rental purposes. If you buy a 
leasehold for rental purposes, you can deduct an equal 
part of the cost each year over the term of the lease.
Travel expenses. Y ou can deduct the ordinary and nec-
essary expenses of traveling away from home if the pri-
mary purpose of the trip is to collect rental income or to 
manage, conserve, or maintain your rental property. Y ou 
must properly allocate your expenses between rental and 
nonrental activities. Y ou can’t deduct the cost of traveling 
away from home if the primary purpose of the trip is to im-
prove the property. The cost of improvements is recovered 
by taking depreciation. For information on travel expenses, 
see chapter 1 of Pub. 463.
T o deduct travel expenses, you must keep records 
that follow the rules in chapter 5 of Pub. 463.
Uncollected rent. If you are a cash basis taxpayer, don’t 
deduct uncollected rent. Because you haven’t included it 
in your income, it’s not deductible.
If you use an accrual method, report income when you 
earn it. If you are unable to collect the rent, you may be 
able to deduct it as a business bad debt. See section 166 
and its regulations for more information about business 
bad debts.
Vacant rental property.  If you hold property for rental 
purposes, you may be able to deduct your ordinary and 
necessary expenses (including depreciation) for manag-
ing, conserving, or maintaining the property while the 
RECORDS
RECORDS
property is vacant. However, you can’t deduct any loss of 
rental income for the period the property is vacant.
Vacant while listed for sale.  If you sell property you 
held for rental purposes, you can deduct the ordinary and 
necessary expenses for managing, conserving, or main-
taining the property until it is sold. If the property isn’t held 
out and available for rent while listed for sale, the expen-
ses aren’t deductible rental expenses.
Points
The term “points” is often used to describe some of the 
charges paid, or treated as paid, by a borrower to take out 
a loan or a mortgage. These charges are also called loan 
origination fees, maximum loan charges, or premium 
charges. Any of these charges (points) that are solely for 
the use of money are interest. Because points are prepaid 
interest, you generally can’t deduct the full amount in the 
year paid, but must deduct the interest over the term of the 
loan.
The method used to figure the amount of points you 
can deduct each year follows the original issue discount 
(OID) rules. In this case, points paid (or treated as paid 
(such as seller paid points)), by a borrower to a lender in-
crease OID which is the excess of:
• Stated redemption price at maturity (generally the sta-
ted principal amount of the mortgage loan) over
• Issue price (generally the amount borrowed reduced 
by the points).
Note. For more detailed information to determine OID 
on a mortgage loan, including how to determine the stated 
redemption price at maturity and issue price of a mort-
gage loan, see the regulations under section 1273.
The first step to determine the amount of your deduc-
tion for the points is to determine whether your total OID 
on the mortgage loan, including the OID resulting from the 
points is de minimis. If the OID isn’t de minimis, you must 
use the constant-yield method to figure how much you can 
deduct.
De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it is less than 
one-fourth of 1% (0.0025) of the stated redemption price 
at maturity multiplied by the number of full years from the 
date of original issue to maturity (term of the loan).
If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one of the fol-
lowing ways to figure the amount of points you can deduct 
each year.
• On a constant-yield basis over the term of the loan.
• On a straight line basis over the term of the loan.
• In proportion to stated interest payments.
• In its entirety at maturity of the loan.
Y ou make this choice by deducting the OID (including the 
points) in a manner consistent with the method chosen on 
your timely filed tax return for the tax year in which the 
loan is issued.
6 Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal 
Use of Dwelling)
Publication 527 (2023)

Page 7 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Carol took out a $100,000 mortgage loan on 
January 1, 2023, to buy a house she will use as a rental 
during 2023. The loan is to be repaid over 30 years. The 
loan requires interest payable each year at a fixed rate. 
During 2023, Carol paid $10,000 of mortgage interest 
(stated interest) to the lender. When the loan was made, 
she paid $1,500 in points to the lender. The amount of the 
OID on the loan is $1,500, which is the difference between 
the stated redemption price at maturity of $100,000 less 
the issue price of $98,500 (the amount borrowed of 
$100,000 minus the points paid of $1,500). Carol deter-
mines that the points (OID) she paid are de minimis based 
on the following computation.
Stated redemption price at maturity (principal amount 
of the loan in this case) .................. $100,000
Multiplied by: The term of the 
loan in complete years ................... × 30
Multiplied by .......................... × 0.0025
De minimis amount ..................... $  7,500
The points (OID) she paid ($1,500) are less than the de 
minimis amount ($7,500). Therefore, Carol has de minimis 
OID and she can choose one of the four ways discussed 
earlier to figure the amount she can deduct each year. Un-
der the straight line method, she can deduct $50 each 
year for 30 years.
Constant-yield method. If the OID (including the points) 
isn’t de minimis, you must use the constant -yield method 
to figure how much you can deduct each year.
Y ou figure your deduction for the first year in the follow-
ing manner.
1. Determine the issue price of the loan. If you paid 
points on the loan, the issue price is generally the dif-
ference between the amount borrowed and the points.
2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to maturity (de-
fined later).
3. Subtract any qualified stated interest payments (de-
fined later) from the result in (2). This is the OID you 
can deduct in the first year.
Yield to maturity (YTM).  This rate is generally shown 
in the literature you receive from your lender. If you don’t 
have this information, consult your lender or tax advisor. In 
general, the YTM is the discount rate that, when used in 
computing the present value of all principal and interest 
payments, produces an amount equal to the issue price of 
the loan.
Qualified stated interest (QSI). In general, this is the 
stated interest that is unconditionally payable in cash or 
property (other than another debt instrument of the bor-
rower) at least annually over the term of the loan at a fixed 
rate.
Example—Year 1. The facts are the same as in the 
previous example. The YTM on Carol's loan is 10. 2467%, 
compounded annually.
She figured the amount of points (OID) she could de-
duct in 2023 as follows.
Amount borrowed ...................... $100,000
Minus: Points (OID) ..................... – 1,500
Issue price of the loan .................... $ 98,500
Multiplied by: YTM ...................... × 0.102467
T otal............................... 10,093
Minus: QSI ........................... – 10,000
Points (OID) deductible in 2023 ............. $     93
T o figure your deduction in any subsequent year, you 
start with the adjusted issue price. T o get the adjusted is-
sue price, add to the issue price figured in Y ear 1 any OID 
previously deducted. Then, follow steps (2) and (3), ear-
lier.
Example—Year 2.  Carol figured the deduction for 
2024 as follows.
Issue price ........................... $98,500
Plus: Points (OID) deducted 
in 2023 ............................ + 93
Adjusted issue price ..................... $98,593
Multiplied by: YTM ...................... × 0.102467
T otal............................... 10,103
Minus: QSI ........................... – 10,000
Points (OID) deductible in 2024 ............. $ 103
Loan or mortgage ends.  If your loan or mortgage ends, 
you may be able to deduct any remaining points (OID) in 
the tax year in which the loan or mortgage ends. A loan or 
mortgage may end due to a refinancing, prepayment, fore-
closure, or similar event. However, if the refinancing is with 
the same lender, the remaining points (OID) generally 
aren’t deductible in the year in which the refinancing oc-
curs, but may be deductible over the term of the new mort-
gage or loan.
Points when loan refinance is more than the previous 
outstanding balance. When you refinance a rental prop-
erty for more than the previous outstanding balance, the 
portion of the points allocable to loan proceeds not rela-
ted to rental use generally can’t be deducted as a rental 
expense.
Example. Y ou refinanced a loan with a balance of 
$100,000. The amount of the new loan was $120,000. Y ou 
used the additional $20,000 to purchase a car. The points 
allocable to the $20,000 would be treated as nondeducti-
ble personal interest.
Repairs and Improvements
Generally, an expense for repairing or maintaining your 
rental property may be deducted if you aren’t required to 
capitalize the expense.
Improvements. Y ou must capitalize any expense you 
pay to improve your rental property. An expense is for an 
improvement if it results in a betterment to your property, 
restores your property, or adapts your property to a new or 
different use. T able 1-1 shows examples of many improve-
ments.
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal 
Use of Dwelling)
7

Page 8 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Betterments. Expenses that may result in a better-
ment to your property include expenses for fixing a pre-ex-
isting defect or condition, enlarging or expanding your 
property, or increasing the capacity, strength, or quality of 
your property.
Restoration. Expenses that may be for restoration in-
clude expenses for replacing a substantial structural part 
of your property, repairing damage to your property after 
you properly adjusted the basis of your property as a re-
sult of a casualty loss, or rebuilding your property to a 
like-new condition.
Adaptation. Expenses that may be for adaptation in-
clude expenses for altering your property to a use that isn’t 
consistent with the intended ordinary use of your property 
when you began renting the property.
De minimis safe harbor for tangible property.  If 
you elect this de minimis safe harbor for your rental activity 
for the tax year, you aren’t required to capitalize the de 
minimis costs of acquiring or producing certain real and 
tangible personal property and may deduct these 
amounts as rental expenses on line 19 of Schedule E. For 
more information on electing and using the de minimis 
safe harbor for tangible property, see T angible Property 
Regulations-Frequently Asked Questions.
Safe harbor for routine maintenance.  If you deter-
mine that your cost was for an improvement to a building 
or equipment, you may still be able to deduct your cost un-
der the routine maintenance safe harbor. See T angible 
Property Regulations-Frequently Asked Questions  for 
more information.
Separate the costs of repairs and improvements, 
and keep accurate records. Y ou will need to know 
the cost of improvements when you sell or depre-
ciate your property.
The expenses you capitalize for improving your prop-
erty can generally be depreciated as if the improvement 
were separate property.
RECORDS
2.
Depreciation of Rental 
Property
Y ou recover the cost of income -producing property 
through yearly tax deductions. Y ou do this by depreciating 
the property; that is, by deducting some of the cost each 
year on your tax return.
Three factors determine how much depreciation you can 
deduct each year: (1) your basis in the property, (2) the re-
covery period for the property, and (3) the depreciation 
method used. Y ou can’t simply deduct your mortgage or 
principal payments, or the cost of furniture, fixtures, and 
equipment, as an expense.
Y ou can deduct depreciation only on the part of your prop-
erty used for rental purposes. Depreciation reduces your 
basis for figuring gain or loss on a later sale or exchange.
Y ou may have to use Form 4562 to figure and report your 
depreciation. See Which Forms T o Use in chapter 3. Also, 
see Pub. 946.
Section 179 deduction.  The section 179 deduction is a 
means of recovering part or all of the cost of certain quali-
fying property in the year you place the property in serv-
ice. It is separate from your depreciation deduction. See 
chapter 2 of Pub. 946 for more information about claiming 
this deduction.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT). If you use accelerated 
depreciation, you may be subject to the AMT . Accelerated 
depreciation allows you to deduct more depreciation ear-
lier in the recovery period than you could deduct using a 
straight line method (same deduction each year).
The prescribed depreciation methods for rental real es-
tate aren’t accelerated, so the depreciation deduction isn’t 
adjusted for the AMT . However, accelerated methods are 
generally used for other property connected with rental 
activities (for example, appliances and wall -to-wall 
carpeting).
Examples of Improvements
Additions
Bedroom
Bathroom
Deck
Garage
Porch
Patio
 
Lawn & Grounds
Landscaping
Driveway
Walkway
Fence
Retaining wall
Sprinkler system
Swimming pool
Miscellaneous
Storm windows, doors
New roof
Central vacuum
Wiring upgrades
Satellite dish
Security system 
 
Heating & Air Conditioning
Heating system
Central air conditioning
Furnace
Duct work
Central humidifier
Filtration system
Plumbing
Septic system
Water heater
Soft water system
Filtration system
 
Interior Improvements
Built-in appliances
Kitchen modernization
Flooring
Wall-to-wall carpeting
 
Insulation
Attic
Walls, floor
Pipes, duct work
T able 1-1.
8 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Publication 527 (2023)

Page 9 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
T o find out if you are subject to the AMT , see the In-
structions for Form 6251.
The Basics
The following section discusses the information you will 
need to have about the rental property and the decisions 
to be made before figuring your depreciation deduction.
What Rental Property Can Be 
Depreciated?
Y ou can depreciate your property if it meets all the follow-
ing requirements.
• Y ou own the property.
• Y ou use the property in your business or income-pro-
ducing activity (such as rental property).
• The property has a determinable useful life.
• The property is expected to last more than 1 year.
Property you own. T o claim depreciation, you must usu-
ally be the owner of the property. Y ou are considered to be 
the owner of the property even if it’s subject to a debt.
Rented property. Generally, if you pay rent for prop-
erty, you can’t depreciate that property. Usually, only the 
owner can depreciate it. However, if you make permanent 
improvements to leased property, you may be able to de-
preciate the improvements. See Additions or improve-
ments to property , later in this chapter, under Recovery 
Periods Under GDS.
Cooperative apartments.  If you are a tenant -stock-
holder in a cooperative housing corporation and rent your 
cooperative apartment to others, you can depreciate your 
stock in the corporation. See chapter 4.
Property having a determinable useful life.  T o be de-
preciable, your property must have a determinable useful 
life. This means that it must be something that wears out, 
decays, gets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its 
value from natural causes.
What Rental Property Can’t Be Depreciated?
Certain property can’t be depreciated. This includes land 
and certain excepted property.
Land. Y ou can’t depreciate the cost of land because land 
generally doesn’t wear out, become obsolete, or get used 
up. But if it does, the loss is accounted for upon disposi-
tion. The costs of clearing, grading, planting, and land-
scaping are usually all part of the cost of land and can’t be 
depreciated. Y ou may, however, be able to depreciate cer-
tain land preparation costs if the costs are so closely as-
sociated with other depreciable property that you can de-
termine a life for them along with the life of the associated 
property.
Example. Y ou built a new house to use as a rental and 
paid for grading, clearing, seeding, and planting bushes 
and trees. Some of the bushes and trees were planted 
right next to the house, while others were planted around 
the outer border of the lot. If you replace the house, you 
would have to destroy the bushes and trees right next to it. 
These bushes and trees are closely associated with the 
house, so they have a determinable useful life. Therefore, 
you can depreciate them. Add your other land preparation 
costs to the basis of your land because they have no de-
terminable life and you can’t depreciate them.
Excepted property. Even if the property meets all the re-
quirements listed earlier under What Rental Property Can 
Be Depreciated , you can’t depreciate the following prop-
erty.
• Property placed in service and disposed of (or taken 
out of business use) in the same year.
• Equipment used to build capital improvements. Y ou 
must add otherwise allowable depreciation on the 
equipment during the period of construction to the ba-
sis of your improvements.
For more information, see chapter 1 of Pub. 946.
When Does Depreciation Begin and 
End?
Y ou begin to depreciate your rental property when you 
place it in service for the production of income. Y ou stop 
depreciating it either when you have fully recovered your 
cost or other basis, or when you retire it from service, 
whichever happens first.
Placed in Service
Y ou place property in service in a rental activity when it is 
ready and available for a specific use in that activity. Even 
if you aren’t using the property, it is in service when it is 
ready and available for its specific use.
Example 1.  On November 22 of last year, you pur-
chased a dishwasher for your rental property. The appli-
ance was delivered on December 7, but wasn’t installed 
and ready for use until January 3 of this year. Because the 
dishwasher wasn’t ready for use last year, it isn’t consid-
ered placed in service until this year.
If the appliance had been installed and ready for use 
when it was delivered in December of last year, it would 
have been considered placed in service in December, 
even if it wasn’t actually used until this year.
Example 2. On April 6, you purchased a house to use 
as residential rental property. Y ou made extensive repairs 
to the house and had it ready for rent on July 5. Y ou began 
to advertise the house for rent in July and actually rented it 
beginning September 1. The house is considered placed 
in service in July when it was ready and available for rent. 
Y ou can begin to depreciate the house in July.
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property 9

Page 10 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 3. Y ou moved from your home in July. During 
August and September, you made several repairs to the 
house. On October 1, you listed the property for rent with 
a real estate company, which rented it on December 1. 
The property is considered placed in service on October 
1, the date when it was available for rent.
Conversion to business use.  If you place property in 
service in a personal activity, you can’t claim depreciation. 
However, if you change the property's use to business or 
the production of income, you can begin to depreciate it at 
the time of the change. Y ou place the property in service 
for business or income -producing use on the date of the 
change.
Example. Y ou bought a house and used it as your per-
sonal home several years before you converted it to rental 
property. Although its specific use was personal and no 
depreciation was allowable, you placed the home in serv-
ice when you began using it as your home. Y ou can begin 
to claim depreciation in the year you converted it to rental 
property because at that time its use changed to the pro-
duction of income.
Idle Property
Continue to claim a deduction for depreciation on property 
used in your rental activity even if it is temporarily idle (not 
in use). For example, if you must make repairs after a ten-
ant moves out, you still depreciate the rental property dur-
ing the time it isn’t available for rent.
Cost or Other Basis Fully Recovered
Y ou must stop depreciating property when the total of your 
yearly depreciation deductions equals your cost or other 
basis of your property. For this purpose, your yearly depre-
ciation deductions include any depreciation that you were 
allowed to claim, even if you didn’t claim it. See Basis of 
Depreciable Property, later.
Retired From Service
Y ou stop depreciating property when you retire it from 
service, even if you haven’t fully recovered its cost or other 
basis. Y ou retire property from service when you perma-
nently withdraw it from use in a trade or business or from 
use in the production of income because of any of the fol-
lowing events.
• Y ou sell or exchange the property.
• Y ou convert the property to personal use.
• Y ou abandon the property.
• The property is destroyed.
Depreciation Methods
Generally, you must use the Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (MACRS) to depreciate residential 
rental property placed in service after 1986.
If you placed rental property in service before 1987, you 
are using one of the following methods.
• Accelerated Cost Recovery System (ACRS) for prop-
erty placed in service after 1980 but before 1987.
• Straight line or declining balance method over the 
useful life of property placed in service before 1981.
See MACRS Depreciation, later, for more information.
Rental property placed in service before 2023.  Con-
tinue to use the same method of figuring depreciation that 
you used in the past.
Use of real property changed.  Generally, you must use 
MACRS to depreciate real property that you acquired for 
personal use before 1987 and changed to business or in-
come-producing use after 1986. This includes your resi-
dence that you changed to rental use. See Property 
Owned or Used in 1986  in chapter 1 of Pub. 946 for those 
situations in which MACRS isn’t allowed.
Improvements made after 1986.  T reat an improvement 
made after 1986 to property you placed in service before 
1987 as separate depreciable property. As a result, you 
can depreciate that improvement as separate property un-
der MACRS if it is the type of property that otherwise 
qualifies for MACRS depreciation. For more information 
about improvements, see Additions or improvements to 
property, later in this chapter, under Recovery Periods Un-
der GDS.
This publication discusses MACRS depreciation 
only. If you need information about depreciating 
property placed in service before 1987, see Pub. 
534.
Basis of Depreciable Property
The basis of property used in a rental activity is generally 
its adjusted basis when you place it in service in that activ-
ity. This is its cost or other basis when you acquired it, ad-
justed for certain items occurring before you place it in 
service in the rental activity.
If you depreciate your property under MACRS, you may 
also have to reduce your basis by certain deductions and 
credits with respect to the property.
Basis and adjusted basis are explained in the following 
discussions.
If you used the property for personal purposes be-
fore changing it to rental use, its basis for depreci-
ation is the lesser of its adjusted basis or its FMV 
when you change it to rental use. See Basis of Property 
Changed to Rental Use in chapter 4.
Cost Basis
The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. The cost 
is the amount you pay for it in cash, in debt obligation, in 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
10 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Publication 527 (2023)

Page 11 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
other property, or in services. Y our cost also includes 
amounts you pay for:
• Sales tax charged on the purchase (but see Exception 
next),
• Freight charges to obtain the property, and
• Installation and testing charges.
Exception. If you deducted state and local general 
sales taxes as an itemized deduction on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), don’t include as part of your cost basis the 
sales taxes you deducted. Such taxes were deductible be-
fore 1987 and after 2003.
Loans with low or no interest.  If you buy property on 
any payment plan that charges little or no interest, the ba-
sis of your property is your stated purchase price, less the 
amount considered to be unstated interest. See Unstated 
Interest and Original Issue Discount (OID)  in Pub. 537, In-
stallment Sales.
Real property. If you buy real property, such as a build-
ing and land, certain fees and other expenses you pay are 
part of your cost basis in the property.
Real estate taxes. If you buy real property and agree 
to pay real estate taxes on it that were owed by the seller 
and the seller doesn’t reimburse you, the taxes you pay 
are treated as part of your basis in the property. Y ou can’t 
deduct them as taxes paid.
If you reimburse the seller for real estate taxes the 
seller paid for you, you can usually deduct that amount. 
Don’t include that amount in your basis in the property.
Settlement fees and other costs.  The following set-
tlement fees and closing costs for buying the property are 
part of your basis in the property.
• Abstract fees.
• Charges for installing utility services.
• Legal fees.
• Recording fees.
• Surveys.
• T ransfer taxes.
• Title insurance.
• Any amounts the seller owes that you agree to pay, 
such as back taxes or interest, recording or mortgage 
fees, charges for improvements or repairs, and sales 
commissions.
The following are settlement fees and closing costs you 
can’t include in your basis in the property.
1. Fire insurance premiums.
2. Rent or other charges relating to occupancy of the 
property before closing.
3. Charges connected with getting or refinancing a loan, 
such as:
a. Points (discount points, loan origination fees),
b. Loan assumption fees,
c. Cost of a credit report, and
d. Fees for an appraisal required by a lender.
Also, don’t include amounts placed in escrow for the fu-
ture payment of items such as taxes and insurance.
Assumption of a mortgage.  If you buy property and 
become liable for an existing mortgage on the property, 
your basis is the amount you pay for the property plus the 
amount remaining to be paid on the mortgage.
Example. Y ou buy a building for $60,000 cash and as-
sume a mortgage of $240,000 on it. Y our basis is 
$300,000.
Separating cost of land and buildings.  If you buy 
buildings and your cost includes the cost of the land on 
which they stand, you must divide the cost between the 
land and the buildings to figure the basis for depreciation 
of the buildings. The part of the cost that you allocate to 
each asset is the ratio of the FMV of that asset to the FMV 
of the whole property at the time you buy it.
If you aren’t certain of the FMVs of the land and the 
buildings, you can divide the cost between them based on 
their assessed values for real estate tax purposes.
Example. Y ou buy a house and land for $200,000. The 
purchase contract doesn’t specify how much of the pur-
chase price is for the house and how much is for the land.
The latest real estate tax assessment on the property 
was based on an assessed value of $160,000, of which 
$136,000 was for the house and $24,000 was for the land.
Y ou can allocate 85% ($136,000 ÷ $160,000) of the 
purchase price to the house and 15% ($24,000 ÷ 
$160,000) of the purchase price to the land.
Y our basis in the house is $170,000 (85% of $200,000) 
and your basis in the land is $30,000 (15% of $200,000).
Basis Other Than Cost
Y ou can’t use cost as a basis for property that you re-
ceived:
• In return for services you performed;
• In an exchange for other property;
• As a gift;
• From your spouse, or from your former spouse as the 
result of a divorce; or
• As an inheritance.
If you received property in one of these ways, see Pub. 
551 for information on how to figure your basis.
Adjusted Basis
T o figure your property's basis for depreciation, you may 
have to make certain adjustments (increases and decrea-
ses) to the basis of the property for events occurring be-
tween the time you acquired the property and the time you 
placed it in service for business or the production of in-
come. The result of these adjustments to the basis is the 
adjusted basis.
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property 11

Page 12 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Increases to basis.  Y ou must increase the basis of any 
property by the cost of all items properly added to a capi-
tal account. These include the following.
• The cost of any additions or improvements made be-
fore placing your property into service as a rental that 
have a useful life of more than 1 year.
• Amounts spent after a casualty to restore the dam-
aged property.
• The cost of extending utility service lines to the prop-
erty.
• Legal fees, such as the cost of defending and perfect-
ing title, or settling zoning issues.
Additions or improvements. Add to the basis of your 
property the amount an addition or improvement actually 
costs you, including any amount you borrowed to make 
the addition or improvement. This includes all direct costs, 
such as material and labor, but doesn’t include your own 
labor. It also includes all expenses related to the addition 
or improvement.
For example, if you had an architect draw up plans for 
remodeling your property, the architect's fee is a part of 
the cost of the remodeling. Or, if you had your lot surveyed 
to put up a fence, the cost of the survey is a part of the 
cost of the fence.
Keep separate accounts for depreciable additions or 
improvements made after you place the property in serv-
ice in your rental activity. For information on depreciating 
additions or improvements, see Additions or improve-
ments to property , later in this chapter, under Recovery 
Periods Under GDS.
The cost of landscaping improvements is usually 
treated as an addition to the basis of the land, 
which isn’t depreciable. However, see What 
Rental Property Can’t Be Depreciated, earlier.
Assessments for local improvements.  Assess-
ments for items which tend to increase the value of prop-
erty, such as streets and sidewalks, must be added to the 
basis of the property. For example, if your city installs 
curbing on the street in front of your house, and assesses 
you and your neighbors for its cost, you must add the as-
sessment to the basis of your property. Also, add the cost 
of legal fees paid to obtain a decrease in an assessment 
levied against property to pay for local improvements. Y ou 
can’t deduct these items as taxes or depreciate them.
However, you can deduct assessments for the purpose 
of maintenance or repairs or for the purpose of meeting in-
terest charges related to the improvements. Don’t add 
them to your basis in the property.
Deducting vs. capitalizing costs.  Don’t add to your 
basis costs you can deduct as current expenses. How-
ever, there are certain costs you can choose either to de-
duct or to capitalize. If you capitalize these costs, include 
them in your basis. If you deduct them, don’t include them 
in your basis.
The costs you may choose to deduct or capitalize in-
clude carrying charges, such as interest and taxes, that 
you must pay to own property.
CAUTION
!
For more information about deducting or capitalizing 
costs and how to make the election, see Carrying 
Charges in sections 263(A) and 266.
Decreases to basis.  Y ou must decrease the basis of 
your property by any items that represent a return of your 
cost. These include the following.
• Insurance or other payment you receive as the result 
of a casualty or theft loss. 
• Casualty loss not covered by insurance for which you 
took a deduction.
• Amount(s) you receive for granting an easement. 
• Residential energy credits you were allowed before 
1986 or after 2005 if you added the cost of the energy 
items to the basis of your home. 
• Exclusion from income of subsidies for energy conser-
vation measures.
• Special depreciation allowance or a section 179 de-
duction claimed on qualified property.
• Depreciation you deducted or could have deducted on 
your tax returns under the method of depreciation you 
chose. If you didn’t deduct enough or deducted too 
much in any year, see Depreciation under Decreases 
to Basis in Pub. 551.
If your rental property was previously used as your main 
home, you must also decrease the basis by the following.
• Gain you postponed from the sale of your main home 
before May 7, 1997, if the replacement home was con-
verted to your rental property.
• District of Columbia first-time homebuyer credit al-
lowed on the purchase of your main home after Au-
gust 4, 1997, and before January 1, 2012.
• Amount of qualified principal residence indebtedness 
discharged on or after January 1, 2007.
Special Depreciation 
Allowance
For 2023, some properties used in connection with resi-
dential real property activities may qualify for a special de-
preciation allowance. This allowance is figured before you 
figure your regular depreciation deduction. See chapter 3 
of Pub. 946 for details. Also, see the instructions for Form 
4562, line 14.
If you qualify for, but choose not to take, a special de-
preciation allowance, you must attach a statement to your 
return. The details of this election are in chapter 3 of Pub. 
946 and the instructions for Form 4562, line 14.
MACRS Depreciation
Most business and investment property placed in service 
after 1986 is depreciated using MACRS. 
12 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Publication 527 (2023)

Page 13 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This section explains how to determine which MACRS 
depreciation system applies to your property. It also dis-
cusses other information you need to know before you can 
figure depreciation under MACRS. This information in-
cludes the property's:
• Recovery class,
• Applicable recovery period,
• Convention,
• Placed-in-service date,
• Basis for depreciation, and
• Depreciation method.
Depreciation Systems
MACRS consists of two systems that determine how you 
depreciate your property —the General Depreciation Sys-
tem (GDS) and the Alternative Depreciation System 
(ADS). Y ou must use GDS unless you are specifically re-
quired by law to use ADS or you elect to use ADS.
Excluded Property
Y ou can’t use MACRS for certain personal property (such 
as furniture or appliances) placed in service in your rental 
property in 2023 if it had been previously placed in service 
before 1987, when MACRS became effective.
In most cases, personal property is excluded from 
MACRS if you (or a person related to you) owned or used 
it in 1986 or if your tenant is a person (or someone related 
to the person) who owned or used it in 1986. However, the 
property isn’t excluded if your 2023 deduction under 
MACRS (using a half-year convention) is less than the de-
duction you would have under ACRS. For more informa-
tion, see What Method Can Y ou Use T o Depreciate Y our 
Property? in chapter 1 of Pub. 946.
Electing ADS
If you choose, you can use the ADS method for most 
property. Under ADS, you use the straight line method of 
depreciation.
The election of ADS for one item in a class of property 
generally applies to all property in that class placed in 
service during the tax year of the election. However, the 
election applies on a property -by-property basis for resi-
dential rental property and nonresidential real property.
If you choose to use ADS for your residential rental 
property, the election must be made in the first year the 
property is placed in service. Once you make this election, 
you can never revoke it.
For property placed in service during 2023, you make 
the election to use ADS by entering the depreciation on 
Form 4562, Part III, Section C, line 20c.
Property Classes Under GDS
Each item of property that can be depreciated under 
MACRS is assigned to a property class, determined by its 
class life. The property class generally determines the de-
preciation method, recovery period, and convention.
The property classes under GDS are: 
• 3-year property,
• 5-year property,
• 7-year property,
• 10-year property,
• 15-year property,
• 20-year property,
• Nonresidential real property, and
• Residential rental property.
Under MACRS, property that you placed in service dur-
ing 2023 in your rental activities generally falls into one of 
the following classes.
• 5-year property. This class includes computers and 
peripheral equipment, office machinery (typewriters, 
calculators, copiers, etc.), automobiles, and light 
trucks.
This class also includes appliances, carpeting, and 
furniture used in a residential rental real estate activity.
Depreciation is limited on automobiles and other 
property used for transportation and property of a type 
generally used for entertainment, recreation, or 
amusement. See chapter 5 of Pub. 946.
• 7-year property. This class includes office furniture 
and equipment (desks, file cabinets, and similar 
items). This class also includes any property that 
doesn’t have a class life and that hasn’t been designa-
ted by law as being in any other class.
• 15-year property. This class includes roads, fences, 
and shrubbery (if depreciable).
• Residential rental property. This class includes any 
real property that is a rental building or structure (in-
cluding a mobile home) for which 80% or more of the 
gross rental income for the tax year is from dwelling 
units. It doesn’t include a unit in a hotel, motel, inn, or 
other establishment where more than half of the units 
are used on a transient basis. If you live in any part of 
the building or structure, the gross rental income in-
cludes the fair rental value of the part you live in. 
The other property classes generally don’t apply 
to property used in rental activities. These classes 
aren’t discussed in this publication. See Pub. 946 
for more information.
Recovery Periods Under GDS
The recovery period of property is the number of years 
over which you recover its cost or other basis. The 
CAUTION
!
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property 13

Page 14 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
recovery periods are generally longer under ADS than 
GDS.
The recovery period of property depends on its prop-
erty class. Under GDS, the recovery period of an asset is 
generally the same as its property class.
Class lives and recovery periods for most assets are 
listed in Appendix B of Pub. 946. See T able 2-1 for recov-
ery periods of property commonly used in residential 
rental activities.
Additions or improvements to property.  T reat addi-
tions or improvements you make to your depreciable 
rental property as separate property items for depreciation 
purposes.
The property class and recovery period of the addition 
or improvement are the ones that would apply to the origi-
nal property if you had placed it in service at the same 
time as the addition or improvement.
The recovery period for an addition or improvement to 
property begins on the later of:
• The date the addition or improvement is placed in 
service, or
• The date the property to which the addition or im-
provement was made is placed in service.
Example. Y ou own a residential rental house that you 
have been renting since 1999 and depreciating under 
ACRS. Y ou built an addition onto the house and placed it 
in service in 2023. Y ou must use MACRS for the addition. 
Under GDS, the addition is depreciated as residential 
rental property over 27.5 years.
Conventions
A convention is a method established under MACRS to 
set the beginning and end of the recovery period. The 
convention you use determines the number of months for 
which you can claim depreciation in the year you place 
MACRS Recovery Periods for Property Used in
Rental Activities
T able 2-1.
Keep for Y our Records
MACRS Recovery Period 
Type of Property
General
Depreciation
System
Alternative
Depreciation
System 
Computers and their peripheral equipment ........................................ 5 years 5 years
Office machinery, such as:
• T ypewriters
• Calculators
• Copiers ............................... ............................... 5 years 6 years
Automobiles .............................................................. 5 years 5 years
Light trucks ............................................................... 5 years 5 years
Appliances, such as:
• Stoves
• Refrigerators ............................. ............................. 5 years 9 years
Carpets .................................................................. 5 years 9 years
Furniture used in rental property ................................................ 5 years 9 years
Office furniture and equipment, such as:
• Desks
• Files ................................ ................................ 7 years 10 years
Any property that doesn’t have a class life and that hasn’t been designated by law as being in any 
other class ............................................................... 7 years 12 years
Roads ................................................................... 15 years 20 years
Shrubbery ................................................................ 15 years 20 years
Fences .................................................................. 15 years 20 years
Residential rental property (buildings or structures) and structural components such as furnaces, 
waterpipes, venting, etc. ...................................................... 27.5 years 30 years1
Additions and improvements, such as a new roof .................................... The same recovery period as that of the property 
to which the addition or improvement is made, 
determined as if the property were placed in 
service at the same time as the addition or 
improvement.
1 40 years for property placed in service before January 1, 2018. However, the ADS recovery period for residential rental property placed in service before January 1, 
2018, is 30 years if the property is held by an electing real property trade or business (as defined in section 163(j)(7)(B)) and section 168(g)(1)(A), (B), (C), (D), or (E) 
did not apply to the property before January 1, 2018. 
14 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Publication 527 (2023)

Page 15 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property in service and in the year you dispose of the 
property.
Mid-month convention.  A mid -month convention is 
used for all residential rental property and nonresidential 
real property. Under this convention, you treat all property 
placed in service, or disposed of, during any month as 
placed in service, or disposed of, at the midpoint of that 
month.
Mid-quarter convention. A mid-quarter convention must 
be used if the mid -month convention doesn’t apply and 
the total depreciable basis of MACRS property placed in 
service in the last 3 months of a tax year (excluding non-
residential real property, residential rental property, and 
property placed in service and disposed of in the same 
year) is more than 40% of the total basis of all such prop-
erty you place in service during the year.
Under this convention, you treat all property placed in 
service, or disposed of, during any quarter of a tax year as 
placed in service, or disposed of, at the midpoint of the 
quarter.
Example. During the tax year, you purchased the fol-
lowing items to use in your rental property. Y ou elect not to 
claim the special depreciation allowance discussed ear-
lier.
• A dishwasher for $400 that you placed in service in 
January.
• Used furniture for $100 that you placed in service in 
September.
• A refrigerator for $800 that you placed in service in 
October.
Y ou use the calendar year as your tax year. The total basis 
of all property placed in service that year is $1,300. The 
$800 basis of the refrigerator placed in service during the 
last 3 months of your tax year exceeds $520 (40% × 
$1,300). Y ou must use the mid-quarter convention instead 
of the half-year convention for all three items.
Half-year convention. The half -year convention is used 
if neither the mid -quarter convention nor the mid -month 
convention applies. Under this convention, you treat all 
property placed in service, or disposed of, during a tax 
year as placed in service, or disposed of, at the midpoint 
of that tax year.
If this convention applies, you deduct a half year of de-
preciation for the first year and the last year that you de-
preciate the property. Y ou deduct a full year of deprecia-
tion for any other year during the recovery period.
Figuring Your Depreciation Deduction
Y ou can figure your MACRS depreciation deduction in one 
of two ways. The deduction is substantially the same both 
ways. Y ou can figure the deduction using either:
• The depreciation method and convention that apply 
over the recovery period of the property, or
• The percentage from the MACRS percentage tables.
In this publication, we will use the percentage tables. 
For instructions on how to compute the deduction, see 
chapter 4 of Pub. 946.
Residential rental property.  Y ou must use the straight 
line method and a mid -month convention for residential 
rental property. In the first year that you claim depreciation 
for residential rental property, you can claim depreciation 
only for the number of months the property is in use. Use 
the mid-month convention (explained under Conventions, 
earlier).
5-, 7 -, or 15 -year property.  For property in the 5 - or 
7-year class, use the 200% declining balance (DB) 
method and a half -year convention. However, in limited 
cases, you must use the mid -quarter convention, if it ap-
plies. For property in the 15 -year class, use the 150% DB 
method and a half -year convention, unless the mid -quar-
ter convention applies.
Y ou can also choose to use the 150% DB method for 
property in the 5 - or 7 -year class. The choice to use the 
150% method for one item in a class of property applies to 
all property in that class that is placed in service during 
the tax year of the election. Y ou make this election on 
Form 4562. In Part III, column (f), enter “150 DB.” Once 
you make this election, you can’t change to another 
method.
If you use either the 200% or 150% DB method, figure 
your deduction using the straight line method in the first 
tax year that the use of the straight line method gives you 
an equal or larger deduction than the use of the 200% or 
150% DB method.
Y ou can also choose to use the straight line method 
with a half -year or mid -quarter convention for 5 -, 7 -, or 
15-year property. The choice to use the straight line 
method for one item in a class of property applies to all 
property in that class that is placed in service during the 
tax year of the election. Y ou elect the straight line method 
on Form 4562. In Part III, column (f), enter “S/L.” Once you 
make this election, you can’t change to another method.
MACRS Percentage Tables
Y ou can use the percentages in T able 2-2 to compute an-
nual depreciation under MACRS. The tables show the 
percentages for the first few years or until the change to 
the straight line method is made. See Appendix A of Pub. 
946 for complete tables. The percentages in T ables 2-2a, 
2-2b, and 2 -2c make the change from using the DB 
method to the straight line method in the first tax year that 
the use of the straight line method gives you an equal or 
greater deduction than the use of the DB method.
If you elect to use the straight line method for 5 -, 7-, or 
15-year property, or the 150% DB method for 5 - or 7-year 
property, use the tables in Appendix A of Pub. 946.
How to use the percentage tables.  Y ou must apply the 
table rates to your property's unadjusted basis  (defined 
later) each year of the recovery period.
Once you begin using a percentage table to figure de-
preciation, you must continue to use it for the entire 
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property 15

Page 16 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
recovery period unless there is an adjustment to the basis 
of your property for a reason other than:
1. Depreciation allowed or allowable, or
2. An addition or improvement that is depreciated as a 
separate item of property.
If there is an adjustment for any reason other than (1) or 
(2), for example, because of a deductible casualty loss, 
you can no longer use the table. For the year of the adjust-
ment and for the remaining recovery period, figure depre-
ciation using the property's adjusted basis at the end of 
the year and the appropriate depreciation method, as ex-
plained earlier under Figuring Y our Depreciation Deduc-
tion. See Figuring the Deduction Without Using the T ables 
in chapter 4 of Pub. 946.
Unadjusted basis. This is the same basis you would 
use to figure gain on a sale (see Basis of Depreciable 
Property, earlier), but without reducing your original basis 
by any MACRS depreciation taken in earlier years.
However, you do reduce your original basis by other 
amounts claimed on the property, including:
• Any amortization,
• Any section 179 deduction, and
• Any special depreciation allowance.
For more information, see chapter 4 of Pub. 946.
16 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Publication 527 (2023)

Page 17 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tables 2-2a, 2-2b, and 2 -2c. The percentages in these 
tables take into account the half -year and mid -quarter 
conventions. Use T able 2 -2a for 5 -year property, T a-
ble 2 -2b for 7 -year property, and T able 2-2c for 15 -year 
property. Use the percentage in the second column 
(half-year convention) unless you are required to use the 
mid-quarter convention (explained earlier). If you must use 
the mid -quarter convention, use the column that corre-
sponds to the calendar year quarter in which you placed 
the property in service.
Example 1.  Y ou purchased a stove and refrigerator 
and placed them in service in June. Y our basis in the stove 
is $600 and your basis in the refrigerator is $1,000. Both 
are 5 -year property. Using the half -year convention col-
umn in T able 2-2a, the depreciation percentage for Y ear 1 
is 20%. For that year, your depreciation deduction is $120 
Table 2-2. Optional MACRS GDS Percentage Tables
a. MACRS 5-Year Property (200% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
20.00%
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76
35.00%
26.00
15.60
11.01
11.01
1.38
25.00%
30.00
18.00
11.37
11.37
4.26
15.00%
34.00
20.40
12.24
11.30
7.06
5.00%
38.00
22.80
13.68
10.94
9.58
b. MACRS 7-Year Property (200% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
c. MACRS 15-Year Property (150% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
d. Residential Rental Property-GDS  (27.5-year S/L with mid-month convention)
14.29%
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
25.00%
21.43
15.31
10.93
8.75
8.74
17.85%
23.47
16.76
11.97
8.87
8.87
10.71%
25.51
18.22
13.02
9.30
8.85
3.57%
27.55
19.68
14.06
10.04
8.73
5.00%
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
8.75%
9.13
8.21
7.39
6.65
5.99
6.25%
9.38
8.44
7.59
6.83
6.15
3.75%
9.63
8.66
7.80
7.02
6.31
1.25%
9.88
8.89
8.00
7.20
6.48
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service.
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
Jan.
Feb.
March
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
3.485% 3.636%
3.182
2.879
2.576
2.273
1.970
1.667
1.364
1.061
0.758
0.455
0.152
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
7 5.90 5.90 5.91 5.90 5.90
8 5.90 5.91 5.90 5.90 5.90
7 8.93 8.75 8.87 8.86 8.73
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property 17

Page 18 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
($600 × 20% (0.20)) for the stove and $200 ($1,000 × 
20% (0.20)) for the refrigerator.
For Y ear 2, the depreciation percentage is 32%. That 
year's depreciation deduction will be $192 ($600 × 32% 
(0.32)) for the stove and $320 ($1,000 × 32% (0.32)) for 
the refrigerator.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1, 
except you buy the refrigerator in October instead of June. 
Because the refrigerator was placed in service in the last 3 
months of the tax year, and its basis ($1,000) is more than 
40% of the total basis of all property placed in service dur-
ing the year ($1,600 × 40% (0.40) = $640), you are re-
quired to use the mid-quarter convention to figure depreci-
ation on both the stove and refrigerator.
Because you placed the refrigerator in service in Octo-
ber, you use the fourth quarter column of T able 2 -2a and 
find the depreciation percentage for Y ear 1 is 5%. Y our de-
preciation deduction for the refrigerator is $50 ($1,000 x 
5% (0.05)).
Because you placed the stove in service in June, you 
use the second quarter column of T able 2-2a and find the 
depreciation percentage for Y ear 1 is 25%. For that year, 
your depreciation deduction for the stove is $150 ($600 x 
25% (0.25)).
Table 2-2d. Use this table when you are using the GDS 
27.5-year option for residential rental property. Find the 
row for the month that you placed the property in service. 
Use the percentages listed for that month to figure your 
depreciation deduction. The mid -month convention is 
taken into account in the percentages shown in the table. 
Continue to use the same row (month) under the column 
for the appropriate year.
Example. Y ou purchased a single family rental house 
for $185,000 and placed it in service on February 8. The 
sales contract showed that the building cost $160,000 and 
the land cost $25,000. Y our basis for depreciation is its 
original cost, $160,000. This is the first year of service for 
your residential rental property and you decide to use 
GDS, which has a recovery period of 27.5 years. Using 
T able 2-2d, you find that the depreciation percentage for 
property placed in service in February of Y ear 1 is 
3.182%. That year's depreciation deduction is $5,091 
($160,000 x 3.182% (0.03182)).
Figuring MACRS Depreciation Under 
ADS
T able 2-1 shows the ADS recovery periods for property 
used in rental activities.
See Appendix B of Pub. 946 for other property. If your 
property isn’t listed in Appendix B, it is considered to have 
no class life. Under ADS, personal property with no class 
life is depreciated using a recovery period of 12 years.
Use the mid -month convention for residential rental 
property and nonresidential real property. For all other 
property, use the half -year or mid -quarter convention, as 
appropriate. 
See Pub. 946 for ADS depreciation tables.
Claiming the Correct Amount 
of Depreciation
Y ou should claim the correct amount of depreciation each 
tax year. If you didn’t claim all the depreciation you were 
entitled to deduct, you must still reduce your basis in the 
property by the full amount of depreciation that you could 
have deducted. For more information, see Depreciation 
under Decreases to Basis in Pub. 551.
If you deducted an incorrect amount of depreciation for 
property in any year, you may be able to make a correction 
by filing Form 1040 -X, Amended U.S. Individual Income 
T ax Return. If you aren’t allowed to make the correction on 
an amended return, you may be able to change your ac-
counting method to claim the correct amount of deprecia-
tion. See How Do Y ou Correct Depreciation Deductions? 
in Pub. 946 for more information.
3.
Reporting Rental Income, 
Expenses, and Losses
Figuring the net income or loss for a residential rental ac-
tivity may involve more than just listing the income and de-
ductions on Schedule E (Form 1040). There are activities 
that don’t qualify to use Schedule E, such as when the ac-
tivity isn’t engaged in to make a profit or when you provide 
substantial services in conjunction with the property.
There are also the limitations that may need to be applied 
if you have a net loss on Schedule E. There are two: (1) 
the limitation based on the amount of investment you have 
at risk in your rental activity, and (2) the special limits im-
posed on passive activities.
Y ou may also have a gain or loss related to your rental 
property from a casualty or theft. This is considered sepa-
rately from the income and expense information you report 
on Schedule E.
Which Forms To Use
The basic form for reporting residential rental income and 
expenses is Schedule E (Form 1040). However, don’t use 
that schedule to report a not -for-profit activity. See Not 
Rented for Profit , later, in chapter 4. There are also other 
rental situations in which forms other than Schedule E 
would be used.
18 Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and 
Losses
Publication 527 (2023)

Page 19 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule E (Form 1040)
If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and provide 
basic services such as heat and light, trash collection, 
etc., you normally report your rental income and expenses 
on Schedule E, Part I.
List your total income, expenses, and depreciation for 
each rental property. Be sure to enter the number of fair 
rental and personal-use days on line 2.
If you have more than three rental or royalty properties, 
complete and attach as many Schedules E as are needed 
to separately list all of the properties. However, fill in lines 
23a through 26 on only one Schedule E. The figures on 
lines 23a through 26 on that Schedule E should be the 
combined totals for all properties reported on your Sched-
ules E.
On Schedule E, page 1, line 18, enter the depreciation 
you are claiming for each property. Y ou may also need to 
attach Form 4562 to claim some or all of your deprecia-
tion. See Form 4562, later, for more information.
If you have a loss from your rental real estate activity, 
you may also need to complete one or both of the follow-
ing forms.
• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. See At-Risk Rules, 
later. Also, see Pub. 925.
• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations. See 
Passive Activity Limits, later.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report income or loss 
from partnerships, S corporations, estates, trusts, and real 
estate mortgage investment conduits. If you need to use 
page 2 of Schedule E and you have more than three rental 
or royalty properties, be sure to use page 2 of the same 
Schedule E you used to enter the combined totals for your 
rental activity on page 1. Also, include the amount from 
line 26 (Part I) in the “T otal income or (loss)” on line 41 
(Part V).
Form 4562. Y ou must complete and attach Form 4562 if 
you are claiming the following depreciation in your rental 
activity.
• Depreciation, including the special depreciation allow-
ance, on property placed in service during 2023.
• Depreciation on listed property (such as a car), re-
gardless of when it was placed in service.
Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your own work-
sheet. Y ou don’t have to attach these computations to 
your return, but you should keep them in your records for 
future reference.
Y ou may also need to attach Form 4562 if you are 
claiming a section 179 deduction, amortizing costs that 
began during 2023, or claiming any other deduction for a 
vehicle, including the standard mileage rate or lease ex-
penses.
See Pub. 946 for information on preparing Form 4562.
Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or 
Loss From Business
Generally, Schedule C is used when you provide substan-
tial services in conjunction with the property or the rental 
is part of a trade or business as a real estate dealer.
Providing substantial services. If you provide substan-
tial services that are primarily for your tenant's conven-
ience, such as regular cleaning, changing linen, or maid 
service, you report your rental income and expenses on 
Schedule C. Use Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership 
Income, if your rental activity is a partnership (including a 
partnership with your spouse unless it is a qualified joint 
venture). Substantial services don’t include the furnishing 
of heat and light, cleaning of public areas, trash collection, 
etc. For more information, see Pub. 334, T ax Guide for 
Small Business. Also, you may have to pay self -employ-
ment tax on your rental income using Schedule SE (Form 
1040), Self -Employment T ax. For a discussion of “sub-
stantial services,” see Real Estate Rents  in chapter 5 of 
Pub. 334.
Qualified Joint Venture (QJV)
If you and your spouse each materially participate (see 
Material participation  under Passive Activity Limits , later) 
as the only members of a jointly owned and operated real 
estate business, and you file a joint return for the tax year, 
you can make a joint election to be treated as a QJV in-
stead of a partnership. This election, in most cases, won’t 
increase the total tax owed on the joint return, but it does 
give each of you credit for social security earnings on 
which retirement benefits are based and for Medicare cov-
erage if your rental income is subject to self -employment 
tax.
If you make this election, you must report rental real es-
tate income on Schedule E (or Schedule C, if you provide 
substantial services). Y ou won’t be required to file Form 
1065 for any year the election is in effect. Rental real es-
tate income generally isn’t included in net earnings from 
self-employment subject to self -employment tax and is 
generally subject to the passive activity limits.
If you and your spouse filed a Form 1065 for the year 
prior to the election, the partnership terminates at the end 
of the tax year immediately preceding the year the election 
takes effect.
For more information on QJVs, go to IRS.gov/QJV.
Limits on Rental Losses
If you have a loss from your rental real estate activity, two 
sets of rules may limit the amount of loss you can report 
on Schedule E. Y ou must consider these rules in the order 
shown below. Both are discussed in this section.
1. At-risk rules. These rules are applied first if there is in-
vestment in your rental real estate activity for which 
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and 
Losses
19

Page 20 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you aren’t at risk. This applies only if the real property 
was placed in service after 1986.
2. Passive activity limits. Generally, rental real estate ac-
tivities are considered passive activities and losses 
aren’t deductible unless you have income from other 
passive activities to offset them. However, there are 
exceptions.
Excess business loss limitation.  In addition to at -risk 
rules and passive activity limits, excess business loss 
rules apply to losses from all noncorporate trades or busi-
nesses. This business loss limitation is figured using Form 
461 after you complete your Schedule E. Any limitation to 
your loss resulting from these rules will not be reflected on 
your Schedule E. Instead, it will be added to your income 
on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR and treated as a net operating 
loss that must be carried forward and deducted in a sub-
sequent year.
At-Risk Rules
Y ou may be subject to the at-risk rules if you have:
• A loss from an activity carried on as a trade or busi-
ness or for the production of income, and
• Amounts invested in the activity for which you aren’t 
fully at risk.
Losses from holding real property (other than mineral 
property) placed in service before 1987 aren’t subject to 
the at-risk rules.
In most cases, any loss from an activity subject to the 
at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of the total 
amount you have at risk in the activity at the end of the tax 
year. Y ou are considered at risk in an activity to the extent 
of cash and the adjusted basis of other property you con-
tributed to the activity and certain amounts borrowed for 
use in the activity. Any loss that is disallowed because of 
the at-risk limits is treated as a deduction from the same 
activity in the next tax year. See Pub. 925 for a discussion 
of the at-risk rules.
Form 6198.  If you are subject to the at -risk rules, file 
Form 6198 with your tax return.
Passive Activity Limits
In most cases, all rental real estate activities (except those 
of certain real estate professionals , discussed later) are 
passive activities. For this purpose, a rental activity is an 
activity from which you receive income mainly for the use 
of tangible property, rather than for services. For a discus-
sion of activities that aren’t considered rental activities, 
see Rental Activities in Pub. 925.
Deductions or losses from passive activities are limited. 
Y ou generally can’t offset income, other than passive in-
come, with losses from passive activities. Nor can you off-
set taxes on income, other than passive income, with 
credits resulting from passive activities. Any excess loss 
or credit is carried forward to the next tax year. Exceptions 
to the rules for figuring passive activity limits for personal 
use of a dwelling unit and for rental real estate with active 
participation are discussed later.
For a detailed discussion of these rules, see Pub. 925.
Real estate professionals.  If you are a real estate pro-
fessional, complete line 43 of Schedule E.
Y ou qualify as a real estate professional for the tax year 
if you meet both of the following requirements.
• More than half of the personal services you perform in 
all trades or businesses during the tax year are per-
formed in real property trades or businesses in which 
you materially participate.
• Y ou perform more than 750 hours of services during 
the tax year in real property trades or businesses in 
which you materially participate.
If you qualify as a real estate professional, rental real es-
tate activities in which you materially participated aren’t 
passive activities. For purposes of determining whether 
you materially participated in your rental real estate activi-
ties, each interest in rental real estate is a separate activity 
unless you elect to treat all your interests in rental real es-
tate as one activity.
Don’t count personal services you perform as an em-
ployee in real property trades or businesses unless you 
are a 5% owner of your employer. Y ou are a 5% owner if 
you own (or are considered to own) more than 5% of your 
employer's outstanding stock, or capital or profits interest.
Don’t count your spouse's personal services to deter-
mine whether you met the requirements listed earlier to 
qualify as a real estate professional. However, you can 
count your spouse's participation in an activity in deter-
mining if you materially participated.
Real property trades or businesses. A real property 
trade or business is a trade or business that does any of 
the following with real property.
• Develops or redevelops it.
• Constructs or reconstructs it.
• Acquires it.
• Converts it.
• Rents or leases it.
• Operates or manages it.
• Brokers it.
Choice to treat all interests as one activity.  If you 
were a real estate professional and had more than one 
rental real estate interest during the year, you can choose 
to treat all the interests as one activity. Y ou can make this 
choice for any year that you qualify as a real estate profes-
sional. If you forgo making the choice for one year, you 
can still make it for a later year.
If you make the choice, it is binding for the tax year you 
make it and for any later year that you are a real estate 
professional. This is true even if you aren’t a real estate 
professional in any intervening year. (For that year, the ex-
ception for real estate professionals won’t apply in deter-
mining whether your activity is subject to the passive 
activity rules.)
20 Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and 
Losses
Publication 527 (2023)

Page 21 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See the Instructions for Schedule E for information 
about making this choice.
Material participation.  Generally, you materially partici-
pated in an activity for the tax year if you were involved in 
its operations on a regular, continuous, and substantial 
basis during the year. For details, see Pub. 925 or the In-
structions for Schedule C.
Participating spouse.  If you are married, determine 
whether you materially participated in an activity by also 
counting any participation in the activity by your spouse 
during the year. Do this even if your spouse owns no inter-
est in the activity or files a separate return for the year.
Form 8582. Y ou may have to complete Form 8582 to fig-
ure the amount of any passive activity loss for the current 
tax year for all activities and the amount of the passive ac-
tivity loss allowed on your tax return. See Form 8582 not 
required, later in this chapter, to determine if you must 
complete Form 8582.
If you are required to complete Form 8582 and are also 
subject to the at -risk rules, include the amount from Form 
6198, line 21 (deductible loss), in column (b) of Form 
8582, Worksheet 1 or 2, as required.
Exception for Personal Use of Dwelling Unit
If you used the rental property as a home during the year, 
any income, deductions, gain, or loss allocable to such 
use is not to be taken into account for purposes of the 
passive activity loss limitation. Instead, follow the rules ex-
plained in chapter 5.
Exception for Rental Real Estate With Active 
Participation
If you or your spouse actively participated in a passive 
rental real estate activity, you may be able to deduct up to 
$25,000 of loss from the activity from your nonpassive in-
come. This special allowance is an exception to the gen-
eral rule disallowing losses in excess of income from pas-
sive activities. Similarly, you may be able to offset credits 
from the activity against the tax on up to $25,000 of non-
passive income after taking into account any losses al-
lowed under this exception.
Example. Y ou are single and have $40,000 in wages, 
$2,000 of passive income from a limited partnership, and 
$3,500 of passive loss from a rental real estate activity in 
which you actively participated. $2,000 of your $3,500 
loss offsets your passive income. The remaining $1,500 
loss can be deducted from your $40,000 wages.
The special allowance isn’t available if you were 
married, lived with your spouse at any time during 
the year, and are filing a separate return.
Active participation. Y ou actively participated in a rental 
real estate activity if you (and your spouse) owned at least 
10% of the rental property and you made management 
decisions or arranged for others to provide services (such 
as repairs) in a significant and bona fide sense. Manage-
CAUTION
!
ment decisions that may count as active participation in-
clude approving new tenants, deciding on rental terms, 
approving expenditures, and other similar decisions.
Example. Y ou are single and had the following income 
and losses during the tax year.
Salary ............................ $42,300
Dividends .......................... 300
Interest ............................ 1,400
Rental loss ......................... (4,000 )
The rental loss was from the rental of a house you 
owned. Y ou had advertised and rented the house to the 
current tenant yourself. Y ou also collected the rents, which 
usually came by mail. Y ou made or contracted out all re-
pairs.
Although the rental loss is from a passive activity, be-
cause you actively participated in the rental property man-
agement, you can use the entire $4,000 loss to offset your 
other income.
Maximum special allowance. The maximum special al-
lowance is:
• $25,000 for single individuals and married individuals 
filing a joint return for the tax year,
• $12,500 for married individuals who file separate re-
turns for the tax year and lived apart from their spou-
ses at all times during the tax year, and
• $25,000 for a qualifying estate reduced by the special 
allowance for which the surviving spouse qualified.
If your MAGI is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if 
married filing separately), you can deduct your loss up to 
the amount specified above. If your MAGI is more than 
$100,000 (more than $50,000 if married filing separately), 
your special allowance is limited to 50% of the difference 
between $150,000 ($75,000 if married filing separately) 
and your MAGI.
Generally, if your MAGI is $150,000 or more ($75,000 
or more if you are married filing separately), there is no 
special allowance.
Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI).  This is 
your adjusted gross income from Form 1040, 1040 -SR, or 
1040-NR, line 11, figured without taking into account:
1. The taxable amount of social security or equivalent 
tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,
2. The deductible contributions to traditional individual 
retirement accounts (IRAs) and section 501(c)(18) 
pension plans,
3. The exclusion from income of interest from series EE 
and I U.S. savings bonds used to pay higher educa-
tional expenses,
4. The exclusion of amounts received under an employ-
er's adoption assistance program,
5. Any passive activity income or loss included on Form 
8582,
6. Any rental real estate loss allowed to real estate pro-
fessionals,
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and 
Losses
21

Page 22 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
7. Any overall loss from a publicly traded partnership 
(see Publicly T raded Partnerships (PTPs) in the In-
structions for Form 8582),
8. The deduction allowed for one-half of self-employ-
ment tax,
9. The deduction allowed for interest paid on student 
loans, and
10. The deduction allowed for foreign-derived intangible 
income and global intangible low-taxed income.
Form 8582 not required.  Don’t complete Form 8582 if 
you meet all of the following conditions.
• Y our only passive activities were rental real estate ac-
tivities in which you actively participated.
• Y our overall net loss from these activities is $25,000 or 
less ($12,500 or less if married filing separately and 
you lived apart from your spouse all year).
• If married filing separately, you lived apart from your 
spouse all year.
• Y ou have no prior year unallowed losses from these 
(or any other passive) activities.
• Y ou have no current or prior year unallowed credits 
from passive activities.
• Y our MAGI is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if mar-
ried filing separately and you lived apart from your 
spouse all year).
• Y ou don’t hold any interest in a rental real estate activ-
ity as a limited partner or as a beneficiary of an estate 
or a trust.
If you meet all of the conditions listed above, your rental 
real estate activities aren’t limited by the passive activity 
rules and you don’t have to complete Form 8582. On lines 
23a through 23e of your Schedule E, enter the applicable 
amounts.
Casualties and Thefts
As a result of a casualty or theft, you may have a loss rela-
ted to your rental property. Y ou may be able to deduct the 
loss on your income tax return.
Casualty. This is the damage, destruction, or loss of 
property resulting from an identifiable event that is sud-
den, unexpected, or unusual. Such events include a 
storm, fire, or earthquake.
Theft. This is defined as the unlawful taking and remov-
ing of your money or property with the intent to deprive 
you of it.
Gain from casualty or theft. It is also possible to have a 
gain from a casualty or theft if you receive money, includ-
ing insurance, that is more than your adjusted basis in the 
property. Generally, you must report this gain. However, 
under certain circumstances, you may defer paying tax by 
choosing to postpone reporting the gain. T o do this, you 
must generally buy replacement property within 2 years 
after the close of the first tax year in which any part of your 
gain is realized. In certain circumstances, the replacement 
period can be greater than 2 years; see Replacement Pe-
riod in Pub. 547 for more information. The cost of the re-
placement property must be equal to or more than the net 
insurance or other payment you received.
More information. For information on business and non-
business casualty and theft losses, see Pub. 547.
How to report. If you had a casualty or theft that involved 
property used in your rental activity, figure the net gain or 
loss in Section B of Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts. 
Follow the Instructions for Form 4684 for where to carry 
your net gain or loss.
Example
In February 2018, you bought a rental house for $135,000 
(house $120,000 and land $15,000) and immediately be-
gan renting it out. In 2023, you rented it all 12 months for a 
monthly rental fee of $1,125. In addition to your rental in-
come of $13,500 (12 x $1,125), you had the following ex-
penses.
Mortgage interest ......................... $8,000
Fire insurance (1-year policy) ................. 250
Miscellaneous repairs ...................... 400
Real estate taxes imposed and paid ............. 500
Maintenance ............................ 200
Y ou depreciate the residential rental property under 
MACRS GDS. This means using the straight line method 
over a recovery period of 27.5 years.
Y ou use T able 2-2d to find your depreciation percent-
age. Because you placed the property in service in Febru-
ary 2018, you continue to use that row of T able 2-2d. For 
Y ear 6, the rate is 3.636%.
Y ou figure your net rental income or loss for the house 
as follows.
T otal rental income received 
($1,125 × 12) ........................... $13,500
Minus: Expenses
Mortgage interest ................ $8,000
Fire insurance .................. 250
Miscellaneous repairs ............. 400
Real estate taxes ................ 500
Maintenance ................... 200
T otal expenses......................... 9,350
Balance ............................... $4,150
Minus: Depreciation ($120,000 x 3.636% 
(0.03636)) ............................ 4,363
Net rental (loss) for house .................. ($213)
Y ou had a net loss for the year. Because you actively 
participated in your passive rental real estate activity and 
your loss was less than $25,000, you can deduct the loss 
22 Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and 
Losses
Publication 527 (2023)

Page 23 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on your return. Y ou also meet all of the requirements for 
not having to file Form 8582. Y ou use Schedule E, Part I, 
to report your rental income and expenses. Y ou enter your 
income, expenses, and depreciation for the house in the 
column for Property A and enter your loss on line 22. Form 
4562 isn’t required.
4.
Special Situations
This chapter discusses some rental real estate activities 
that are subject to additional rules.
Condominiums
A condominium is most often a dwelling unit in a multi -unit 
building, but can also take other forms, such as a town-
house or garden apartment.
If you own a condominium, you also own a share of the 
common elements, such as land, lobbies, elevators, and 
service areas. Y ou and the other condominium owners 
may pay dues or assessments to a special corporation 
that is organized to take care of the common elements.
Special rules apply if you rent your condominium to oth-
ers. Y ou can deduct as rental expenses all the expenses 
discussed in chapters 1 and 2. In addition, you can deduct 
any dues or assessments paid for maintenance of the 
common elements.
Y ou can’t deduct special assessments you pay to a 
condominium management corporation for improvements. 
However, you may be able to recover your share of the 
cost of any improvement by taking depreciation.
Cooperatives
If you live in a cooperative, you don’t own your apartment. 
Instead, a corporation owns the apartments and you are a 
tenant-stockholder in the cooperative housing corpora-
tion. If you rent your apartment to others, you can usually 
deduct, as a rental expense, all the maintenance fees you 
pay to the cooperative housing corporation.
In addition to the maintenance fees paid to the cooper-
ative housing corporation, you can deduct your direct pay-
ments for repairs, upkeep, and other rental expenses, in-
cluding interest paid on a loan used to buy your stock in 
the corporation.
Depreciation
Y ou will be depreciating your stock in the corporation 
rather than the apartment itself. Figure your depreciation 
deduction as follows.
1. Figure the depreciation for all the depreciable real 
property owned by the corporation. (Depreciation 
methods are discussed in chapter 2 of this publication 
and Pub. 946.) If you bought your cooperative stock 
after its first offering, figure the depreciable basis of 
this property as follows.
a. Multiply your cost per share by the total number of 
outstanding shares.
b. Add to the amount figured in (a) any mortgage 
debt on the property on the date you bought the 
stock.
c. Subtract from the amount figured in (b) any mort-
gage debt that isn’t for the depreciable real prop-
erty, such as the part for the land.
2. Subtract from the amount figured in (1) any deprecia-
tion for space owned by the corporation that can be 
rented but can’t be lived in by tenant-stockholders.
3. Divide the number of your shares of stock by the total 
number of shares outstanding, including any shares 
held by the corporation.
4. Multiply the result of (2) by the percentage you figured 
in (3). This is your depreciation on the stock.
Y our depreciation deduction for the year can’t be more 
than the part of your adjusted basis (defined in chapter 2) 
in the stock of the corporation that is allocable to your 
rental property.
Payments added to capital account.  Payments ear-
marked for a capital asset or improvement, or otherwise 
charged to the corporation's capital account, are added to 
the basis of your stock in the corporation. For example, 
you can’t deduct a payment used to pave a community 
parking lot, install a new roof, or pay the principal of the 
corporation's mortgage.
T reat as a capital cost the amount you were assessed 
for capital items. This can’t be more than the amount by 
which your payments to the corporation exceeded your 
share of the corporation's mortgage interest and real es-
tate taxes.
Y our share of interest and taxes is the amount the cor-
poration elected to allocate to you, if it reasonably reflects 
those expenses for your apartment. Otherwise, figure your 
share in the following manner.
1. Divide the number of your shares of stock by the total 
number of shares outstanding, including any shares 
held by the corporation.
2. Multiply the corporation's deductible interest by the 
number you figured in (1). This is your share of the in-
terest.
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 4 Special Situations 23

Page 24 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Multiply the corporation's deductible taxes by the 
number you figured in (1). This is your share of the 
taxes.
Property Changed to Rental 
Use
If you change your home or other property (or a part of it) 
to rental use at any time other than the beginning of your 
tax year, you must divide yearly expenses, such as taxes 
and insurance, between rental use and personal use.
Y ou can deduct as rental expenses only the part of the 
expense that is for the part of the year the property was 
used or held for rental purposes.
Y ou can’t deduct depreciation or insurance for the part 
of the year the property was held for personal use. How-
ever, you can include the home mortgage interest and real 
estate tax expenses for the part of the year the property 
was held for personal use when figuring the amount you 
can deduct on Schedule A.
Example. Y our tax year is the calendar year. Y ou 
moved from your home in May and started renting it out on 
June 1. Y ou can deduct as rental expenses seven-twelfths 
of your yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance.
Starting with June, you can deduct as rental expenses 
the amounts you pay for items generally billed monthly, 
such as utilities.
When figuring depreciation, treat the property as 
placed in service on June 1.
Basis of Property Changed to Rental 
Use
When you change property you held for personal use to 
rental use (for example, you rent your former home), the 
basis for depreciation will be the lesser of the FMV or ad-
justed basis on the date of conversion.
FMV. This is the price at which the property would change 
hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither 
having to buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl-
edge of all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property, on 
or about the same date, may be helpful in figuring the 
FMV of the property.
Figuring the basis.  The basis for depreciation is the 
lesser of:
• The FMV of the property on the date you changed it to 
rental use; or
• Y our adjusted basis on the date of the change—that 
is, your original cost or other basis of the property, plus 
the cost of permanent additions or improvements 
since you acquired it, minus deductions for any casu-
alty or theft losses claimed on earlier years' income 
tax returns and other decreases to basis. For other in-
creases and decreases to basis, see Adjusted Basis 
in chapter 2.
Example. Y ou originally built a house for $140,000 on 
a lot that cost you $14,000, which you used as your home 
for many years. Before changing the property to rental use 
this year, you added $28,000 of permanent improvements 
to the house and claimed a $3,500 casualty loss deduc-
tion for damage to the house. Part of the improvements 
qualified for a $500 residential energy credit, which you 
claimed on a prior year tax return. Because land isn’t de-
preciable, you can only include the cost of the house 
when figuring the basis for depreciation.
The adjusted basis of the house at the time of the 
change in its use was $164,000 ($140,000 + $28,000 − 
$3,500 − $500).
On the date of the change in use, your property had an 
FMV of $168,000, of which $21,000 was for the land and 
$147,000 was for the house.
The basis for depreciation on the house is the FMV on 
the date of the change ($147,000) because it is less than 
your adjusted basis ($164,000).
Cooperatives
If you change your cooperative apartment to rental use, 
figure your allowable depreciation as explained earlier. 
(Depreciation methods are discussed in chapter 2 of this 
publication and Pub. 946.) The basis of all the depreciable 
real property owned by the cooperative housing corpora-
tion is the smaller of the following amounts.
• The FMV of the property on the date you change your 
apartment to rental use. This is considered to be the 
same as the corporation's adjusted basis minus 
straight line depreciation, unless this value is unrealis-
tic.
• The corporation's adjusted basis in the property on 
that date. Don’t subtract depreciation when figuring 
the corporation's adjusted basis.
If you bought the stock after its first offering, the corpo-
ration's adjusted basis in the property is the amount fig-
ured in (1) under Depreciation, earlier. The FMV of the 
property is considered to be the same as the corporation's 
adjusted basis figured in this way minus straight line de-
preciation, unless the value is unrealistic.
Figuring the Depreciation Deduction
T o figure the deduction, use the depreciation system in ef-
fect when you convert your residence to rental use. Gen-
erally, that will be MACRS for any conversion after 1986. 
T reat the property as placed in service on the conversion 
date.
Example. Y our converted residence (see the previous 
example under Figuring the basis , earlier) was available 
for rent on August 1. Using T able 2-2d (see chapter 2), the 
percentage for Y ear 1 beginning in August is 1.364% and 
the depreciation deduction for Y ear 1 is $2,005 ($147,000 
× 1.364% (0.01364)).
24 Chapter 4 Special Situations Publication 527 (2023)

Page 25 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Renting Part of Property
If you rent part of your property, you must divide certain 
expenses between the part of the property used for rental 
purposes and the part of the property used for personal 
purposes, as though you actually had two separate pieces 
of property.
Y ou can deduct the expenses related to the part of the 
property used for rental purposes, such as home mort-
gage interest and real estate taxes, as rental expenses on 
Schedule E (Form 1040). Y ou can also deduct as rental 
expenses a portion of other expenses that are normally 
nondeductible personal expenses, such as expenses for 
electricity or painting the outside of the house.
There is no change in the types of expenses deductible 
for the personal-use part of your property. Generally, these 
expenses may be deducted only if you itemize your de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Y ou can’t deduct any part of the cost of the first phone 
line even if your tenants have unlimited use of it.
Y ou don’t have to divide the expenses that belong only 
to the rental part of your property. For example, if you paint 
a room that you rent or pay premiums for liability insurance 
in connection with renting a room in your home, your entire 
cost is a rental expense. If you install a second phone line 
strictly for your tenant's use, all the cost of the second line 
is deductible as a rental expense. Y ou can deduct depreci-
ation on the part of the house used for rental purposes as 
well as on the furniture and equipment you use for rental 
purposes.
How to divide expenses. If an expense is for both rental 
use and personal use, such as mortgage interest or heat 
for the entire house, you must divide the expense between 
rental use and personal use. Y ou can use any reasonable 
method for dividing the expense. It may be reasonable to 
divide the cost of some items (for example, water) based 
on the number of people using them. The two most com-
mon methods for dividing an expense are (1) the number 
of rooms in your home, and (2) the square footage of your 
home.
Example. Y ou rent a room in your house. The room is 
12 × 15 feet, or 180 square feet. Y our entire house has 
1,800 square feet of floor space. Y ou can deduct as a 
rental expense 10% of any expense that must be divided 
between rental use and personal use. If your heating bill 
for the year for the entire house was $600, $60 ($600 × 
10% (0.10)) is a rental expense. The balance, $540, is a 
personal expense that you can’t deduct.
Duplex. A common situation is the duplex where you live 
in one unit and rent out the other. Certain expenses apply 
to the entire property, such as mortgage interest and real 
estate taxes, and must be split to determine rental and 
personal expenses.
Example. Y ou own a duplex and live in one half, rent-
ing out the other half. Both units are approximately the 
same size. Last year, you paid a total of $10,000 mortgage 
interest and $2,000 real estate taxes for the entire prop-
erty. Y ou can deduct $5,000 mortgage interest and $1,000 
real estate taxes on Schedule E. If you itemize your de-
ductions, include the other $5,000 mortgage interest and 
$1,000 real estate taxes when figuring the amount you can 
deduct on Schedule A.
Not Rented for Profit
If you don’t rent your property to make a profit, you can’t 
deduct rental expenses in excess of the amount of your 
rental income. Y ou can’t deduct a loss or carry forward to 
the next year any rental expenses that are more than your 
rental income for the year.
Where to report. Report your not-for-profit rental income 
on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8j. If you itemize your de-
ductions, include your mortgage interest (if you use the 
property as your main home or second home), real estate 
taxes, and casualty losses from your not -for-profit rental 
activity when figuring the amount you can deduct on 
Schedule A.
Presumption of profit. If your rental income is more than 
your rental expenses for at least 3 years out of a period of 
5 consecutive years, you are presumed to be renting your 
property to make a profit.
Postponing decision.  If you are starting your rental 
activity and don’t have 3 years showing a profit, you can 
elect to have the presumption made after you have the 5 
years of experience required by the test. Y ou may choose 
to postpone the decision of whether the rental is for profit 
by filing Form 5213. Y ou must file Form 5213 within 3 
years after the due date of your return (determined without 
extensions) for the year in which you first carried on the 
activity or, if earlier, within 60 days after receiving written 
notice from the IRS proposing to disallow deductions at-
tributable to the activity.
More information. For more information about the rules 
for an activity not engaged in for profit, see Hobby or 
business: here's what to know about that side hustle.
Example—Property Changed 
to Rental Use
In January, you bought a condominium apartment to live 
in. Instead of selling the house you had been living in, you 
decided to change it to rental property. Y ou selected a ten-
ant and started renting the house on February 1. Y ou 
charge $750 a month for rent and collect it yourself. Y ou 
also received a $750 security deposit from your tenant. 
Because you plan to return it to your tenant at the end of 
the lease, you don’t include it in your income. Y our rental 
expenses for the year are as follows.
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 4 Special Situations 25

Page 26 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mortgage interest ...................... $1,800
Fire insurance (1-year policy) ............... 100
Miscellaneous repairs (after renting) .......... 297
Real estate taxes imposed and paid ........... 1,200
Y ou must divide the real estate taxes, mortgage inter-
est, and fire insurance between the personal use of the 
property and the rental use of the property. Y ou can de-
duct eleven -twelfths of these expenses as rental expen-
ses. Y ou can include the balance of the real estate taxes 
and mortgage interest when figuring the amount you can 
deduct on Schedule A if you itemize. Y ou can’t deduct the 
balance of the fire insurance because it is a personal ex-
pense.
Y ou bought this house in 2008 for $35,000. Y our prop-
erty tax was based on assessed values of $10,000 for the 
land and $25,000 for the house. Before changing it to 
rental property, you added several improvements to the 
house. Y ou figure your adjusted basis as follows.
Improvements Cost
House ............................ $25,000
Remodeled kitchen ................... 4,200
Recreation room ..................... 5,800
New roof .......................... 1,600
Patio and deck ...................... 2,400
Adjusted basis ...................... $39,000
On February 1, when you changed your house to rental 
property, the property had an FMV of $152,000. Of this 
amount, $35,000 was for the land and $117,000 was for 
the house.
Because your adjusted basis is less than the FMV on 
the date of the change, you use $39,000 as your basis for 
depreciation.
As specified for residential rental property, you must 
use the straight line method of depreciation over the GDS 
or ADS recovery period. Y ou choose the GDS recovery 
period of 27.5 years.
Y ou use T able 2-2d to find your depreciation percent-
age. Because you placed the property in service in Febru-
ary, the percentage is 3.182%.
On April 1, you bought a new dishwasher for the rental 
property at a cost of $425. The dishwasher is personal 
property used in a rental real estate activity, which has a 
5-year recovery period. Y ou use T able 2-2a to find the de-
preciation percentage for Y ear 1 under “Half-year conven-
tion” (20%) to figure your depreciation deduction.
On May 1, you paid $4,000 to have a furnace installed 
in the house. The furnace is residential rental property. Be-
cause you placed the property in service in May, the de-
preciation percentage from T able 2-2d is 2.273%.
Y ou figured your net rental income or loss for the house 
as follows.
T otal rental income received 
($750 × 11) ............................ $8,250
Minus: Expenses
Mortgage interest ($1,800 × 11/12) ........ $1,650
Fire insurance ($100 × 11/12) ........... 92
Miscellaneous repairs ............... 297
Real estate taxes ($1,200 × 11/12) ........ 1,100
T otal expenses.......................... 3,139
Balance ................................ $5,111
Minus: Depreciation
House ($39,000 × 0.03182) ........... $1,241
Dishwasher ($425 × 0.20) ............ 85
Furnace ($4,000 × 0.02273) ........... 91
T otal depreciation......................... 1,417
Net rental income for house ........... $3,694
Y ou use Schedule E, Part I, to report your rental income 
and expenses. Y ou enter your income, expenses, and de-
preciation for the house in the column for Property A. Be-
cause all property was placed in service this year, you 
must use Form 4562 to figure the depreciation. See the In-
structions for Form 4562 for more information on preparing 
the form.
5.
Personal Use of Dwelling 
Unit (Including Vacation 
Home)
If you have any personal use of a dwelling unit (including a 
vacation home) that you rent, you must divide your expen-
ses between rental use and personal use. In general, your 
rental expenses will be no more than your total expenses 
multiplied by a fraction, the denominator of which is the to-
tal number of days the dwelling unit is used and the nu-
merator of which is the total number of days actually ren-
ted at a fair rental price. Only your rental expenses may be 
deducted on Schedule E (Form 1040). Some of your per-
sonal expenses may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 
1040) if you itemize your deductions.
Y ou must also determine if the dwelling unit is considered 
a home. The amount of rental expenses that you can de-
duct may be limited if the dwelling unit is considered a 
home. Whether a dwelling unit is considered a home de-
pends on how many days during the year are considered 
to be days of personal use. There is a special rule if you 
used the dwelling unit as a home and you rented it for less 
than 15 days during the year.
Dwelling unit.  A dwelling unit includes a house, apart-
ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, vacation home, 
or similar property. It also includes all structures or other 
property belonging to the dwelling unit. A dwelling unit has 
26 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including 
Vacation Home)
Publication 527 (2023)

Page 27 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
basic living accommodations, such as sleeping space, a 
toilet, and cooking facilities.
A dwelling unit doesn’t include property (or part of the 
property) used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar es-
tablishment. Property is used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, 
or similar establishment if it is regularly available for occu-
pancy by paying customers and isn’t used by an owner as 
a home during the year.
Example. Y ou rent a room in your home that is always 
available for short -term occupancy by paying customers. 
Y ou don’t use the room yourself and you allow only paying 
customers to use the room. This room is used solely as a 
hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishment and isn’t a dwell-
ing unit.
Dividing Expenses
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and personal pur-
poses, divide your expenses between the rental use and 
the personal use based on the number of days used for 
each purpose.
When dividing your expenses, follow these rules.
• Any day that the unit is rented at a fair rental price is a 
day of rental use even if you used the unit for personal 
purposes that day. (This rule doesn’t apply when de-
termining whether you used the unit as a home.)
• Any day that the unit is available for rent but not ac-
tually rented isn’t a day of rental use.
Fair rental price.  A fair rental price for your property is 
generally the amount of rent that a person who isn’t rela-
ted to you would be willing to pay. The rent you charge 
isn’t a fair rental price if it is substantially less than the 
rents charged for other properties that are similar to your 
property in your area.
Ask yourself the following questions when comparing 
another property with yours.
• Is it used for the same purpose?
• Is it approximately the same size?
• Is it in approximately the same condition?
• Does it have similar furnishings?
• Is it in a similar location?
If any of the answers are no, the properties probably aren’t 
similar.
Example. Y our beach cottage was available for rent 
from June 1 through August 31 (92 days). Except for the 
first week in August (7 days), when you were unable to 
find a renter, you rented the cottage at a fair rental price 
during that time. The person who rented the cottage for 
July allowed you to use it over the weekend (2 days) with-
out any reduction in or refund of rent. Y our family also 
used the cottage during the last 2 weeks of May (14 days). 
The cottage wasn’t used at all before May 17 or after Au-
gust 31.
Y ou figure the part of the cottage expenses to treat as 
rental expenses as follows.
• The cottage was used for rental a total of 85 days (92 
− 7). The days it was available for rent but not rented 
(7 days) aren’t days of rental use. The July weekend 
(2 days) you used it is rental use because you re-
ceived a fair rental price for the weekend.
• Y ou used the cottage for personal purposes for 14 
days (the last 2 weeks in May).
• The total use of the cottage was 99 days (14 days per-
sonal use + 85 days rental use).
• Y our rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) of the cottage 
expenses.
Note. When determining whether you used the cottage 
as a home, the July weekend (2 days) you used it is con-
sidered personal use even though you received a fair 
rental price for the weekend. Therefore, you had 16 days 
of personal use and 83 days of rental use for this purpose. 
Because you used the cottage for personal purposes 
more than 14 days and more than 10% of the days of 
rental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If you have a 
net loss, you may not be able to deduct all of the rental ex-
penses. See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home next.
Dwelling Unit Used as a Home
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and personal pur-
poses, the tax treatment of the rental expenses you fig-
ured earlier under Dividing Expenses  and rental income 
depends on whether you are considered to be using the 
dwelling unit as a home.
Y ou use a dwelling unit as a home during the tax year if 
you use it for personal purposes more than the greater of:
1. 14 days, or
2. 10% of the total days it is rented to others at a fair 
rental price.
See What is a day of personal use, later.
If a dwelling unit is used for personal purposes on a day 
it is rented at a fair rental price  (discussed earlier), don’t 
count that day as a day of rental use in applying (2) above. 
Instead, count it as a day of personal use in applying both 
(1) and (2) above.
What is a day of personal use?  A day of personal use 
of a dwelling unit is any day that the unit is used by any of 
the following persons.
1. Y ou or any other person who owns an interest in it, un-
less you rent it to another owner as their main home 
under a shared equity financing agreement (defined 
later). However, see Days used as a main home be-
fore or after renting, later.
2. A member of your family or a member of the family of 
any other person who owns an interest in it, unless 
the family member uses the dwelling unit as their main 
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including 
Vacation Home)
27

Page 28 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home and pays a fair rental price. Family includes only 
your spouse, siblings, half siblings, ancestors (pa-
rents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal descendants 
(children, grandchildren, etc.).
3. Anyone under an arrangement that lets you use some 
other dwelling unit.
4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.
Main home. If the other person or member of the fam-
ily in (1) or (2) has more than one home, their main home 
are ordinarily the one they lived in most of the time.
Shared equity financing agreement.  This is an 
agreement under which two or more persons acquire un-
divided interests for more than 50 years in an entire dwell-
ing unit, including the land, and one or more of the 
co-owners are entitled to occupy the unit as their main 
home upon payment of rent to the other co-owner(s).
Donation of use of the property.  Y ou use a dwelling 
unit for personal purposes if:
• Y ou donate the use of the unit to a charitable organiza-
tion,
• The organization sells the use of the unit at a fundrais-
ing event, and
• The “purchaser” uses the unit.
Examples. The following examples show how to de-
termine if you have days of personal use.
Example 1. Y ou and your neighbor are co-owners of a 
condominium at the beach. Last year, you rented the unit 
to vacationers whenever possible. The unit wasn’t used as 
a main home by anyone. Y our neighbor used the unit for 2 
weeks last year; you didn’t use it at all.
Because your neighbor has an interest in the unit, both 
of you are considered to have used the unit for personal 
purposes during those 2 weeks.
Example 2. Y ou and your neighbors are co-owners of 
a house under a shared equity financing agreement. Y our 
neighbors live in the house and pay you a fair rental price.
Even though your neighbors have an interest in the 
house, the days your neighbors live there aren’t counted 
as days of personal use by you. This is because your 
neighbors rent the house as their main home under a 
shared equity financing agreement.
Example 3. Y ou own a rental property that you rent to 
your son. Y our son doesn’t own any interest in this prop-
erty. He uses it as his main home and pays you a fair 
rental price.
Y our son's use of the property isn’t personal use by you 
because your son is using it as his main home, he owns 
no interest in the property, and he is paying you a fair 
rental price.
Example 4. Y ou rent your beach house to Rosa. Rosa 
rents her cabin in the mountains to you. Y ou each pay a 
fair rental price.
Y ou are using your beach house for personal purposes 
on the days that Rosa uses it because your house is used 
by Rosa under an arrangement that allows you to use her 
cabin.
Example 5.  Y ou rent an apartment to your mother at 
less than a fair rental price. Y ou are using the apartment 
for personal purposes on the days that your mother rents it 
because you rent it for less than a fair rental price.
Days used for repairs and maintenance.  Any day 
that you spend working substantially full time repairing 
and maintaining (not improving) your property isn’t coun-
ted as a day of personal use. Don’t count such a day as a 
day of personal use even if family members use the prop-
erty for recreational purposes on the same day.
Example. Corey owns a cabin in the mountains that he 
rents for most of the year. He spends a week at the cabin 
with family members. Corey works on maintenance of the 
cabin 3 or 4 hours each day during the week and spends 
the rest of the time fishing, hiking, and relaxing. Corey's 
family members, however, work substantially full time on 
the cabin each day during the week. The main purpose of 
being at the cabin that week is to do maintenance work. 
Therefore, the use of the cabin during the week by Corey 
and his family won’t be considered personal use by Corey.
Days used as a main home before or after renting. 
For purposes of determining whether a dwelling unit was 
used as a home, you may not have to count days you 
used the property as your main home before or after rent-
ing it or offering it for rent as days of personal use. Don’t 
count them as days of personal use if:
• Y ou rented or tried to rent the property for 12 or more 
consecutive months, or
• Y ou rented or tried to rent the property for a period of 
less than 12 consecutive months and the period 
ended because you sold or exchanged the property.
However, this special rule doesn’t apply when dividing ex-
penses between rental and personal use. See Property 
Changed to Rental Use in chapter 4.
Example 1. On February 28, 2022, you moved out of 
the house you had lived in for 6 years because you accep-
ted a job in another town. Y ou rented your house at a fair 
rental price from March 15, 2022, to May 14, 2023 (14 
months). On June 1, 2023, you moved back into your old 
house.
The days you used the house as your main home from 
January 1 to February 28, 2022, and from June 1 to De-
cember 31, 2023, aren’t counted as days of personal use. 
Therefore, you would use the rules in chapter 1 when fig-
uring your rental income and expenses.
Example 2. On January 31, you moved out of the con-
dominium where you had lived for 3 years. Y ou offered it 
for rent at a fair rental price beginning on February 1. Y ou 
were unable to rent it until April. On September 15, you 
sold the condominium.
The days you used the condominium as your main 
home from January 1 to January 31 aren’t counted as 
days of personal use when determining whether you used 
it as a home.
28 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including 
Vacation Home)
Publication 527 (2023)

Page 29 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Examples. The following examples show how to deter-
mine whether you used your rental property as a home.
Example 1. Y ou converted the basement of your home 
into an apartment with a bedroom, a bathroom, and a 
small kitchen. Y ou rented the basement apartment at a fair 
rental price to college students during the regular school 
year. Y ou rented to them on a 9-month lease (273 days). 
Y ou figured 10% of the total days rented to others at a fair 
rental price is 27 days.
During June (30 days), your brothers stayed with you 
and lived in the basement apartment rent free.
Y our basement apartment was used as a home be-
cause you used it for personal purposes for 30 days. 
Rent-free use by your brothers is considered personal 
use. Y our personal use (30 days) is more than the greater 
of 14 days or 10% of the total days it was rented (27 days).
Example 2.  Y ou rented the guest bedroom in your 
home at a fair rental price during the local college's home-
coming, commencement, and football weekends (a total 
of 27 days). Y our sister-in-law stayed in the room rent free 
for the last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. Y ou figured 10% of 
the total days rented to others at a fair rental price is 3 
days.
The room was used as a home because you used it for 
personal purposes for 21 days. That is more than the 
greater of 14 days or 10% of the 27 days it was rented (3 
days).
Example 3.  Y ou own a condominium apartment in a 
resort area. Y ou rented it at a fair rental price for a total of 
170 days during the year. For 12 of these days, the tenant 
wasn’t able to use the apartment and allowed you to use it 
even though you didn’t refund any of the rent. Y our family 
actually used the apartment for 10 of those days. There-
fore, the apartment is treated as having been rented for 
160 (170 – 10) days. Y ou figured 10% of the total days ren-
ted to others at a fair rental price is 16 days. Y our family 
also used the apartment for 7 other days during the year.
Y ou used the apartment as a home because you used it 
for personal purposes for 17 days. That is more than the 
greater of 14 days or 10% of the 160 days it was rented 
(16 days).
Minimal rental use.  If you use the dwelling unit as a 
home and you rent it less than 15 days during the year, 
that period isn’t treated as rental activity. See Used as a 
home but rented less than 15 days, later, for more informa-
tion.
Limit on deductions. Renting a dwelling unit that is con-
sidered a home isn’t a passive activity. Instead, if your 
rental expenses are more than your rental income, some 
or all of the excess expenses can’t be used to offset in-
come from other sources. The excess expenses that can’t 
be used to offset income from other sources are carried 
forward to the next year and treated as rental expenses for 
the same property. Any expenses carried forward to the 
next year will be subject to any limits that apply for that 
year. This limitation will apply to expenses carried forward 
to another year even if you don’t use the property as your 
home for that subsequent year.
T o figure your deductible rental expenses for this year 
and any carryover to next year, use Worksheet 5-1.
Reporting Income and 
Deductions
Property not used for personal purposes.  If you don’t 
use a dwelling unit for personal purposes, see chapter 3 
for how to report your rental income and expenses.
Property used for personal purposes.  If you do use a 
dwelling unit for personal purposes, then how you report 
your rental income and expenses depends on whether 
you used the dwelling unit as a home.
Not used as a home.  If you use a dwelling unit for 
personal purposes, but not as a home, report all the rental 
income in your income. Because you used the dwelling 
unit for personal purposes, you must divide your expenses 
between the rental use and the personal use as described 
earlier in this chapter under Dividing Expenses . The ex-
penses for personal use aren’t deductible as rental expen-
ses.
Y our deductible rental expenses can be more than your 
gross rental income; however, see Limits on Rental Los-
ses in chapter 3.
Used as a home but rented less than 15 days.  If 
you use a dwelling unit as a home and you rent it less than 
15 days during the year, its primary function isn’t consid-
ered to be rental and it shouldn’t be reported on Sched-
ule E (Form 1040). Y ou aren’t required to report the rental 
income and rental expenses from this activity. Any expen-
ses related to the home, such as mortgage interest, prop-
erty taxes, and any qualified casualty loss, will be reported 
as normally allowed on Schedule A (Form 1040). See the 
Instructions for Schedule A for more information on de-
ducting these expenses.
Used as a home and rented 15 days or more. If you 
use a dwelling unit as a home and rent it 15 days or more 
during the year, include all your rental income in your in-
come. Because you used the dwelling unit for personal 
purposes, you must divide your expenses between the 
rental use and the personal use as described earlier in this 
chapter under Dividing Expenses. The expenses for per-
sonal use aren’t deductible as rental expenses.
If you had a net profit from renting the dwelling unit for 
the year (that is, if your rental income is more than the total 
of your rental expenses, including depreciation), deduct all 
of your rental expenses. Y ou don’t need to use Worksheet 
5-1.
However, if you had a net loss from renting the dwelling 
unit for the year, your deduction for certain rental expen-
ses is limited. T o figure your deductible rental expenses 
and any carryover to next year, use Worksheet 5-1.
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including 
Vacation Home)
29

Page 30 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet for Figuring 
Rental Deductions for a 
Dwelling Unit Used as a 
Home
Worksheet 5-1.
Keep for Y our Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer “Yes” to all of the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. T otal days available for rent at fair rental price..................................... A.  
B. T otal days available for rent (line A) but not rented.................................. B.  
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A ............................... C.  
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) .......... D.  
E. Total days of rental and personal use. Add lines C and D ......................... E.  
F . Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E .................................. F .   .      
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ......................................................................... 1.  
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest. See instructions ........... 2a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of deductible real estate taxes. See instructions ................. b.  
 c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses. See instructions .......... c.  
 d. Enter direct rental expenses. See instructions ..................................... d.  
 e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a–2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E. See instructions ............................................ 2e.  
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ................................................ 3.  
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) ............................ 4a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest. See instructions .................. b.  
c. Enter the rental portion of excess real estate taxes. See instructions ................... c.  
 d. Carryover of operating expenses from 2022 worksheet .............................. d.  
 e. Add lines 4a–4d ............................................................ e.  
 f. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4e. See instructions ............................ 4f.  
5. Subtract line 4f from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ................................................. 5.  
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses. See instructions ............. 6a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit ........................... b.  
 c. Carryover of excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation from 2022 worksheet ...... c.  
 d. Add lines 6a–6c ............................................................ d.  
 e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d. See instructions ............................................................... 6e.  
PART III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4f from line 4e ...................... 7a.  
 b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year.
Subtract line 6e from line 6d ................................................................... b.  
30 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including 
Vacation Home)
Publication 527 (2023)

Page 31 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet for Figuring Rental 
Deductions for a Dwelling Unit 
Used as a Home
Worksheet 5-1 Instructions.
Keep for Y our Records
Caution. Use the percentage determined in Part I, line F , to figure the rental portions to enter on lines 2a–2c, 4a–4c, and 6a–6b of Part II.
Line 2a. If you are claiming the standard deduction, do not report an amount on line 2a; instead, report the rental portion of your 
mortgage interest on line 4b.
If you are itemizing your deductions on Schedule A, figure the amount of mortgage interest to include on line 2a by using the 
following steps. 
Step 1. T reat all the mortgage interest you paid for mortgages secured by your home(s) as a personal expense and figure the 
amount that would be deductible as an itemized expense on Schedule A. See Pub. 936 for more information about figuring the 
home mortgage interest deduction and the limits that may apply. 
Step 2. Include on line 2a the rental portion of deductible mortgage interest figured in Step 1 that is attributable to the home you 
are renting. 
Note. Be sure to claim only the personal portion of your deductible mortgage interest on Schedule A. The personal portion of 
mortgage interest on the dwelling unit doesn't include the rental portion you reported on line 2a of this Worksheet 5-1 or any 
portion that you deducted on other forms, such as Schedule C or F .
Line 2b. If you are claiming the standard deduction, do not report an amount on line 2b; instead, report the rental portion of your real 
estate taxes on line 4c.
If you are itemizing your deductions on Schedule A, figure the amount to report on line 2b by using the following steps.
Step 1. If the total of your state and local income (or, if elected on your Schedule A, general sales) taxes, real estate taxes, and 
personal property taxes is not more than $10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately), enter the rental portion of the real estate 
taxes attributable to the dwelling unit you are renting on line 2b.
Step 2. If you do not meet the condition of Step 1, use the following worksheet to figure the amount to include on line 2b.
Line 2b Worksheet
1. Enter your state and local income taxes (or, if you elect on Schedule A, your state and 
local general sales taxes) that are personal expenses ...........................  
2. Enter all the state and local real estate taxes you paid on the dwelling unit you are 
renting ...............................................................  
3. Enter any other state and local real estate taxes you paid that are a personal expense 
and not included on line 2 ................................................  
4. Enter your state and local personal property taxes that are a personal expense .......  
5. Add lines 1 through 4 ....................................................  
6. Multiply line 2 by the percentage of expenses allowed for rental (Part I, line F) ........  
7. Subtract line 6 from line 5 .................................................  
8. Subtract line 7 from $10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately). If zero or less, 
enter -0- ..............................................................  
9. Real estate taxes reported on line 2b. Enter the smaller of line 6 or line 8 here and 
on line 2b .............................................................  
10. Excess real estate taxes reported on line 4c. Subtract line 9 from line 6 ..........  
 Note. Be sure to report only the personal portion of your real estate taxes on line 5b of Schedule A. The personal 
portion of real estate taxes on the dwelling unit doesn't include the rental portion you reported on line 2b of this 
Worksheet 5-1 or any portion that you deducted on other forms, such as Schedule C or F . 
Line 2c. If you are claiming the standard deduction and you are not increasing your standard deduction by a net qualified disaster loss, 
do not report an amount on line 2c; instead, report the rental portion of your casualty losses on line 6a.
If you are itemizing your deductions on Schedule A or filing a Schedule A to increase your standard deduction by a net qualified 
disaster loss, figure the amount to report on line 2c by using the following steps.
Step 1. Complete a worksheet version of Section A of Form 4684 treating all your casualty losses (and gains) as personal 
expenses. If you are itemizing your deductions, when completing line 17 of this worksheet version of Form 4684, enter 10% of 
your adjusted gross income figured without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. Don't file this worksheet 
version of Form 4684; instead, keep it for your records. Y ou will complete a separate Form 4684 to attach to your return using 
only the personal portion of your casualty losses (and gains) for Section A.
Step 2. Include on line 2c the rental portion of the loss amounts from lines 15 and 18 of this worksheet version of Form 4684 that 
are the result of a federally declared disaster. If you are claiming an increased standard deduction instead of itemizing your 
deductions, only use the rental portion of a net qualified disaster loss on line 15 of the worksheet version of Form 4684 for this 
Step 2.
Note. Be sure to use only the personal portion of your casualty losses (and gains) when completing Section A of the separate 
Form 4684 you attach to your return. The separate Form 4684 you attach to your return is used to figure the casualty losses you 
can include on line 15 of Schedule A and the net qualified disaster losses you can include on line 16 of Schedule A. Y ou will 
report casualty and theft losses attributable to your rental activity in Section B of the separate Form 4684 you attach to your 
return.
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including 
Vacation Home)
31

Page 32 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 5-1 Instructions—Continued
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used for 
rental activities other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also, include rental agency fees, advertising, office 
supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 2e. Y ou can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses even if your rental expenses are more than your 
rental income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E. Include the amount from 
line 2c with the casualty loss from line 6e, if any, in Section B of Form 4684, on line 27, and enter “See attached statement” 
above line 27. Attach a statement to your tax return showing how you calculated the deductible loss (you can use the worksheet 
as your attachment).
Line 4b. If you are claiming the standard deduction, enter the rental portion of all the home mortgage interest paid for loans used to buy, 
build, or substantially improve the dwelling unit you are renting on line 4b. Do not include mortgage interest on a loan that did not 
benefit the dwelling unit (for example, a home equity loan used to pay off credit card bills, to buy a car, or to pay tuition costs).
If you are itemizing your deductions and the amount you figured in Step 1 under Line 2a was less than the full amount of interest 
you paid because of the limits on deducting home mortgage interest as a personal expense, include on line 4b the rental portion 
of the excess attributable to the loans used to buy, build, or substantially improve the dwelling unit you rented.
Line 4c. If you are claiming the standard deduction, enter the rental portion of all the real estate taxes paid on the dwelling unit you 
rented.
If you are itemizing your deductions and you used the Line 2b Worksheet to figure the amount to include on line 2b, then include 
the amount from line 10 of the Line 2b Worksheet on line 4c; otherwise, do not enter an amount on line 4c.
Line 4f. Y ou can deduct the amounts on lines 4a, 4b, 4c, and 4d as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they aren’t more 
than the amount on line 4f.*
Line 6a. If you are claiming the standard deduction and not increasing it by a net qualified disaster loss, enter the rental portion of all 
casualty losses attributable to the dwelling unit you rented.
If you are itemizing your deductions on Schedule A or filing a Schedule A to increase your standard deduction by a net qualified 
disaster loss, enter the rental portion of the casualty losses attributable to the dwelling unit you rented that are in excess of the 
amount you figured on lines 15 and 18 of your worksheet version of Form 4684.
Line 6e. Y ou can deduct the amounts on lines 6a, 6b, and 6c as rental expenses only to the extent they aren’t more than the amount on 
line 6e.* Include the depreciation from line 6e, if any, on the appropriate line of Schedule E. Include the casualty loss from 
line 6e, if any, with the casualty loss from line 2c in Section B of Form 4684, on line 27, and enter “See attached statement” 
above line 27. Attach a statement to your tax return showing how you calculated the deductible loss (you can use the worksheet 
as your attachment).
* Allocating the limited deduction. If you can’t deduct all of the amount on line 4e or 6d this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you wish 
among the expenses included on line 4e or 6d. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I, or if a casualty loss, as 
instructed earlier on Form 4684, line 27.
32 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including 
Vacation Home)
Publication 527 (2023)

Page 33 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue; need help prepar-
ing your tax return; or want to download free publications, 
forms, or instructions, go to IRS.gov to find resources that 
can help you right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After receiving all 
your wage and earnings statements (Forms W -2, W -2G, 
1099-R, 1099 -MISC, 1099 -NEC, etc.); unemployment 
compensation statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 1099 -G); 
and interest, dividend, and retirement statements from 
banks and investment firms (Forms 1099), you have sev-
eral options to choose from to prepare and file your tax re-
turn. Y ou can prepare the tax return yourself, see if you 
qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax professional to 
prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation.  Y our options for pre-
paring and filing your return online or in your local com-
munity, if you qualify, include the following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare and file your 
federal individual income tax return for free using soft-
ware or Free File Fillable Forms. However, state tax 
preparation may not be available through Free File. Go 
to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if you qualify for free online 
federal tax preparation, e-filing, and direct deposit or 
payment options.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income T ax Assistance (VITA) 
program offers free tax help to people with 
low-to-moderate incomes, persons with disabilities, 
and limited-English-speaking taxpayers who need 
help preparing their own tax returns. Go to IRS.gov/
VITA, download the free IRS2Go app, or call 
800-906-9887 for information on free tax return prepa-
ration.
• TCE. The T ax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) pro-
gram offers free tax help for all taxpayers, particularly 
those who are 60 years of age and older. TCE volun-
teers specialize in answering questions about pen-
sions and retirement-related issues unique to seniors. 
Go to IRS.gov/TCE or download the free IRS2Go app 
for information on free tax return preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed Forces and quali-
fied veterans may use MilT ax, a free tax service of-
fered by the Department of Defense through Military 
OneSource. For more information, go to 
MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/MilT ax).
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, which can 
be completed online and then e -filed regardless of in-
come.
Using online tools to help prepare your return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/T ools for the following.
• The Earned Income T ax Credit Assistant (IRS.gov/
EITCAssistant) determines if you’re eligible for the 
earned income credit (EIC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) helps you 
get an employer identification number (EIN) at no 
cost.
• The T ax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/W4App) 
makes it easier for you to estimate the federal income 
tax you want your employer to withhold from your pay-
check. This is tax withholding. See how your withhold-
ing affects your refund, take-home pay, or tax due.
• The First- Time Homebuyer Credit Account Look-up 
(IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool provides information on 
your repayments and account balance.
• The Sales T ax Deduction Calculator (IRS.gov/
SalesT ax) figures the amount you can claim if you 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax questions. On 
IRS.gov, you can get up -to-date information on 
current events and changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you get an-
swers to some of the most common tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive T ax Assistant, a tool that 
will ask you questions and, based on your input, pro-
vide answers on a number of tax topics.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, and publica-
tions. Y ou will find details on the most recent tax 
changes and interactive links to help you find answers 
to your questions.
• Y ou may also be able to access tax information in your 
e-filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return?  There are 
various types of tax return preparers, including enrolled 
agents, certified public accountants (CPAs), accountants, 
and many others who don’t have professional credentials. 
If you choose to have someone prepare your tax return, 
choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax preparer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall substantive accu-
racy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax identification 
number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs the return, 
you're ultimately responsible for providing all the 
information required for the preparer to accurately 
prepare your return and for the accuracy of every item re-
ported on the return. Anyone paid to prepare tax returns 
for others should have a thorough understanding of tax 
matters. For more information on how to choose a tax pre-
parer, go to Tips for Choosing a T ax Preparer on IRS.gov.
CAUTION
!
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 6 How T o Get T ax Help 33

Page 34 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employers can register to use Business Services On-
line. The Social Security Administration (SSA) offers on-
line service at SSA.gov/employer for fast, free, and secure 
W-2 filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled agents, 
and individuals who process Form W -2, Wage and T ax 
Statement, and Form W -2c, Corrected Wage and T ax 
Statement.
IRS social media. Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia to see the 
various social media tools the IRS uses to share the latest 
information on tax changes, scam alerts, initiatives, prod-
ucts, and services. At the IRS, privacy and security are our 
highest priority. We use these tools to share public infor-
mation with you. Don’t post your social security number 
(SSN) or other confidential information on social media 
sites. Always protect your identity when using any social 
networking site.
The following IRS Y ouT ube channels provide short, in-
formative videos on various tax -related topics in English, 
Spanish, and ASL.
• Y outube.com/irsvideos.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio presentations 
for individuals, small businesses, and tax professionals.
Online tax information in other languages.  Y ou can 
find information on IRS.gov/MyLanguage if English isn’t 
your native language.
Free Over -the-Phone Interpreter (OPI) Service.  The 
IRS is committed to serving taxpayers with limited -English 
proficiency (LEP) by offering OPI services. The OPI Serv-
ice is a federally funded program and is available at T ax-
payer Assistance Centers (TACs), most IRS offices, and 
every VITA/TCE tax return site. The OPI Service is acces-
sible in more than 350 languages.
Accessibility Helpline available for taxpayers with 
disabilities. T axpayers who need information about ac-
cessibility services can call 833 -690-0598. The Accessi-
bility Helpline can answer questions related to current and 
future accessibility products and services available in al-
ternative media formats (for example, braille, large print, 
audio, etc.). The Accessibility Helpline does not have ac-
cess to your IRS account. For help with tax law, refunds, or 
account-related issues, go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp.
Note. Form 9000, Alternative Media Preference, or 
Form 9000(SP) allows you to elect to receive certain types 
of written correspondence in the following formats.
• Standard Print.
• Large Print.
• Braille.
• Audio (MP3).
• Plain T ext File (TXT).
• Braille Ready File (BRF).
Disasters. Go to IRS.gov/DisasterRelief to review the 
available disaster tax relief.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to IRS.gov/
Forms to view, download, or print all the forms, instruc-
tions, and publications you may need. Or, you can go to 
IRS.gov/OrderForms to place an order.
Getting tax publications and instructions in eBook 
format. Download and view most tax publications and in-
structions (including the Instructions for Form 1040) on 
mobile devices as eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks.
IRS eBooks have been tested using Apple's iBooks for 
iPad. Our eBooks haven’t been tested on other dedicated 
eBook readers, and eBook functionality may not operate 
as intended.
Access your online account (individual taxpayers 
only). Go to IRS.gov/Account to securely access infor-
mation about your federal tax account.
• View the amount you owe and a breakdown by tax 
year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a new payment 
plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 years of payment history 
and any pending or scheduled payments.
• Access your tax records, including key data from your 
most recent tax return, and transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests from tax pro-
fessionals.
• View your address on file or manage your communica-
tion preferences.
Get a transcript of your return. With an online account, 
you can access a variety of information to help you during 
the filing season. Y ou can get a transcript, review your 
most recently filed tax return, and get your adjusted gross 
income. Create or access your online account at IRS.gov/
Account.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets your tax professional 
submit an authorization request to access your individual 
taxpayer IRS online account. For more information, go to 
IRS.gov/T axProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The safest and easiest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to e -file and choose direct deposit, 
which securely and electronically transfers your refund di-
rectly into your financial account. Direct deposit also 
avoids the possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
destroyed, or returned undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 
10 taxpayers use direct deposit to receive their refunds. If 
you don’t have a bank account, go to IRS.gov/
DirectDeposit for more information on where to find a bank 
or credit union that can open an account online.
34 Chapter 6 How T o Get T ax Help Publication 527 (2023)

Page 35 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related identity 
theft issues. 
• T ax-related identity theft happens when someone 
steals your personal information to commit tax fraud. 
Y our taxes can be affected if your SSN is used to file a 
fraudulent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with taxpayers by 
email, text messages (including shortened links), tele-
phone calls, or social media channels to request or 
verify personal or financial information. This includes 
requests for personal identification numbers (PINs), 
passwords, or similar information for credit cards, 
banks, or other financial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Identity Theft 
Central webpage, for information on identity theft and 
data security protection for taxpayers, tax professio-
nals, and businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of tax-related 
identity theft, you can learn what steps you should 
take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP PINs are 
six-digit numbers assigned to taxpayers to help pre-
vent the misuse of their SSNs on fraudulent federal in-
come tax returns. When you have an IP PIN, it pre-
vents someone else from filing a tax return with your 
SSN. T o learn more, go to IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your mobile de-
vice to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 800-829-1954.
The IRS can’t issue refunds before mid -February 
for returns that claimed the EIC or the additional 
child tax credit (ACTC). This applies to the entire 
refund, not just the portion associated with these credits.
Making a tax payment.  Payments of U.S. tax must be 
remitted to the IRS in U.S. dollars. Digital assets are not 
accepted. Go to IRS.gov/Payments for information on how 
to make a payment using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill or estimated 
tax payment directly from your checking or savings ac-
count at no cost to you.
• Debit Card, Credit Card, or Digital Wallet: Choose an 
approved payment processor to pay online or by 
phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Schedule a payment 
when filing your federal taxes using tax return prepara-
tion software or through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal T ax Payment System: Best option 
for businesses. Enrollment is required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment to the ad-
dress listed on the notice or instructions.
• Cash: Y ou may be able to pay your taxes with cash at 
a participating retail store.
CAUTION
!
• Same-Day Wire: Y ou may be able to do same-day 
wire from your financial institution. Contact your finan-
cial institution for availability, cost, and time frames.
Note. The IRS uses the latest encryption technology to 
ensure that the electronic payments you make online, by 
phone, or from a mobile device using the IRS2Go app are 
safe and secure. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or money order.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/Payments for 
more information about your options.
• Apply for an online payment agreement (IRS.gov/
OPA) to meet your tax obligation in monthly install-
ments if you can’t pay your taxes in full today. Once 
you complete the online process, you will receive im-
mediate notification of whether your agreement has 
been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier to see if 
you can settle your tax debt for less than the full 
amount you owe. For more information on the Offer in 
Compromise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  Go to IRS.gov/Form1040X 
for information and updates.
Checking the status of your amended return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of Form 1040 -X amen-
ded returns.
It can take up to 3 weeks from the date you filed 
your amended return for it to show up in our sys-
tem, and processing it can take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter you’ve re-
ceived. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to find additional informa-
tion about responding to an IRS notice or letter.
Responding to an IRS notice or letter.  Y ou can now 
upload responses to all notices and letters using the 
Document Upload T ool. For notices that require additional 
action, taxpayers will be redirected appropriately on 
IRS.gov to take further action. T o learn more about the 
tool, go to IRS.gov/Upload.
Note. Y ou can use Schedule LEP (Form 1040), Re-
quest for Change in Language Preference, to state a pref-
erence to receive notices, letters, or other written commu-
nications from the IRS in an alternative language. Y ou may 
not immediately receive written communications in the re-
quested language. The IRS’s commitment to LEP taxpay-
ers is part of a multi -year timeline that began providing 
translations in 2023. Y ou will continue to receive communi-
cations, including notices and letters, in English until they 
are translated to your preferred language.
Contacting your local TAC.  Keep in mind, many ques-
tions can be answered on IRS.gov without visiting a TAC. 
Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp for the topics people ask about 
most. If you still need help, TACs provide tax help when a 
tax issue can’t be handled online or by phone. All TACs 
now provide service by appointment, so you’ll know in 
CAUTION
!
Publication 527 (2023) Chapter 6 How T o Get T ax Help 35

Page 36 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
advance that you can get the service you need without 
long wait times. Before you visit, go to IRS.gov/
TACLocator to find the nearest TAC and to check hours, 
available services, and appointment options. Or, on the 
IRS2Go app, under the Stay Connected tab, choose the 
Contact Us option and click on “Local Offices.”
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) Is Here To Help 
You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the IRS that 
helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer rights. Their job is 
to ensure that every taxpayer is treated fairly and that you 
know and understand your rights under the T axpayer Bill 
of Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your Taxpayer 
Rights?
The T axpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic rights that 
all taxpayers have when dealing with the IRS. Go to 
T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to help you understand what 
these rights mean to you and how they apply. These are 
your rights. Know them. Use them.
What Can TAS Do for You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you can’t resolve 
with the IRS. And their service is free. If you qualify for 
their assistance, you will be assigned to one advocate 
who will work with you throughout the process and will do 
everything possible to resolve your issue. TAS can help 
you if:
• Y our problem is causing financial difficulty for you, 
your family, or your business;
• Y ou face (or your business is facing) an immediate 
threat of adverse action; or
• Y ou’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS but no one 
has responded, or the IRS hasn’t responded by the 
date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of Columbia, 
and Puerto Rico. T o find your advocate’s number:
• Go to T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us;
• Download Pub. 1546, The T axpayer Advocate Service 
Is Y our Voice at the IRS, available at IRS.gov/pub/irs-
pdf/p1546.pdf;
• Call the IRS toll free at 800-TAX-FORM 
(800-829-3676) to order a copy of Pub. 1546;
• Check your local directory; or
• Call TAS toll free at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that affect 
many taxpayers. If you know of one of these broad issues, 
report it to TAS at IRS.gov/SAMS. Be sure to not include 
any personal taxpayer information.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS and TAS. LITCs rep-
resent individuals whose income is below a certain level 
and who need to resolve tax problems with the IRS. LITCs 
can represent taxpayers in audits, appeals, and tax collec-
tion disputes before the IRS and in court. In addition, 
LITCs can provide information about taxpayer rights and 
responsibilities in different languages for individuals who 
speak English as a second language. Services are offered 
for free or a small fee. For more information or to find an 
LITC near you, go to the LITC page at 
T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/LITC or see IRS Pub. 4134, 
Low Income T axpayer Clinic List, at IRS.gov/pub/irs-pdf/
p4134.pdf.
36 Publication 527 (2023)

Page 37 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
T o help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
A
Accelerated Cost Recovery System 
(ACRS) 12
(See also Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS))
Effective date 10
Accounting methods:
Accrual method 4
Cash method 4
Constructive receipt of income 4
Accrual method taxpayers 4
ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery System):
Effective date 10
Active participation 21
Activities not for profit 25
Additions to property 14
(See also Improvements)
Basis 12
MACRS recovery period 14
Adjusted basis:
MACRS depreciation 11
Adjusted gross income (AGI):
Modified (See Modified adjusted gross 
income (MAGI))
Advance rent 4
Security deposits 4
Advertising 5
Allocation of expenses:
Change of property to rental use 24
How to divide expenses 27
Part of property rented 25
Personal use of rental property 5, 26
Alternative Depreciation System (ADS):
Election of 13
MACRS 12, 18
Alternative minimum tax (AMT):
Accelerated depreciation methods 8
Apartments:
Basement apartments 29
Dwelling units 26
Appraisal fees 11
Assessments for maintenance 12
Assessments, local (See Local assessments)
Assistance (See T ax help)
Assumption of mortgage 11
Attorneys' fees 11, 12
Automobiles:
MACRS recovery periods 13
B
Basis:
Adjusted basis 11
Assessments for local improvements 12
Basis other than cost 11
Cost basis 10
Decreases to 12
Deductions:
Capitalization of costs vs. 12
Not greater than basis 10
Fair market value 24
Increases to 12
MACRS depreciable basis 10
Property changed to rental use 24
C
Capital expenditures:
Deductions vs. effect on basis 12
Local benefit taxes 5
Mortgages, payments to obtain 5
Cars:
MACRS recovery periods 13
Cash method taxpayers 4
Casualty losses 22
Charitable contributions:
Use of property 28
Cleaning and maintenance 5
Closing costs 11
Commissions 5
Computers:
MACRS recovery periods 13
Condominiums 23, 26
Constructive receipt of income 4
Cooperative housing 9, 23, 26
Cost basis 10
Credit reports 11
Credits:
Residential energy credits 12
D
Days of personal use 27
Days used for repairs and maintenance 28
Deductions:
Capitalizing costs vs. effect on basis 12
Depreciation (See Depreciation)
Limitations on 19
Passive activity losses (See Passive activity)
Depreciation 8
Alternative Depreciation System (ADS) 
(See Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (MACRS))
Basis (See Basis)
Change of property to rental use 24
Claiming correct amount of 18
Declining balance method 10
Duration of property expected to last more 
than one year 9
Eligible property 9
First-year expensing 8
MACRS (See Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (MACRS))
Methods 10, 15
Ownership of property 9
Rental expense 5
Rented property 9
Section 179 deduction 8
Special depreciation allowances 12
Straight line method 10
Useful life 9
Vacant rental property 6
Discount, bonds and notes issued at 
(See Original issue discount (OID))
Dividing of expenses (See Allocation of 
expenses)
Dwelling units:
Definition 26
Fair rental price 27
Personal use of 26, 27
E
Easements 12
Equipment rental expense 6
F
Fair market value (FMV) 24
Fair rental price 27
Fees:
Loan origination fees 6, 11
Points (See Points)
Settlement fees and other costs 11
T ax return preparation fees5
First-year expensing 8
Form 1040 or 1040-SR:
Not rented for profit income 25
Part of property rented 25
Rental income and expenses 18
Schedule E 19
Form 1098:
Mortgage interest 5
Form 4684:
Casualties and thefts 22
Form 4797:
Sales of business property 22
Form 8582:
Passive activity losses 21, 22
G
Gains and losses:
At-risk rules 20
Casualty and theft losses 22
Limits on rental losses 19
Passive activity losses 20
Rental real estate activities 21
Sale of rental property 3, 22
General depreciation system (GDS) 
(See Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS))
H
Home:
Main home 28
Use as rental property (See Use of home)
I
Improvements 8
(See also Repairs)
Assessments for local improvements 12
Basis 12
Depreciation of rented property 9
MACRS recovery period 14
Insurance 5
Casualty or theft loss payments 12
Change of property to rental use 24
Fire insurance premiums, cost basis 11
Part of property rented 25
Premiums paid in advance 5
Title insurance, cost basis 11
Interest payments 5
(See also Mortgages)
Loan origination fees 6
Rental expenses 5
L
Land:
Cost basis 11
Depreciation 9
Leases:
Cancellation payments 4
Equipment leasing 6
Limits:
Passive activity losses and credits 20
Rental losses 19
Loans:
Assumption fees 11
Charges connected with getting or 
refinancing, cost basis 11
Low or no interest 11
Origination fees 6
Publication 527 (2023) 37

Page 38 of 38  Fileid: … tions/p527/2023/a/xml/cycle02/source 13:48 - 24-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Local assessments 12
Losses (See Gains and losses)
M
Missing children, photographs of 2
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System 
(MACRS) 12-18
Additions or improvements to property 14
Adjusted basis 11
Alternative Depreciation System (ADS) 12, 
18
Basis other than cost 11
Conventions 14
Cost basis 10
Depreciable basis 10
Effective date 10
Excluded property 13
General Depreciation System (GDS) 12, 13, 
15
Nonresidential rental property 13
Property used in rental activities 
(T able 2-1)14
Recovery periods 14, 15
Residential rental property 13, 15
Special depreciation allowances 12
Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) 21
Mortgages 5, 11
Assumption of, cost basis 11
Change of property to rental use 24
End of, OID 7
Interest 5, 24, 25
Part of property rented 25
N
Nonresidential real property 13
Not-for-profit activities 25
O
Original issue discount (OID) 6, 7
P
Part interest:
Expenses 5
Income 4
Passive activity:
Maximum special allowance 21
Personal property:
Rental income from 4
Personal use of rental property 24, 26
(See also Property changed to rental use)
Placed-in-service date 9
Points 5, 6, 11
Pre-rental expenses 6
Principal residence (See Home)
Profit, property not rented for 25
Property changed to rental use 24
Basis 24
Publications (See T ax help)
R
Real estate professionals 20
Real estate taxes 11
Real property trades or businesses 20
Recordkeeping requirements:
T ravel and transportation expenses6
Recovery periods 13
Rent 11
Advance rent 4
Fair price 27
Rental expenses 5
Advertising 5
Allocation between rental and personal 
uses 27
Change of property to rental use 24
Cleaning and maintenance 5
Commissions 5
Depreciation 5
Dwelling unit used as home 27
Equipment rental 6
Home, property also used as 4
Improvements 8
Insurance 5
Interest payments 5
Local transportation expenses 5
Part of property rented 25
Points 5, 6
Pre-rental expenses 6
Rental payments 5
Repairs 5, 7
Sale of property 6
T ax return preparation fees5
T axes5
T enant, paid by4
T ravel expenses5
Utilities 5
Vacant rental property 6
Rental income:
Advance rent 4
Cancellation of lease payments 4
Dwelling unit used as home 27
Lease with option to buy 4
Not rented for profit 25
Part interest 4
Property received from tenant 4
Reporting 4, 18
Security deposit 4
Services received from tenant 4
Uncollected rent 6
Used as home 4
Rental losses 21
(See also Gains and losses)
(See also Passive activity)
Repairs 5, 7
(See also Improvements)
Assessments for maintenance 12
Personal use of rental property exception for 
days used for repairs and 
maintenance 28
S
Sale of property:
Expenses 6
Gain or loss 3, 22
Main home 3
Section 179 deductions 8
Security deposits 4
Settlement fees 11
Shared equity financing agreements 28
Special depreciation allowances 12
Spouse:
Material participation 21
Standard mileage rates 6
Surveys 11
T
Tables and figures:
Improvements, examples of (T able 1-1)8
MACRS optional tables (T able 2-2d)18
MACRS optional tables (T ables 2-2a, 2-2b, 
and 2-2c) 17
MACRS recovery periods for property used in 
rental activities (T able 2-1)14
Tax credits:
Residential energy credits, effect on 
basis 12
Tax help 33
Tax return preparation fees 5
Taxes:
Deduction of 5
Local benefit taxes 5
Real estate taxes 11
T ransfer taxes11
Theft losses 22
Title insurance 11
Transfer taxes 11
Travel and transportation expenses:
Local transportation expenses 5
Recordkeeping 6
Rental expenses 5
Standard mileage rate 6
U
Uncollected rent:
Income 6
Use of home:
Before or after renting 28
Change to rental use 24
Days of personal use 27
Fair rental price 27
Passive activity rules exception 21
Personal use as dwelling unit 26
Utilities 5, 12
V
Vacant rental property 6
Vacation homes:
Dwelling unit 26
Fair rental price 27
Personal use of 26
Valuation:
Fair market value 24
38 Publication 527 (2023)