Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 10  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 31  15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Publication 504
Cat. No. 15006I
Divorced
or Separated
Individuals
For use in preparing
2020 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (TiếngViệt) 
Contents
Future Developments ....................... 1
Reminders ............................... 1
Introduction .............................. 2
Filing Status .............................. 3
Married Filing Jointly ...................... 4
Married Filing Separately .................. 5
Head of Household ....................... 6
Dependents .............................. 8
Qualifying Child or Qualifying Relative ......... 8
Children of Divorced or Separated 
Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart) ..... 8
Qualifying Child of More Than One 
Person .......................... 11
Alimony ................................ 12
General Rules ......................... 13
Certain Rules for Instruments Executed After 
1984 .............................. 14
Alimony Requirements ................ 15
Recapture of Alimony ................. 16
Instruments Executed Before 1985 .......... 17
Qualified Domestic Relations Order ........... 19
Individual Retirement Arrangements .......... 19
Property Settlements ...................... 19
Transfer Between Spouses ................ 19
Gift Tax on Property Settlements ............ 22
Gift Tax Return ...................... 22
Sale of Jointly Owned Property ............. 22
Costs of Getting a Divorce .................. 23
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ........... 23
Community Property ...................... 23
Community Income ...................... 23
Alimony (Community Income) .............. 25
How To Get Tax Help ...................... 26
Index .................................. 29
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to 
Pub. 504, such as legislation enacted after this publication 
was published, go to IRS.gov/Pub504.
Reminders
Change of withholding.  The Form W -4 no longer uses 
personal allowances to calculate your income tax with-
holding. If you have been claiming a personal allowance 
Feb 16, 2021

Page 2 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for your spouse, and you divorce or legally separate, you 
must give your employer a new Form W -4, Employee’s 
Withholding Certificate, within 10 days after the divorce or 
separation. For more information on withholding and when 
you must furnish a new Form W -4, see Pub. 505, Tax 
Withholding and Estimated Tax.
Divorce or separation instruments after 2018. 
Amounts paid as alimony or separate maintenance pay-
ments under a divorce or separation instrument executed 
after 2018 won't be deductible by the payer. Such 
amounts also won't be includible in the income of the re-
cipient. The same is true of alimony paid under a divorce 
or separation instrument executed before 2019 and modi-
fied after 2018, if the modification expressly states that the 
alimony isn't deductible to the payer or includible in the in-
come of the recipient.
Relief from joint liability.  In some cases, one spouse 
may be relieved of joint liability for tax, interest, and penal-
ties on a joint tax return. For more information, see Relief 
from joint liability under Married Filing Jointly.
Social security numbers for dependents. You must in-
clude on your tax return the taxpayer identification number 
(generally, the social security number (SSN)) of every de-
pendent you claim. See Dependents, later.
Using and getting an ITIN.  The ITIN is entered wher-
ever an SSN is requested on a tax return. If you’re re-
quired to include another person's SSN on your return and 
that person doesn’t have and can’t get an SSN, enter that 
person's ITIN. The IRS will issue an ITIN to a nonresident 
or resident alien who doesn’t have and isn’t eligible to get 
an SSN. To apply for an ITIN, file Form W -7, Application 
for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number, with the 
IRS. Allow 7 weeks for the IRS to notify you of your ITIN 
application status (9 to 11 weeks if you submit the applica-
tion during peak processing periods (January 15 through 
April 30) or if you’re filing from overseas). If you haven't re-
ceived your ITIN at the end of that time, you can call the 
IRS to check the status of your application. For more infor-
mation, go to IRS.gov/FormW7.
Change of address. If you change your mailing address, 
be sure to notify the IRS. You can use Form 8822, 
Change of Address.
Change of name.  If you change your name, be sure to 
notify the Social Security Administration using Form SS -5, 
Application for a Social Security Card.
Photographs of missing children.  The IRS is a proud 
partner with the National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC). Photographs of missing children se-
lected by the Center may appear in this publication on pa-
ges that would otherwise be blank. You can help bring 
these children home by looking at the photographs and 
calling 800-THE-LOST (800-843-5678) if you recognize a 
child.
Introduction
This publication explains tax rules that apply if you are di-
vorced or separated from your spouse. It covers general 
filing information and can help you choose your filing sta-
tus. It can also help you decide which benefits you are en-
titled to claim.
The publication also discusses payments and transfers 
of property that often occur as a result of divorce and how 
you must treat them on your tax return. Examples include 
alimony, child support, other court -ordered payments, 
property settlements, and transfers of individual retire-
ment arrangements. In addition, this publication also ex-
plains deductions allowed for some of the costs of obtain-
ing a divorce and how to handle tax withholding and 
estimated tax payments.
The last part of the publication explains special rules 
that may apply to persons who live in community property 
states.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and suggestions for future 
editions.
You can send us comments through IRS.gov/
FormComments. Or, you can write to the Internal Reve-
nue Service, Tax Forms and Publications, 1111 Constitu-
tion Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments and suggestions as we revise 
our tax forms, instructions, and publications. Do not send 
tax questions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Getting answers to your tax questions.  If you have 
a tax question not answered by this publication or the How 
To Get Tax Help  section at the end of this publication, go 
to the IRS Interactive Tax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the search 
feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Visit IRS.gov/Forms to download current and prior -year 
forms, instructions, and publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to order current forms, instruc-
tions, and publications; call 800 -829-3676 to order 
prior-year forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon as possible. 
Do not resubmit requests you’ve already sent us. You can 
get forms and publications faster online.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publications
501 Dependents, Standard Deduction, and Filing 
Information
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
555 Community Property
590-A Contributions to Individual Retirement 
Arrangements (IRAs)
  501 
  544 
  555 
  590-A 
Page 2 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 3 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
590-B Distributions from Individual Retirement 
Arrangements (IRAs)
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
974 Premium Tax Credit
Forms (and Instructions)
8332 Release/Revocation of Release of Claim to 
Exemption for Child by Custodial Parent
8379 Injured Spouse Allocation
8857 Request for Innocent Spouse Relief
See How To Get Tax Help near the end of this publication 
for information about getting publications and forms.
Filing Status
Your filing status is used in determining whether you must 
file a return, your standard deduction, and the correct tax. 
It may also be used in determining whether you can claim 
certain other deductions and credits. The filing status you 
can choose depends partly on your marital status on the 
last day of your tax year.
Marital status. If you are unmarried, your filing status is 
single or, if you meet certain requirements, head of house-
hold or qualifying widow(er). If you are married, your filing 
status is either married filing a joint return or married filing 
a separate return. For information about the single and 
qualifying widow(er) filing statuses, see Pub. 501, De-
pendents, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information.
Unmarried persons. You are unmarried for the whole 
year if either of the following applies.
• You have obtained a final decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance by the last day of your tax year. You 
must follow your state law to determine if you are di-
vorced or legally separated.
Exception. If you and your spouse obtain a di-
vorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing tax re-
turns as unmarried individuals, and at the time of di-
vorce you intend to remarry each other and do so in 
the next tax year, you and your spouse must file as 
married individuals. 
• You have obtained a decree of annulment, which 
holds that no valid marriage ever existed. You must 
file amended returns (Form 1040-X, Amended U.S. In-
dividual Income Tax Return) for all tax years affected 
by the annulment that aren’t closed by the statute of 
limitations. The statute of limitations generally doesn’t 
end until 3 years (including extensions) after the date 
you file your original return or within 2 years after the 
date you pay the tax. On the amended return, you will 
change your filing status to single or, if you meet cer-
tain requirements, head of household. 
Married persons. You are married for the whole year 
if you are separated but you haven’t obtained a final de-
cree of divorce or separate maintenance by the last day of 
your tax year. An interlocutory decree isn’t a final decree. 
  590-B 
  971 
  974 
  8332 
  8379 
  8857 
However, individuals who have entered into a registered 
domestic partnership, civil union, or other similar relation-
ship that isn’t called a marriage under state (or foreign) 
law aren’t married for federal tax purposes. For more infor-
mation, see Pub. 501.
Exception. If you live apart from your spouse, under 
certain circumstances, you may be considered unmarried 
and can file as head of household. See Head of House-
hold, later.
Health care law considerations.  Under the health care 
law, you must have qualifying health care coverage.
Qualifying health care coverage (also called minimum 
essential coverage) includes:
• Most coverage through government-sponsored pro-
grams (including Medicaid coverage, Medicare parts 
A or C, the Children’s Health Insurance Program 
(CHIP), certain benefits for veterans and their families, 
TRICARE, and health coverage for Peace Corps vol-
unteers);
• Most types of employer-sponsored coverage;
• Grandfathered health plans; and
• Other health coverage the Department of Health and 
Human Services designates as minimum essential 
coverage.
Your divorce or separation may impact your responsi-
bilities under the health care law in the following ways.
• Special Marketplace Enrollment Period. If you lose 
your health insurance coverage due to divorce, you 
are still required to have coverage for every month of 
the year for yourself and the dependents you can 
claim on your tax return. Losing coverage through a 
divorce is considered a qualifying life event that allows 
you to enroll in health coverage through the Health In-
surance Marketplace during a Special Enrollment Pe-
riod.
• Changes in Circumstances. If you purchase health 
insurance coverage through the Health Insurance 
Marketplace, you may get advance payments of the 
premium tax credit in 2020. If you do, you should re-
port changes in circumstances to your Marketplace 
throughout the year. Changes to report include a 
change in marital status, a name change, and a 
change in your income or family size. By reporting 
changes, you will help make sure that you get the 
proper type and amount of financial assistance. This 
will also help you avoid getting too much or too little 
credit in advance.
• Shared Policy Allocation. If you divorced or are le-
gally separated during the tax year and are enrolled in 
the same qualified health plan, you and your former 
spouse must allocate policy amounts on your sepa-
rate tax returns to figure your premium tax credit and 
reconcile any advance payments made on your be-
half. The Instructions for Form 8962, Premium Tax 
Credit, has more information about the Shared Policy 
Allocation.
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 3

Page 4 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Married Filing Jointly
If you are married, you and your spouse can choose to file 
a joint return. If you file jointly, you both must include all 
your income, deductions, and credits on that return. You 
can file a joint return even if one of you had no income or 
deductions.
If both you and your spouse have income, you 
usually should figure your tax on both a joint re-
turn and separate returns (using the filing status 
of married filing separately) to see which gives the two of 
you the lower combined tax.
Nonresident alien. To file a joint return, at least one of 
you must be a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of 
the tax year. If either of you was a nonresident alien at any 
time during the tax year, you can file a joint return only if 
you agree to treat the nonresident spouse as a resident of 
the United States. This means that your combined world-
wide incomes are subject to U.S. income tax. These rules 
are explained in Pub. 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Signing a joint return.  Both you and your spouse must 
generally sign the return, or it won't be considered a joint 
return.
Joint and individual liability. Both you and your spouse 
may be held responsible, jointly and individually, for the 
tax and any interest or penalty due on your joint return. 
This means that one spouse may be held liable for all the 
tax due even if all the income was earned by the other 
spouse.
Divorced taxpayers.  If you are divorced, you are 
jointly and individually responsible for any tax, interest, 
and penalties due on a joint return for a tax year ending 
before your divorce. This responsibility applies even if 
your divorce decree states that your former spouse will be 
responsible for any amounts due on previously filed joint 
returns.
Relief from joint liability.  In some cases, a spouse 
may be relieved of the tax, interest, and penalties on a 
joint return. You can ask for relief no matter how small the 
liability.
There are three types of relief available.
• Innocent spouse relief.
• Separation of liability, which applies to joint filers who 
are divorced, widowed, legally separated, or who 
haven’t lived together for the 12 months ending on the 
date election of this relief is filed.
• Equitable relief.
Married persons who live in community property states, 
but who didn’t file joint returns, may also qualify for relief 
from liability for tax attributable to an item of community in-
come or for equitable relief. See Relief from liability for tax 
attributable to an item of community income , later, under 
Community Property.
TIP
Each kind of relief has different requirements. You must 
file Form 8857 to request relief under any of these catego-
ries. Pub. 971 explains these kinds of relief and who may 
qualify for them. You can also find information on our web-
site at IRS.gov.
Tax refund applied to spouse's debts.  The overpay-
ment shown on your joint return may be used to pay the 
past-due amount of your spouse's debts. This includes 
your spouse's federal tax, state income tax, child or 
spousal support payments, or a federal nontax debt, such 
as a student loan. You can get a refund of your share of 
the overpayment if you qualify as an injured spouse.
Injured spouse. You are an injured spouse if you file 
a joint return and all or part of your share of the overpay-
ment was, or is expected to be, applied against your 
spouse's past-due debts. An injured spouse can get a re-
fund for his or her share of the overpayment that would 
otherwise be used to pay the past-due amount.
To be considered an injured spouse, you must:
1. Have made and reported tax payments (such as fed-
eral income tax withheld from wages or estimated tax 
payments), or claimed a refundable tax credit, such 
as the earned income credit or additional child tax 
credit on the joint return and
2. Not be legally obligated to pay the past-due amount.
If the injured spouse's permanent home is in a com-
munity property state, then the injured spouse must only 
meet (2). For more information, see Pub. 555.
If you are an injured spouse, you must file Form 8379 to 
have your portion of the overpayment refunded to you. 
Follow the instructions for the form.
If you haven’t filed your joint return and you know that 
your joint refund will be offset, file Form 8379 with your re-
turn. You should receive your refund within 14 weeks from 
the date the paper return is filed or within 11 weeks from 
the date the return is filed electronically.
If you filed your joint return and your joint refund was 
offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When filed after offset, it 
can take up to 8 weeks to receive your refund. Don’t at-
tach the previously filed tax return, but do include copies 
of all Forms W -2, Wage and Tax Statement, and W -2G, 
Certain Gambling Winnings, for both spouses and any 
Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld.
An injured spouse claim is different from an inno-
cent spouse relief request. An injured spouse 
uses Form 8379 to request an allocation of the tax 
overpayment attributed to each spouse. An innocent 
spouse uses Form 8857 to request relief from joint liability 
for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return for items of 
the other spouse (or former spouse) that were incorrectly 
reported on or omitted from the joint return. For informa-
tion on innocent spouses, see Relief from joint liability , 
earlier.
CAUTION
!
Page 4 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 5 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Married Filing Separately
If you and your spouse file separate returns, you should 
each report only your own income, deductions, and cred-
its on your individual return. You can file a separate return 
even if only one of you had income.
Community or separate income.  If you live in a com-
munity property state and file a separate return, your in-
come may be separate income or community income for 
income tax purposes. For more information, see Com-
munity Income under Community Property, later.
Separate liability. If you and your spouse file separately, 
you each are responsible only for the tax due on your own 
return.
Itemized deductions. If you and your spouse file sepa-
rate returns and one of you itemizes deductions, the other 
spouse can’t use the standard deduction and should also 
itemize deductions.
Dividing itemized deductions.  You may be able to 
claim itemized deductions on a separate return for certain 
expenses that you paid separately or jointly with your 
spouse. See Table 1.
Separate returns may give you a higher tax.  Some 
married couples file separate returns because each wants 
to be responsible only for his or her own tax. There is no 
joint liability. But in almost all instances, if you file separate 
returns, you will pay more combined federal tax than you 
would with a joint return. This is because the following 
special rules apply if you file a separate return.
1. Your tax rate is generally higher than it would be on a 
joint return.
2. Your exemption amount for figuring the alternative 
minimum tax is half of that allowed on a joint return.
3. You can’t take the credit for child and dependent care 
expenses in most cases, and the amount you can ex-
clude from income under an employer's dependent 
care assistance program is limited to $2,500 (instead 
of $5,000 on a joint return). If you are legally separa-
ted or living apart from your spouse, you may be able 
to file a separate return and still take the credit. See 
Pub. 503 for more information.
Itemized Deductions on Separate Returns
This table shows itemized deductions you can claim on your married filing separate return whether you paid the 
expenses separately with your own funds or jointly with your spouse.
Caution: If you live in a community property state, these rules don’t apply. See Community Property.
IF you paid ... AND you ...
THEN you can deduct on your 
separate federal return ...
medical expenses paid with funds deposited in a joint checking 
account in which you and your spouse have 
an equal interest
half of the total medical expenses, 
subject to certain limits, unless you can 
show that you alone paid the expenses. 
state income tax file a separate state income tax return the state income tax you alone paid 
during the year.
file a joint state income tax return and you and 
your spouse are jointly and individually liable 
for the full amount of the state income tax 
the state income tax you alone paid 
during the year.
file a joint state income tax return and you are 
liable for only your own share of state income 
tax
the smaller of:
• the state income tax you alone 
paid during the year or
• the total state income tax you and 
your spouse paid during the year 
multiplied by the following fraction. 
The numerator is your gross 
income and the denominator is 
your combined gross income.
property tax paid the tax on property held as tenants by 
the entirety
the property tax you alone paid.
mortgage interest paid the interest on a qualified home1 held as 
tenants by the entirety 
the mortgage interest you alone paid.
casualty loss have a casualty loss2 resulting from a 
federally declared disaster on a home you 
own as tenants by the entirety 
half of the loss, subject to the 
deduction limits. Neither spouse may 
report the total casualty loss. 
1 For more information on a qualified home and deductible mortgage interest, see Pub. 936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction.
2 For more information on casualty losses, see Pub. 547, Casualties, Disasters and Thefts.
Table 1.
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 5

Page 6 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. You can’t take the earned income credit.
5. You can’t take the exclusion or credit for adoption ex-
penses in most cases.
6. You can’t exclude the interest from qualified savings 
bonds that you used for higher education expenses.
7. If you lived with your spouse at any time during the tax 
year:
a. You can’t claim the credit for the elderly or the dis-
abled, and
b. You will have to include in income a higher per-
centage (up to 85%) of any social security or 
equivalent railroad retirement benefits you re-
ceived.
8. The following credits and deductions are reduced at 
income levels that are half those for a joint return.
a. The child tax credit.
b. The retirement savings contributions credit.
9. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 (instead of 
$3,000 on a joint return).
10. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you can’t claim 
the standard deduction. If you can claim the standard 
deduction, your basic standard deduction is half the 
amount allowed on a joint return.
11. You can’t take the credit for higher education expen-
ses (American opportunity and lifetime learning cred-
its), the deduction for student loan interest, or the tui-
tion and fees deduction.
Joint return after separate returns. If either you or your 
spouse (or both of you) file a separate return, you can 
generally change to a joint return within 3 years from the 
due date (not including extensions) of the separate return 
or returns. This applies to a return either of you filed claim-
ing married filing separately, single, or head of household 
filing status. Use Form 1040-X to change your filing status.
Separate returns after joint return.  After the due date 
of your return, you and your spouse can’t file separate re-
turns if you previously filed a joint return.
Exception. A personal representative for a decedent 
can change from a joint return elected by the surviving 
spouse to a separate return for the decedent. The per-
sonal representative has 1 year from the due date (includ-
ing extensions) of the joint return to make the change.
Head of Household
Filing as head of household has the following advantages.
• You can claim the standard deduction even if your 
spouse files a separate return and itemizes deduc-
tions.
• Your standard deduction is higher than is allowed if 
you claim a filing status of single or married filing sep-
arately.
• Your tax rate will ususallybe lower than it is if you 
claim a filing status of single or married filing sepa-
rately.
• You may be able to claim certain credits (such as the 
dependent care credit and the earned income credit) 
you can’t claim if your filing status is married filing sep-
arately.
• Income limits that reduce your child tax credit and 
your retirement savings contributions credit, for exam-
ple, are higher than the income limits if you claim a fil-
ing status of married filing separately.
Requirements. You may be able to file as head of 
household if you meet all of the following requirements.
• You are unmarried or “considered unmarried” on the 
last day of the year.
• You paid more than half the cost of keeping up a 
home for the year.
• A “qualifying person” lived with you in the home for 
more than half the year (except for temporary absen-
ces, such as school). However, if the “qualifying per-
son” is your dependent parent, he or she doesn’t have 
to live with you. See Special rule for parent, later, un-
der Qualifying person.
Considered unmarried.  You are considered unmarried 
on the last day of the tax year if you meet all of the follow-
ing tests.
• You file a separate return. A separate return includes 
a return claiming married filing separately, single, or 
head of household filing status.
• You paid more than half the cost of keeping up your 
home for the tax year.
• Your spouse didn’t live in your home during the last 6 
months of the tax year. Your spouse is considered to 
live in your home even if he or she is temporarily ab-
sent due to special circumstances. See Temporary 
absences, later.
• Your home was the main home of your child, step-
child, or foster child for more than half the year. (See 
Qualifying person, later, for rules applying to a child's 
birth, death, or temporary absence during the year.)
• You must be able to claim the child as a dependent. 
However, you meet this test if you can’t claim the child 
as a dependent only because the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child. The general rules for claiming a 
dependent are shown in Table 3.
If you were considered married for part of the year 
and lived in a community property state  (one of 
the states listed later under Community Property), 
special rules may apply in determining your income and 
expenses. See Pub. 555 for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse was a non-
resident alien at any time during the tax year, and you 
haven’t chosen to treat your spouse as a resident alien, 
you are considered unmarried for head of household 
CAUTION
!
Page 6 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 7 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
purposes. However, your spouse isn’t a qualifying person 
for head of household purposes. You must have another 
qualifying person and meet the other requirements to file 
as head of household.
Keeping up a home.  You are keeping up a home only if 
you pay more than half the cost of its upkeep for the year. 
This includes rent, mortgage interest, real estate taxes, in-
surance on the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in 
the home. This doesn’t include the cost of clothing, edu-
cation, medical treatment, vacations, life insurance, or 
transportation for any member of the household.
Qualifying person. Table 2 shows who can be a qualify-
ing person. Any person not described in Table 2  isn't a 
qualifying person.
Generally, the qualifying person must live with you for 
more than half of the year.
Special rule for parent.  If your qualifying person is 
your father or mother, you may be eligible to file as head 
of household even if your father or mother doesn't live with 
you. However, you must be able to claim your father or 
mother as a dependent. Also, you must pay more than 
half the cost of keeping up a home that was the main 
home for the entire year for your father or mother.
You are keeping up a main home for your father or 
mother if you pay more than half the cost of keeping your 
parent in a rest home or home for the elderly.
Death or birth.  If the person for whom you kept up a 
home was born or died in 2020, you may still be able to 
file as head of household. If the person is your qualifying 
Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing 
status.
IF the person is your ... AND ... THEN that person is ...
qualifying child (such as a son, 
daughter, or grandchild who lived 
with you more than half the year 
and meets certain other tests)2
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not the 
child meets the Citizen or Resident 
Test, described in Pub. 501.
he or she is married and you can claim him or 
her as a dependent
a qualifying person.
he or she is married and you can’t claim him or 
her as a dependent
not a qualifying person.3
qualifying relative4 who is your 
father or mother
you can claim him or her as a dependent5 a qualifying person.6
you can’t claim him or her as a dependent not a qualifying person.
qualifying relative4 other than your 
father or mother (such as a 
grandparent, brother, or sister who 
meets certain tests)
he or she lived with you more than half the 
year, and he or she is related to you in one of 
the ways listed under Relatives who don't have 
to live with you in Pub. 501 and you can claim 
him or her as a dependent5
a qualifying person.
he or she didn’t live with you more than half the 
year
not a qualifying person.
he or she isn’t related to you in one of the ways 
listed under Relatives who don’t have to live 
with you in Pub. 501 and is your qualifying 
relative only because he or she lived with you 
all year as a member of your household
not a qualifying person.
you can’t claim him or her as a dependent not a qualifying person.
1 A person can’t qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2 See Table 3 for the tests that must be met to be a qualifying child. Note. If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” for head of 
household filing status doesn’t include a child who is your qualifying child only because of the rules described under Children of Divorced or 
Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart) under Qualifying Child, later. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child is 
generally your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though you can’t claim the child as a dependent.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you can’t claim them as a dependent is because you can be claimed as a dependent on 
someone else's return.
4 See Table 3 for the tests that must be met to be a qualifying relative.
5 If you can claim a person as a dependent only because of a multiple support agreement, that person isn’t a qualifying person. See Multiple Support 
Agreement in Pub. 501.
6 See Special rule for parent.
Table 2.
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 7

Page 8 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
child, the child must have lived with you for more than half 
the part of the year he or she was alive. If the person is 
anyone else, see Pub. 501.
Temporary absences.  You and your qualifying per-
son are considered to live together even if one or both of 
you are temporarily absent from your home due to special 
circumstances such as illness, education, business, vaca-
tion, military service, or detention in a juvenile facility. It 
must be reasonable to assume that the absent person will 
return to the home after the temporary absence. You must 
continue to keep up the home during the absence.
Kidnapped child. You may be eligible to file as head 
of household even if the child who is your qualifying per-
son has been kidnapped. You can claim head of house-
hold filing status if all of the following statements are true.
• The child is presumed by law enforcement authorities 
to have been kidnapped by someone who isn’t a 
member of your family or the child's family.
• In the year of the kidnapping, the child lived with you 
for more than half the part of the year before the kid-
napping.
• In the year of the child’s return, the child lived with you 
for more than half the part of the year following the 
date of the child’s return.
• You would have qualified for head of household filing 
status if the child hadn’t been kidnapped.
This treatment applies for all years until the earliest of:
1. The year the child is returned,
2. The year there is a determination that the child is 
dead, or
3. The year the child would have reached age 18.
For more information on filing as head of household, 
see Pub. 501.
Dependents
Qualifying Child or Qualifying 
Relative
The term “dependent” means:
• A qualifying child, or
• A qualifying relative.
Table 3 shows the tests that must be met to be either a 
qualifying child or qualifying relative, plus the additional 
requirements for claiming a dependent. For detailed infor-
mation, see Pub. 501.
You may be entitled to a child tax credit for each 
qualifying child who was under age 17 at the end 
of the year if you claimed that child as a depend-
ent. If you can't claim the child tax credit for a child who is 
an eligible dependent, you may be able to claim the credit 
for other dependents instead. See the Instructions for 
Forms 1040 and 1040-SR for details.
Children of Divorced or Separated Parents 
(or Parents Who Live Apart)
In most cases, because of the residency test (see item 3 
under Tests To Be a Qualifying Child in Table 3), a child of 
divorced or separated parents is the qualifying child of the 
custodial parent. However, the child will be treated as the 
qualifying child of the noncustodial parent if the rule for 
children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart) applies.
Children of divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart). A child will be treated as the qual-
ifying child of his or her noncustodial parent if all four of 
the following statements are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree 
of divorce or separate maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separation agree-
ment, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 months of 
the year, whether or not they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of his or her support for 
the year from the parents.
3. The child is in the custody of one or both parents for 
more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following applies.
a. The custodial parent signs a written declaration, 
discussed later, that he or she won't claim the 
child as a dependent for the year, and the noncus-
todial parent attaches this written declaration to 
his or her return. (If the decree or agreement went 
into effect after 1984, see Divorce decree or sepa-
ration agreement that went into effect after 1984 
and before 2009, or Post-2008 divorce decree or 
separation agreement, later).
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or separate mainte-
nance or written separation agreement that ap-
plies to 2020 states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, the decree or 
agreement wasn’t changed after 1984 to say the 
noncustodial parent can’t claim the child as a de-
pendent, and the noncustodial parent provides at 
least $600 for the child's support during the year. 
See Child support under pre-1985 agreement, 
later.
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.  The 
custodial parent is the parent with whom the child lived for 
TIP
Page 8 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 9 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the greater number of nights during the year. The other 
parent is the noncustodial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during the year 
and the child lived with both parents before the separa-
tion, the custodial parent is the one with whom the child 
lived for the greater number of nights during the rest of the 
year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a night if the 
child sleeps:
• At that parent's home, whether or not the parent is 
present, or
• In the company of the parent, when the child doesn’t 
sleep at a parent's home (for example, the parent and 
child are on vacation together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived with each 
parent for an equal number of nights during the year, the 
custodial parent is the parent with the higher adjusted 
gross income.
December 31. The night of December 31 is treated as 
part of the year in which it begins. For example, the night 
of December 31, 2020, is treated as part of 2020.
Overview of the Rules for Claiming a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see Pub. 501.
• You can’t claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer. 
• You can’t claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund of 
withheld income tax or estimated tax paid. 
• You can’t claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident of 
Canada or Mexico.1
• You can’t claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1.
 
 
 
2.
 
 
 
 
 
3.
 
 
4.
 
 
5.
 
The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 
child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, 
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them. 
 
The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year 
and younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly), (b) 
under age 24 at the end of the year, a student, and 
younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly), or (c) any 
age if permanently and totally disabled. 
 
The child must have lived with you for more than half of the 
year.2
 
The child must not have provided more than half of his or 
her own support for the year. 
 
The child must not be filing a joint return for the year 
(unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund of 
withheld income tax or estimated tax paid).
 
A child isn't a qualifying child unless he or she meets items 
(1) through (5). 
1.
 
 
2.
 
 
 
 
 
3.
 
 
4.
The person can’t be your qualifying child or the qualifying 
child of anyone else. 
 
The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don't have to live with you 
in Pub. 501, or (b) must live with you all year as a member 
of your household 2 (and your relationship must not violate 
local law).
 
The person's gross income for the year must be less than 
$4,300.3
 
You must provide more than half of the person's total 
support for the year.4
 
A person isn't a qualifying relative unless he or she meets 
items (1) through (4). 
If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than 
one person, only one person can actually treat the child as a 
qualifying child. See Qualifying Child of More Than One Person, 
later, to find out which person is the person entitled to claim the 
child as a qualifying child. 
1 An exception exists for certain adopted children.
2 Exceptions exist for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), and kidnapped children. 
3 An exception exists for persons who are disabled and have income from a sheltered workshop.
4 Exceptions exist for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), and kidnapped children. 
See Pub. 501.
Table 3.
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 9

Page 10 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emancipated child.  If a child is emancipated under 
state law, the child is treated as not living with either pa-
rent. See Examples 5 and 6.
Absences. If a child wasn’t with either parent on a par-
ticular night (because, for example, the child was staying 
at a friend's house), the child is treated as living with the 
parent with whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night, except for the absence. But if it can’t be deter-
mined with which parent the child normally would have 
lived or if the child wouldn’t have lived with either parent 
that night, the child is treated as not living with either pa-
rent that night.
Parent works at night.  If, due to a parent's nighttime 
work schedule, a child lives for a greater number of days 
but not nights with the parent who works at night, that pa-
rent is treated as the custodial parent. On a school day, 
the child is treated as living at the primary residence regis-
tered with the school.
Example 1 —child lived with one parent for a 
greater number of nights.  You and your child’s other 
parent are divorced. In 2020, your child lived with you 210 
nights and with the other parent 156 nights. You are the 
custodial parent.
Example 2 —child is away at camp.  In 2020, your 
daughter lives with each parent for alternate weeks. In the 
summer, she spends 6 weeks at summer camp. During 
the time she is at camp, she is treated as living with you 
for 3 weeks and with her other parent, your ex -spouse, for 
3 weeks because this is how long she would have lived 
with each parent if she hadn’t attended summer camp.
Example 3—child lived same number of days with 
each parent.  Your son lived with you 180 nights during 
the year and lived the same number of nights with his 
other parent, your ex-spouse. Your adjusted gross income 
is $40,000. Your ex -spouse's adjusted gross income is 
$25,000. You are treated as your son's custodial parent 
because you have the higher adjusted gross income.
Example 4 —child is at parent’s home but with 
other parent.  Your son normally lives with you during 
the week and with his other parent, your ex -spouse, every 
other weekend. You become ill and are hospitalized. The 
other parent lives in your home with your son for 10 con-
secutive days while you are in the hospital. Your son is 
treated as living with you during this 10 -day period be-
cause he was living in your home.
Example 5—child emancipated in May.  When your 
son turned age 18 in May 2020, he became emancipated 
under the law of the state where he lives. As a result, he 
isn’t considered in the custody of his parents for more 
than half of the year. The special rule for children of di-
vorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) 
doesn’t apply.
Example 6 —child emancipated in August.  Your 
daughter lives with you from January 1, 2020, until May 
31, 2020, and lives with her other parent, your ex -spouse, 
from June 1, 2020, through the end of the year. She turns 
18 and is emancipated under state law on August 1, 2020. 
Because she is treated as not living with either parent be-
ginning on August 1, she is treated as living with you the 
greater number of nights in 2020. You are the custodial 
parent.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent must use 
either Form 8332 or a similar statement (containing the 
same information required by the form) to make a written 
declaration to release a claim to an exemption for a child 
to the noncustodial parent. Although the exemption 
amount is zero for tax year 2020, this release allows the 
noncustodial parent to claim the child tax credit, additional 
child tax credit, and credit for other dependents, if applica-
ble, for the child. The noncustodial parent must attach a 
copy of the form or statement to his or her tax return each 
year the custodial parent releases his or her claims.
The release can be for 1 year, for a number of specified 
years (for example, alternate years), or for all future years, 
as specified in the declaration.
Form 8332 doesn't apply to other tax benefits, 
such as the earned income credit, dependent 
care credit, or head of household filing status. 
See Pub. 501.
Divorce decree or separation agreement that went 
into effect after 1984 and before 2009.  If the divorce 
decree or separation agreement went into effect after 
1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parent may be 
able to attach certain pages from the decree or agreement 
instead of Form 8332. The decree or agreement must 
state all three of the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the child as a de-
pendent without regard to any condition, such as pay-
ment of support.
2. The custodial parent won't claim the child as a de-
pendent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial parent, rather 
than the custodial parent, can claim the child as a de-
pendent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of the following 
pages of the decree or agreement to his or her return.
• The cover page (write the other parent's SSN on this 
page).
• The pages that include all of the information identified 
in items (1) through (3) above.
• The signature page with the other parent's signature 
and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation agree-
ment. If the decree or agreement went into effect after 
2008, a noncustodial parent claiming a child as a depend-
ent can’t attach pages from a divorce decree or separa-
tion agreement instead of Form 8332. The custodial pa-
rent must sign either a Form 8332 or a similar statement. 
The only purpose of this statement must be to release the 
custodial parent's claim to an exemption. The 
CAUTION
!
Page 10 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 11 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
noncustodial parent must attach a copy to his or her re-
turn. The form or statement must release the custodial pa-
rent's claim to the child without any conditions. For exam-
ple, the release must not depend on the noncustodial 
parent paying support.
The noncustodial parent must attach the required 
information even if it was filed with a return in an 
earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an exemption.
The custodial parent can revoke a release of claim to an 
exemption that he or she previously released to the non-
custodial parent. For the revocation to be effective for 
2020, the custodial parent must have given (or made rea-
sonable efforts to give) written notice of the revocation to 
the noncustodial parent in 2019 or earlier. The custodial 
parent can use Part III of Form 8332 for this purpose and 
must attach a copy of the revocation to his or her return for 
each tax year he or she claims the child as a dependent 
as a result of the revocation.
Remarried parent.  If you remarry, the support provi-
ded by your new spouse is treated as provided by you.
Child support under pre -1985 agreement. All child 
support payments actually received from the noncustodial 
parent under a pre -1985 agreement are considered used 
for the support of the child.
Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, the noncusto-
dial parent provides $1,200 for the child's support. This 
amount is considered support provided by the noncusto-
dial parent even if the $1,200 was actually spent on things 
other than support.
Parents who never married. This rule for divorced or 
separated parents also applies to parents who never mar-
ried and lived apart at all times during the last 6 months of 
the year.
Alimony. Payments to your spouse that are includible 
in his or her gross income as either alimony, separate 
maintenance payments, or similar payments from an es-
tate or trust aren’t treated as a payment for the support of 
a dependent.
Qualifying Child of More Than One Person
If your qualifying child isn’t a qualifying child of 
anyone else, this topic doesn’t apply to you and 
you don’t need to read about it. This also is true if 
your qualifying child isn’t a qualifying child of anyone else 
except your spouse with whom you plan to file a joint re-
turn.
If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the 
noncustodial parent under the rules for Children 
of divorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart), earlier, see Applying the tiebreaker rules to di-
vorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) , 
later.
CAUTION
!
TIP
CAUTION
!
Sometimes, a child meets the relationship, age, resi-
dency, support, and joint return tests to be a qualifying 
child of more than one person. (For a description of these 
tests, see list items 1 through 5 under Tests To Be a Qual-
ifying Child in Table 3). Although the child meets the con-
ditions to be a qualifying child of each of these persons, 
only one person can actually claim the child as a qualify-
ing child to take the following tax benefits (provided the 
person is eligible).
1. The child tax credit, the credit for other dependents, 
and the additional child tax credit.
2. Head of household filing status.
3. The credit for child and dependent care expenses.
4. The exclusion from income for dependent care bene-
fits.
5. The earned income credit.
In other words, you and the other person can’t agree to 
divide these tax benefits between you.
Tiebreaker rules.  To determine which person can treat 
the child as a qualifying child to claim these tax benefits, 
the following tiebreaker rules apply.
• If only one of the persons is the child's parent, the 
child is treated as the qualifying child of the parent.
• If the parents file a joint return together and can claim 
the child as a qualifying child, the child is treated as 
the qualifying child of the parents.
• If the parents don’t file a joint return together but both 
parents claim the child as a qualifying child, the IRS 
will treat the child as the qualifying child of the parent 
with whom the child lived for the longer period of time 
during the year. If the child lived with each parent for 
the same amount of time, the IRS will treat the child as 
the qualifying child of the parent who had the higher 
adjusted gross income (AGI) for the year.
• If no parent can claim the child as a qualifying child, 
the child is treated as the qualifying child of the person 
who had the highest AGI for the year.
• If a parent can claim the child as a qualifying child but 
no parent claims the child, the child is treated as the 
qualifying child of the person who had the highest AGI 
for the year, but only if that person's AGI is higher than 
the highest AGI of any of the child's parents who can 
claim the child. See Pub. 501 for details.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and the other 
person may be able to choose which of you claims the 
child as a qualifying child.
You may be able to qualify for the earned income credit 
under the rules for taxpayers without a qualifying child if 
you have a qualifying child for the earned income credit 
who is claimed as a qualifying child by another taxpayer. 
For more information, see Pub. 596.
Example 1—separated parents. You, your husband, 
and your 10 -year-old son lived together until August 1, 
2020, when your husband moved out of the household. In 
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 11

Page 12 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
August and September, your son lived with you. For the 
rest of the year, your son lived with your husband, the 
boy's father. Your son is a qualifying child of both you and 
your husband because your son lived with each of you for 
more than half the year and because he met the relation-
ship, age, support, and joint return tests for both of you. At 
the end of the year, you and your husband still weren't di-
vorced, legally separated, or separated under a written 
separation agreement, so the rule for children of divorced 
or separated parents (or parents who live apart) doesn't 
apply.
You and your husband will file separate returns. Your 
husband agrees to let you treat your son as a qualifying 
child. This means, if your husband doesn’t claim your son 
as a qualifying child, you can claim your son as a depend-
ent and treat him as a qualifying child for the child tax 
credit and exclusion for dependent care benefits, if you 
qualify for each of those tax benefits. However, you can’t 
claim head of household filing status because you and 
your husband didn’t live apart the last 6 months of the 
year. And, as a result of your filing status being married fil-
ing separately, you can’t claim the earned income credit 
or the credit for child and dependent care expenses.
Example 2 —separated parents claim same child. 
The facts are the same as in Example 1 except that you 
and your husband both claim your son as a qualifying 
child. In this case, only your husband will be allowed to 
treat your son as a qualifying child. This is because, dur-
ing 2020, the boy lived with him longer than with you. If 
you claimed the child tax credit for your son, the IRS will 
disallow your claim to the child tax credit. If you don’t have 
another qualifying child or dependent, the IRS will also 
disallow your claim to the exclusion for dependent care 
benefits. In addition, because you and your husband 
didn’t live apart the last 6 months of the year, your hus-
band can’t claim head of household filing status. And, as a 
result of his filing status being married filing separately, he 
can’t claim the earned income credit or the credit for child 
and dependent care expenses.
Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or separa-
ted parents (or parents who live apart).  If a child is 
treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent 
under the rules for children of divorced or separated pa-
rents (or parents who live apart) described earlier, only the 
noncustodial parent can claim the child tax credit or the 
credit for other dependents for the child. However, the 
custodial parent, if eligible, or other eligible person can 
claim the child as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status, the credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses, the exclusion for dependent care benefits, and 
the earned income credit. If the child is the qualifying child 
of more than one person for those tax benefits, the tie-
breaker rules determine which person can treat the child 
as a qualifying child.
Example 1. You and your 5 -year-old son lived all year 
with your mother, who paid the entire cost of keeping up 
the home. Your AGI is $10,000. Your mother's AGI is 
$25,000. Your son's father doesn't live with you or your 
son.
Under the rules for children of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart), your son is treated as 
the qualifying child of his father, who can claim the child 
tax credit for the child if he meets all the requirements to 
do so. Because of this, you can't claim the child tax credit 
for your son. However, your son's father can’t claim your 
son as a qualifying child for head of household filing sta-
tus, the credit for child and dependent care expenses, the 
exclusion for dependent care benefits, or the earned in-
come credit.
You and your mother didn’t have any childcare expen-
ses or dependent care benefits, but the boy is a qualifying 
child of both you and your mother for head of household 
filing status and the earned income credit because he 
meets the relationship, age, residency, support, and joint 
return tests for both you and your mother. (Note: The sup-
port test doesn’t apply for the earned income credit.) How-
ever, you agree to let your mother claim your son. This 
means she can claim him for head of household filing sta-
tus and the earned income credit if she qualifies for each 
and if you don’t claim him as a qualifying child for the 
earned income credit. (You can’t claim head of household 
filing status because your mother paid the entire cost of 
keeping up the home.)
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except that your AGI is $25,000 and your mother's AGI is 
$21,000. Your mother can’t claim your son as a qualifying 
child for any purpose because her AGI isn't higher than 
yours.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except that you and your mother both claim your son as a 
qualifying child for the earned income credit. Your mother 
also claims him as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status. You, as the child's parent, will be the only one 
allowed to claim your son as a qualifying child for the 
earned income credit. The IRS will disallow your mother's 
claim to the earned income credit and head of household 
filing status unless she has another qualifying child.
Alimony
Amounts paid as alimony or separate mainte-
nance payments under a divorce or separation in-
strument executed after 2018 won't be deductible 
by the payer. Such amounts also won't be includible in the 
income of the recipient. The same is true of alimony paid 
under a divorce or separation instrument executed before 
2019 and modified after 2018, if the modification ex-
pressly states that the alimony isn't deductible to the 
payer or includible in the income of the recipient. See Cer-
tain Rules for Instruments Executed or Modified After 
2018 ,later.
Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or former 
spouse under a divorce or separation instrument. It 
doesn’t include voluntary payments that aren’t made un-
der a divorce or separation instrument.
CAUTION
!
Page 12 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 13 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alimony is deductible by the payer, and the recipient 
must include it in income. Although this discussion is gen-
erally written for the payer of the alimony, the recipient can 
also use the information to determine whether an amount 
received is alimony.
To be alimony, a payment must meet certain require-
ments. There are some differences between the require-
ments that apply to payments under instruments executed 
after 1984 and to payments under instruments executed 
before 1985. General alimony requirements and specific 
requirements that apply to post -1984 instruments (and, in 
certain cases, some pre -1985 instruments) are discussed 
in this publication. See Instruments Executed Before 
1985, later, if you are looking for information on where to 
find the specific requirements that apply to pre -1985 in-
struments.
Spouse or former spouse. Unless otherwise stated, the 
term “spouse” includes former spouse.
Divorce or separation instrument. The term “divorce or 
separation instrument” means:
• A decree of divorce or separate maintenance or a writ-
ten instrument incident to that decree,
• A written separation agreement, or
• A decree or any type of court order requiring a spouse 
to make payments for the support or maintenance of 
the other spouse. This includes a temporary decree, 
an interlocutory (not final) decree, and a decree of ali-
mony pendente lite (while awaiting action on the final 
decree or agreement).
Invalid decree. Payments under a divorce decree can 
be alimony even if the decree's validity is in question. A di-
vorce decree is valid for tax purposes until a court having 
proper jurisdiction holds it invalid.
Amended instrument.  An amendment to a divorce 
decree may change the nature of your payments. Amend-
ments aren’t ordinarily retroactive for federal tax purpo-
ses. However, a retroactive amendment to a divorce de-
cree correcting a clerical error to reflect the original intent 
of the court will generally be effective retroactively for fed-
eral tax purposes.
Example 1.  A court order retroactively corrected a 
mathematical error under your divorce decree to express 
the original intent to spread the payments over more than 
10 years. This change also is effective retroactively for 
federal tax purposes.
Example 2. Your original divorce decree didn't fix any 
part of the payment as child support. To reflect the true in-
tention of the court, a court order retroactively corrected 
the error by designating a part of the payment as child 
support. The amended order is effective retroactively for 
federal tax purposes.
Deducting alimony paid. Generally, you can deduct ali-
mony you paid, whether or not you itemized deductions 
on your return.
You must use Form 1040 or 1040 -SR to deduct ali-
mony you paid. You can’t use Form 1040 -NR. Enter the 
amount of alimony you paid on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 18a. In the space provided on line 18b, enter your re-
cipient’s SSN or ITIN.
If you paid alimony to more than one person, enter the 
SSN or ITIN of one of the recipients. Show the SSN or 
ITIN and amount paid to each other recipient on an at-
tached statement. Enter your total payments on line 18a.
If you don’t provide your spouse's SSN or ITIN, 
you may have to pay a $50 penalty and your de-
duction may be disallowed.
Reporting alimony received.  Report alimony you re-
ceived as income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 2a. 
You can’t use Form 1040-NR-EZ.
You must give the person who paid the alimony 
your SSN or ITIN. If you don’t, you may have to 
pay a $50 penalty.
Withholding on nonresident aliens.  If you are a U.S. 
citizen or resident alien and you pay alimony to a nonresi-
dent alien spouse, you may have to withhold income tax 
at a rate of 30% on each payment. However, many tax 
treaties provide for an exemption from withholding for ali-
mony payments. For more information, see Pub. 515, 
Withholding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and Foreign En-
tities.
General Rules
The following rules apply to alimony.
Payments not alimony.  Not all payments under a di-
vorce or separation instrument are alimony. Alimony 
doesn’t include:
• Child support,
• Noncash property settlements,
• Payments that are your spouse's part of community in-
come, as explained later under Community Property,
• Payments to keep up the payer's property, or
• Use of the payer's property.
Example. Under your written separation agreement, 
your spouse lives rent -free in a home you own and you 
must pay the mortgage, real estate taxes, insurance, re-
pairs, and utilities for the home. Because you own the 
home and the debts are yours, your payments for the 
mortgage, real estate taxes, insurance, and repairs aren’t 
alimony. Neither is the value of your spouse's use of the 
home.
If they qualify, you may be able to deduct the payments 
for utilities as alimony. Your spouse must report them as 
income. If you itemize deductions, you can deduct the real 
estate taxes and, if the home is a qualified home, you can 
also include the interest on the mortgage in figuring your 
deductible interest. However, if your spouse owned the 
home, see Example 2  under Payments to a third party , 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 13

Page 14 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
later. If you owned the home jointly with your spouse, see 
Table 4. For more information, see Pub. 936, Home Mort-
gage Interest Deduction.
Child support.  To determine whether a payment is 
child support, see the discussion under Certain Rules for 
Instruments Executed After 1984 , later. If your divorce or 
separation agreement was executed before 1985, see the 
2004 revision of Pub. 504, available at IRS.gov/
FormsPubs.
Underpayment. If both alimony and child support pay-
ments are called for by your divorce or separation instru-
ment, and you pay less than the total required, the pay-
ments apply first to child support and then to alimony.
Example. Your divorce decree calls for you to pay 
your former spouse $200 a month ($2,400 ($200 x 12) a 
year) as child support and $150 a month ($1,800 ($150 x 
12) a year) as alimony. If you pay the full amount of 
$4,200 ($2,400 + $1,800) during the year, you can deduct 
$1,800 as alimony and your former spouse must report 
$1,800 as alimony received. If you pay only $3,600 during 
the year, $2,400 is child support. You can deduct only 
$1,200 ($3,600 – $2,400) as alimony and your former 
spouse must report $1,200 as alimony received.
Payments to a third party.  Cash payments, checks, or 
money orders to a third party on behalf of your spouse un-
der the terms of your divorce or separation instrument can 
be alimony, if they otherwise qualify. These include pay-
ments for your spouse's medical expenses, housing costs 
(rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition, etc. The payments are 
treated as received by your spouse and then paid to the 
third party.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you must pay 
your former spouse's medical and dental expenses. If the 
payments otherwise qualify, you can deduct them as 
alimony on your return. Your former spouse must report 
them as alimony received and can include them in figuring 
deductible medical expenses.
Example 2.  Under your separation agreement, you 
must pay the real estate taxes, mortgage payments, and 
insurance premiums on a home owned by your spouse. If 
they otherwise qualify, you can deduct the payments as 
alimony on your return, and your spouse must report them 
as alimony received. Your spouse may be able to deduct 
the real estate taxes and home mortgage interest, subject 
to the limitations on those deductions. See the Instruc-
tions for Schedule A (Form 1040). However, if you owned 
the home, see the example under Payments not alimony , 
earlier. If you owned the home jointly with your spouse, 
see Table 4.
Life insurance premiums.  Alimony includes premiums 
you must pay under your divorce or separation instrument 
for insurance on your life to the extent your spouse owns 
the policy.
Payments for jointly owned home.  If your divorce or 
separation instrument states that you must pay expenses 
for a home owned by you and your spouse or former 
spouse, some of your payments may be alimony. See Ta-
ble 4.
However, if your spouse owned the home, see Exam-
ple 2 under Payments to a third party, earlier. If you owned 
the home, see the example under Payments not alimony , 
earlier.
Certain Rules for Instruments 
Executed After 1984
The following rules for alimony apply to payments under 
divorce or separation instruments executed after 1984.
Expenses for a Jointly Owned Home
Use the table below to find how much of your payment is alimony and how much you can claim as an itemized deduction.
IF you must pay 
all of the ... AND your home is ...
THEN you can deduct and 
your spouse (or former 
spouse) must include as 
alimony ...
AND you can claim as an 
itemized deduction ...
mortgage 
payments 
(principal and 
interest)
jointly owned half of the total payments half of the interest as interest 
expense (if the home is a qualified 
home).1
real estate taxes 
and home 
insurance
held as tenants in 
common
half of the total payments half of the real estate taxes2 and 
none of the home insurance. 
held as tenants by 
the entirety or in joint 
tenancy
none of the payments all of the real estate taxes and 
none of the home insurance.
1 Your spouse (or former spouse) can deduct the other half of the interest if the home is a qualified home.
2 Your spouse (or former spouse) can deduct the other half of the real estate taxes.
Table 4.
Page 14 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 15 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alimony Requirements
A payment to or for a spouse under a divorce or separa-
tion instrument is alimony if the spouses don’t file a joint 
return with each other and all of the following require-
ments are met.
• The payment is in cash.
• The instrument doesn’t designate the payment as not 
alimony.
• The spouses aren’t members of the same household 
at the time the payments are made. This requirement 
applies only if the spouses are legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate maintenance.
• There is no liability to make any payment (in cash or 
property) after the death of the recipient spouse.
• The payment isn’t treated as child support.
Each of these requirements is discussed next.
Cash payment requirement.  Only cash payments, in-
cluding checks and money orders, qualify as alimony. The 
following don’t qualify as alimony.
• Transfers of services or property (including a debt in-
strument of a third party or an annuity contract).
• Execution of a debt instrument by the payer.
• The use of the payer's property.
Payments to a third party.  Cash payments to a third 
party under the terms of your divorce or separation instru-
ment can qualify as cash payments to your spouse. See 
Payments to a third party under General Rules, earlier.
Also, cash payments made to a third party at the written 
request of your spouse may qualify as alimony if all the fol-
lowing requirements are met.
• The payments are in lieu of payments of alimony di-
rectly to your spouse.
• The written request states that both spouses intend 
the payments to be treated as alimony.
• You receive the written request from your spouse be-
fore you file your return for the year you made the pay-
ments.
Payments designated as not alimony.  You and your 
spouse can designate that otherwise qualifying payments 
aren't alimony. You do this by including a provision in your 
divorce or separation instrument that states the payments 
aren't deductible as alimony by you and are excludable 
from your spouse's income. For this purpose, any instru-
ment (written statement) signed by both of you that makes 
this designation and that refers to a previous written sepa-
ration agreement is treated as a written separation agree-
ment (and therefore a divorce or separation instrument). If 
you are subject to temporary support orders, the designa-
tion must be made in the original or a later temporary sup-
port order.
Your spouse can exclude the payments from income 
only if he or she attaches a copy of the instrument desig-
nating them as not alimony to his or her return. The copy 
must be attached each year the designation applies.
Spouses can’t be members of the same household. 
Payments to your spouse while you are members of the 
same household aren't alimony if you are legally separa-
ted under a decree of divorce or separate maintenance. A 
home you formerly shared is considered one household, 
even if you physically separate yourselves in the home.
You aren’t treated as members of the same household 
if one of you is preparing to leave the household and does 
leave no later than 1 month after the date of the payment.
Exception. If you aren’t legally separated under a de-
cree of divorce or separate maintenance, a payment un-
der a written separation agreement, support decree, or 
other court order may qualify as alimony even if you are 
members of the same household when the payment is 
made.
Liability for payments after death of recipient 
spouse. If any part of payments you make must continue 
to be made for any period after your spouse's death, that 
part of your payments isn’t alimony whether made before 
or after the death. If all of the payments would continue, 
then none of the payments made before or after the death 
are alimony.
The divorce or separation instrument doesn’t have to 
expressly state that the payments cease upon the death 
of your spouse if, for example, the liability for continued 
payments would end under state law.
Example. You must pay your former spouse $10,000 
in cash each year for 10 years. Your divorce decree states 
that the payments will end upon your former spouse's 
death. You must also pay your former spouse or your for-
mer spouse's estate $20,000 in cash each year for 10 
years. The death of your spouse wouldn’t end these pay-
ments under state law.
The $10,000 annual payments may qualify as alimony. 
The $20,000 annual payments that don’t end upon your 
former spouse's death aren’t alimony.
Substitute payments.  If you must make any pay-
ments in cash or property after your spouse's death as a 
substitute for continuing otherwise qualifying payments 
before the death, the otherwise qualifying payments aren’t 
alimony. To the extent that your payments begin, acceler-
ate, or increase because of the death of your spouse, oth-
erwise qualifying payments you made may be treated as 
payments that weren’t alimony. Whether or not such pay-
ments will be treated as not alimony depends on all the 
facts and circumstances.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you must pay 
your former spouse $30,000 annually. The payments will 
stop at the end of 6 years or upon your former spouse's 
death, if earlier.
Your former spouse has custody of your minor children. 
The decree provides that if any child is still a minor at your 
spouse's death, you must pay $10,000 annually to a trust 
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 15

Page 16 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
until the youngest child reaches the age of majority. The 
trust income and corpus (principal) are to be used for your 
children's benefit.
These facts indicate that the payments to be made af-
ter your former spouse's death are a substitute for 
$10,000 of the $30,000 annual payments. Of each of the 
$30,000 annual payments, $10,000 isn't alimony.
Example 2. Under your divorce decree, you must pay 
your former spouse $30,000 annually. The payments will 
stop at the end of 15 years or upon your former spouse's 
death, if earlier. The decree provides that if your former 
spouse dies before the end of the 15 -year period, you 
must pay the estate the difference between $450,000 
($30,000 × 15) and the total amount paid up to that time. 
For example, if your spouse dies at the end of the 10th 
year, you must pay the estate $150,000 ($450,000 − 
$300,000).
These facts indicate that the lump -sum payment to be 
made after your former spouse's death is a substitute for 
the full amount of the $30,000 annual payments. None of 
the annual payments are alimony. The result would be the 
same if the payment required at death were to be discoun-
ted by an appropriate interest factor to account for the pre-
payment.
Child support. A payment that is specifically designated 
as child support or treated as specifically designated as 
child support under your divorce or separation instrument 
isn’t alimony. The amount of child support may vary over 
time. Child support payments aren’t deductible by the 
payer and aren’t taxable to the payee.
Specifically designated as child support.  A pay-
ment will be treated as specifically designated as child 
support to the extent that the payment is reduced either:
• On the happening of a contingency relating to your 
child, or
• At a time that can be clearly associated with the con-
tingency.
A payment may be treated as specifically designated as 
child support even if other separate payments are specifi-
cally designated as child support.
Contingency relating to your child.  A contingency 
relates to your child if it depends on any event relating to 
that child. It doesn’t matter whether the event is certain or 
likely to occur. Events relating to your child include the 
child's:
• Becoming employed,
• Dying,
• Leaving the household,
• Leaving school,
• Marrying, or
• Reaching a specified age or income level.
Clearly associated with a contingency.  Payments 
that would otherwise qualify as alimony are presumed to 
be reduced at a time clearly associated with the 
happening of a contingency relating to your child only in 
the following situations.
1. The payments are to be reduced not more than 6 
months before or after the date the child will reach 18, 
21, or local age of majority.
2. The payments are to be reduced on two or more oc-
casions that occur not more than 1 year before or af-
ter a different one of your children reaches a certain 
age from 18 to 24. This certain age must be the same 
for each child, but need not be a whole number of 
years.
In all other situations, reductions in payments aren't trea-
ted as clearly associated with the happening of a contin-
gency relating to your child.
Either you or the IRS can overcome the presumption in 
the two situations above. This is done by showing that the 
time at which the payments are to be reduced was deter-
mined independently of any contingencies relating to your 
children. For example, if you can show that the period of 
alimony payments is customary in the local jurisdiction, 
such as a period equal to one -half of the duration of the 
marriage, you can overcome the presumption and may be 
able to treat the amount as alimony.
Recapture of Alimony
If your alimony payments decrease or end during the first 
3 calendar years, you may be subject to the recapture 
rule. If you are subject to this rule, you have to include in 
income (in the third year) part of the alimony payments 
you previously deducted. Your spouse can deduct (in the 
third year) part of the alimony payments he or she previ-
ously included in income.
The 3-year period starts with the first calendar year you 
make a payment qualifying as alimony under a decree of 
divorce or separate maintenance or a written separation 
agreement. Don’t include any time in which payments 
were being made under temporary support orders. The 
second and third years are the next 2 calendar years, 
whether or not payments are made during those years.
The reasons for a reduction or end of alimony pay-
ments that can require a recapture include:
• A change in your divorce or separation instrument,
• A failure to make timely payments,
• A reduction in your ability to provide support, or
• A reduction in your spouse's support needs.
When to apply the recapture rule.  You are subject to 
the recapture rule in the third year if the alimony you pay in 
the third year decreases by more than $15,000 from the 
second year or the alimony you pay in the second and 
third years decreases significantly from the alimony you 
pay in the first year.
When you figure a decrease in alimony, don’t include 
the following amounts.
• Payments made under a temporary support order.
Page 16 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 17 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Payments required over a period of at least 3 calendar 
years that vary because they are a fixed part of your 
income from a business or property, or from compen-
sation for employment or self-employment.
• Payments that decrease because of the death of ei-
ther spouse or the remarriage of the spouse receiving 
the payments before the end of the third year.
How to figure and report the recapture.  Both you and 
your spouse can use Worksheet 1 to figure recaptured ali-
mony.
Including the recapture in income.  If you must in-
clude a recapture amount in income, show it on Schedule 
1 (Form 1040), line 2a (“Alimony received”). Cross out “re-
ceived” and enter “recapture.” On the dotted line next to 
the amount, enter your spouse's last name and SSN or 
ITIN.
Deducting the recapture.  If you can deduct a recap-
ture amount, show it on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 18a 
(“Alimony paid”). Cross out “paid” and enter “recapture.” In 
the space provided, enter your spouse's SSN or ITIN.
Example. You pay your former spouse $50,000 ali-
mony the first year, $39,000 the second year, and 
$28,000 the third year. In the third year, you report $1,500 
as income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 2a, and your 
former spouse reports $1,500 as a deduction on Schedule 
1 (Form 1040), line 18a. (See the worksheet that was 
completed for this example.)
Instruments Executed Before 1985
Information on pre -1985 instruments was included in this 
publication through 2004. If you need the 2004 revision, 
please visit IRS.gov/FormsPubs.
Certain Rules for Instruments 
Executed or Modified After 2018
Amounts paid as alimony or separate maintenance pay-
ments under a divorce or separation instrument executed 
after 2018 won’t be deductible by the payer. Such 
amounts also won’t be includible in the income of the re-
cipient. The same is true of alimony paid under a divorce 
or separation instrument executed before 2019 and modi-
fied after 2018, if the modification expressly states that the 
alimony isn’t deductible to the payer or includible in the in-
come of the recipient. The examples below illustrate the 
tax treatment of alimony payments under the post -2018 
alimony rules. In each of the examples, assume the pay-
ments qualify as alimony under the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986.
Example 1. On December 2, 2013, a court executed a 
divorce decree providing for monthly alimony payments 
beginning January 1, 2014, for a period of 8 years. On 
May 15, 2020, the court modified the divorce decree to in-
crease the amount of monthly alimony payments. The first 
increased alimony payment was due on June 1, 2020. 
The modification didn't expressly provide that the post -
Worksheet 1. Recapture of Alimony Keep for Your Records
Note. Don't enter less than -0- on any line.
1. Alimony paid in 2nd year ............................................ 1.  
2. Alimony paid in 3rd year ........................... 2.  
3. Floor ........................................... 3. $15,000
4. Add lines 2 and 3 ................................................... 4.  
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... 5.  
6. Alimony paid in 1st year ............................................. 6.  
7. Adjusted alimony paid in 2nd year
(line 1 minus line 5) ............................... 7.  
8. Alimony paid in 3rd year ........................... 8.  
9. Add lines 7 and 8 ................................. 9.  
10. Divide line 9 by 2.0 ................................ 10.  
11. Floor ........................................... 11. $15,000
12. Add lines 10 and 11 ................................................. 12.  
13. Subtract line 12 from line 6 ............................................................. 13.  
14. Recaptured alimony. Add lines 5 and 13 ................................................. *14.  
. 
* If you deducted alimony paid, report this amount as income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 2a. 
 If you reported alimony received, deduct this amount on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 18a.
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 17

Page 18 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2018 alimony rules apply to alimony payments made after 
the date of the modification. Therefore, all alimony pay-
ments made in 2020 are includible in the recipient’s in-
come and deductible from the payer’s income.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in  Example 1 
above except the modification expressly provided that the 
post-2018 alimony rules apply. The alimony payments 
made in January 2020 through May 2020 are includible in 
the recipient’s income and deductible from the payer’s in-
come. The alimony payments made in June 2020 through 
December 2020 are neither includible in the recipient’s in-
come nor deductible from the payer’s income.
Example 3. On December 2, 2013, a couple executed 
a written separation agreement providing for monthly ali-
mony payments on the first day of each month, beginning 
January 1, 2014, for a period of 8 years. The written sepa-
ration agreement set forth that it expires upon the execu-
tion of a divorce decree dissolving the couple’s marriage. 
On May 27, 2020, a court executed the divorce decree 
awarding alimony under the same terms as described in 
the couple’s separation agreement. The alimony pay-
ments made in January 2020 through May 2020 under the 
written separation agreement are includible in the recipi-
ent’s income and deductible from the payer’s income. The 
court executed the divorce decree after December 31, 
2018; therefore, alimony payments made in June 2020 
through December 2020 under the divorce decree are 
neither includible in the recipient’s income nor deductible 
from the payer’s income.
Example 4. On October 1, 2018, a couple executed a 
written separation agreement subject to the laws of State 
X. The written separation agreement requires a $1,000 
monthly alimony payment on the last business day of a 
month for a period of 3 years. Under the laws of State X, 
at the time of divorce, a written separation agreement may 
survive as an independent contract. In the process of ob-
taining their divorce, the couple decided their separation 
agreement will remain an independent contract and won't 
be incorporated or merged into their divorce decree. The 
court, after acknowledging the separation agreement as 
fair and equitable, executed a divorce decree on April 1, 
2020, dissolving the couple’s marriage. The divorce de-
cree did not mention alimony. All alimony payments made 
in 2020 are includible in the recipient’s income and deduc-
tible from the payer’s income because the alimony pay-
ments were made under the written separation agreement 
that was executed on or before December 31, 2018.
Worksheet 1. Recapture of Alimony—Illustrated
Note. Don't enter less than -0- on any line.
1. Alimony paid in 2nd year .......................................... 1. $39,000
2. Alimony paid in 3rd year ........................ 2. 28,000
3. Floor ........................................... 3. $15,000
4. Add lines 2 and 3 ................................................. 4. 43,000
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ..................................... 5. -0-
6. Alimony paid in 1st year ........................................... 6. 50,000
7. Adjusted alimony paid in 2nd year
(line 1 minus line 5) .............................. 7. 39,000
8. Alimony paid in 3rd year ........................ 8. 28,000
9. Add lines 7 and 8 ............................... 9. 67,000
10. Divide line 9 by 2.0 .............................. 10. 33,500
11. Floor ........................................... 11. $15,000
12. Add lines 10 and 11 ............................................... 12. 48,500
13. Subtract line 12 from line 6 ........................................................... 13. 1,500
14. Recaptured alimony. Add lines 5 and 13 ............................................. *14. 1,500
. 
* If you deducted alimony paid, report this amount as income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 2a. 
 If you reported alimony received, deduct this amount on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 18a.
Page 18 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 19 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified Domestic
Relations Order
A qualified domestic relations order (QDRO) is a judg-
ment, decree, or court order (including an approved prop-
erty settlement agreement) issued under a state's domes-
tic relations law that:
• Recognizes someone other than a participant as hav-
ing a right to receive benefits from a qualified retire-
ment plan (such as most pension and profit-sharing 
plans) or a tax-sheltered annuity;
• Relates to payment of child support, alimony, or mari-
tal property rights to a spouse, former spouse, child, 
or other dependent of the participant; and
• Specifies certain information, including the amount or 
part of the participant's benefits to be paid to the par-
ticipant's spouse, former spouse, child, or other de-
pendent.
Benefits paid to a child or other dependent.  Benefits 
paid under a QDRO to the plan participant's child or other 
dependent are treated as paid to the participant. For infor-
mation about the tax treatment of benefits from retirement 
plans, see Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity Income.
Benefits paid to a spouse or former spouse.  Benefits 
paid under a QDRO to the plan participant's spouse or for-
mer spouse must generally be included in the spouse's or 
former spouse's income. If the participant contributed to 
the retirement plan, a prorated share of the participant's 
cost (investment in the contract) is used to figure the taxa-
ble amount.
The spouse or former spouse can use the special rules 
for lump-sum distributions if the benefits would have been 
treated as a lump -sum distribution had the participant re-
ceived them. For this purpose, consider only the balance 
to the spouse's or former spouse's credit in determining 
whether the distribution is a total distribution. See 
Lump-Sum Distributions in Pub. 575 for information about 
the special rules.
Rollovers. If you receive an eligible rollover distribu-
tion under a QDRO as the plan participant's spouse or for-
mer spouse, you may be able to roll it over tax free into a 
traditional individual retirement arrangement (IRA) or an-
other qualified retirement plan.
For more information on the tax treatment of eligible 
rollover distributions, see Pub. 575.
Individual Retirement
Arrangements
The following discussions explain some of the effects of 
divorce or separation on traditional individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs). Traditional IRAs are IRAs other than 
Roth or SIMPLE IRAs.
Spousal IRA. If you get a final decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance by the end of your tax year, you can’t 
deduct contributions you make to your former spouse's 
traditional IRA. You can deduct only contributions to your 
own traditional IRA.
IRA transferred as a result of divorce.  The transfer of 
all or part of your interest in a traditional IRA to your 
spouse or former spouse, under a decree of divorce or 
separate maintenance or a written instrument incident to 
the decree, isn’t considered a taxable transfer. Starting 
from the date of the transfer, the traditional IRA interest 
transferred is treated as your spouse's or former spouse's 
traditional IRA.
IRA contribution and deduction limits.  All taxable ali-
mony you receive under a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance is treated as compensation for the contribu-
tion and deduction limits for traditional IRAs.
For more information about IRAs, including Roth IRAs, 
see Pub. 590-A and Pub. 590-B.
Property Settlements
Generally, there is no recognized gain or loss on the 
transfer of property between spouses, or between former 
spouses if the transfer is because of a divorce. You may, 
however, have to report the transaction on a gift tax re-
turn. See Gift Tax on Property Settlements , later. If you 
sell property that you own jointly to split the proceeds as 
part of your property settlement, see Sale of 
Jointly-Owned Property, later.
Transfer Between Spouses
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a transfer of 
property from you to (or in trust for the benefit of):
• Your spouse, or
• Your former spouse, but only if the transfer is incident 
to your divorce.
This rule applies even if the transfer was in exchange for 
cash, the release of marital rights, the assumption of liabil-
ities, or other consideration.
Exceptions to nonrecognition rule.  This rule doesn’t 
apply in the following situations.
• Your spouse or former spouse is a nonresident alien.
• Certain transfers in trust, discussed later.
• Certain stock redemptions under a divorce or separa-
tion instrument or a valid written agreement that are 
taxable under applicable tax law, as discussed in Reg-
ulations section 1.1041-2.
Property subject to nonrecognition rule.  The term 
“property” includes all property whether real or personal, 
tangible or intangible, or separate or community. It in-
cludes property acquired after the end of your marriage 
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 19

Page 20 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and transferred to your former spouse. It doesn’t include 
services.
Health savings account (HSA).  If you transfer your in-
terest in an HSA to your spouse or former spouse under a 
divorce or separation instrument, it isn’t considered a tax-
able transfer. After the transfer, the interest is treated as 
your spouse's HSA.
Archer medical savings account (MSA). If you transfer 
your interest in an Archer MSA to your spouse or former 
spouse under a divorce or separation instrument, it isn’t 
considered a taxable transfer. After the transfer, the inter-
est is treated as your spouse's Archer MSA.
Individual retirement arrangement (IRA).  The treat-
ment of the transfer of an interest in an IRA as a result of 
divorce is similar to that just described for the transfer of 
an interest in an HSA and an Archer MSA. See IRA trans-
ferred as a result of divorce , earlier, under Individual Re-
tirement Arrangements.
Incident to divorce.  A property transfer is incident to 
your divorce if the transfer:
• Occurs within 1 year after the date your marriage 
ends, or
• Is related to the end of your marriage.
A divorce, for this purpose, includes the end of your mar-
riage by annulment or due to violations of state laws.
Related to end of marriage. A property transfer is re-
lated to the end of your marriage if both of the following 
conditions apply.
• The transfer is made under your original or modified 
divorce or separation instrument.
• The transfer occurs within 6 years after the date your 
marriage ends.
Unless these conditions are met, the transfer is pre-
sumed not to be related to the end of your marriage. How-
ever, this presumption won't apply if you can show that the 
transfer was made to carry out the division of property 
owned by you and your spouse at the time your marriage 
ended. For example, the presumption won't apply if you 
can show that the transfer was made more than 6 years 
after the end of your marriage because of business or le-
gal factors that prevented earlier transfer of the property 
and the transfer was made promptly after those factors 
were taken care of.
Transfers to third parties.  If you transfer property to a 
third party on behalf of your spouse (or former spouse, if 
incident to your divorce), the transfer is treated as two 
transfers.
• A transfer of the property from you to your spouse or 
former spouse.
• An immediate transfer of the property from your 
spouse or former spouse to the third party.
You don’t recognize gain or loss on the first transfer. In-
stead, your spouse or former spouse may have to recog-
nize gain or loss on the second transfer.
For this treatment to apply, the transfer from you to the 
third party must be one of the following.
• Required by your divorce or separation instrument.
• Requested in writing by your spouse or former 
spouse.
• Consented to in writing by your spouse or former 
spouse. The consent must state that both you and 
your spouse or former spouse intend the transfer to be 
treated as a transfer from you to your spouse or for-
mer spouse subject to the rules of Internal Revenue 
Code section 1041. You must receive the consent be-
fore filing your tax return for the year you transfer the 
property.
This treatment doesn’t apply to transfers to which 
Regulations section 1. 1041-2 (certain stock re-
demptions) applies.
Transfers in trust.  If you make a transfer of property in 
trust for the benefit of your spouse (or former spouse, if in-
cident to your divorce), you generally don’t recognize any 
gain or loss.
However, you must recognize gain or loss if, incident to 
your divorce, you transfer an installment obligation in trust 
for the benefit of your former spouse. For information on 
the disposition of an installment obligation, see Pub. 537, 
Installment Sales.
You must also recognize as gain on the transfer of 
property in trust the amount by which the liabilities as-
sumed by the trust, plus the liabilities to which the prop-
erty is subject, exceed the total of your adjusted basis in 
the transferred property.
Example. You own property with a fair market value of 
$12,000 and an adjusted basis of $1,000. You transfer the 
property in trust for the benefit of your spouse. The trust 
didn’t assume any liabilities. The property is subject to a 
$5,000 liability. Your recognized gain is $4,000 ($5,000 − 
$1,000).
Reporting income from property. You should report in-
come from property transferred to your spouse or former 
spouse as shown in Table 5.
For information on the treatment of interest on transfer-
red U.S. savings bonds, see chapter 1 of Pub. 550, In-
vestment Income and Expenses.
When you transfer property to your spouse (or for-
mer spouse, if incident to your divorce), you must 
give your spouse sufficient records to determine 
the adjusted basis and holding period of the property on 
the date of the transfer. If you transfer investment credit 
property with recapture potential, you must also provide 
sufficient records to determine the amount and period of 
the recapture.
Tax treatment of property received.  Property you re-
ceive from your spouse (or former spouse, if the transfer is 
CAUTION
!
RECORDS
Page 20 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 21 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
incident to your divorce) is treated as acquired by gift for 
income tax purposes. Its value isn’t taxable to you.
Basis of property received.  Your basis in property re-
ceived from your spouse (or former spouse, if incident to 
your divorce) is the same as your spouse's adjusted ba-
sis. This applies for determining either gain or loss when 
you later dispose of the property. It applies whether the 
property's adjusted basis is less than, equal to, or greater 
than either its value at the time of the transfer or any con-
sideration you paid. It also applies even if the property's li-
abilities are more than its adjusted basis.
This rule generally applies to all property received after 
July 18, 1984, under a divorce or separation instrument in 
effect after that date. It also applies to all other property 
received after 1983 for which you and your spouse (or for-
mer spouse) made a “section 1041 election”  to apply this 
rule. For information about how to make that election, see 
Temporary Regulations section 1.1041-1T(g).
Example. Karen and Don owned their home jointly. 
Karen transferred her interest in the home to Don as part 
of their property settlement when they divorced last year. 
Don's basis in the interest received from Karen is her ad-
justed basis in the home. His total basis in the home is 
their joint adjusted basis.
Property received before July 19, 1984.  Your basis 
in property received in settlement of marital support rights 
before July 19, 1984, or under an instrument in effect be-
fore that date (other than property for which you and your 
spouse (or former spouse) made a “section 1041 elec-
tion”) is its fair market value when you received it.
Example. Larry and Gina owned their home jointly be-
fore their divorce in 1983. That year, Gina received Larry's 
interest in the home in settlement of her marital support 
rights. Gina's basis in the interest received from Larry is 
the part of the home's fair market value proportionate to 
that interest. Her total basis in the home is that part of the 
fair market value plus her adjusted basis in her own inter-
est.
Property transferred in trust.  If the transferor recog-
nizes gain on property transferred in trust, as described 
earlier under Transfers in trust , the trust's basis in the 
property is increased by the recognized gain.
Example. Your spouse transfers property in trust, rec-
ognizing a $4,000 gain. Your spouse's adjusted basis in 
the property was $1,000. The trust's basis in the property 
is $5,000 ($1,000 + $4,000).
Property Transferred Pursuant to Divorce
The tax treatment of items of property transferred from you to your spouse or former spouse pursuant to your divorce is 
shown below.
IF you transfer ... THEN you ...
AND your spouse or 
former spouse ...
FOR more information, 
see ...
income-producing 
property (such as an 
interest in a business, 
rental property, stocks, 
or bonds)
include on your tax return 
any profit or loss, rental 
income or loss, dividends, 
or interest generated or 
derived from the property 
during the year until the 
property is transferred 
reports any income or 
loss generated or 
derived after the 
property is transferred. 
Pub. 550, Investment 
Income and Expenses. 
(See Ownership 
transferred under U.S. 
Savings Bonds in 
chapter 1.)
interest in a passive 
activity with unused 
passive activity losses
can’t deduct your 
accumulated unused 
passive activity losses 
allocable to the interest
increases the adjusted 
basis of the transferred 
interest by the amount of 
the unused losses. 
Pub. 925, Passive Activity 
and At-Risk Rules.
investment credit 
property with recapture 
potential
don’t have to recapture 
any part of the credit
may have to recapture 
part of the credit if he or 
she disposes of the 
property or changes its 
use before the end of the 
recapture period. 
Form 4255, Recapture of 
Investment Credit.
interests in nonstatutory 
stock options and 
nonqualified deferred 
compensation
don’t include any amount 
in gross income upon the 
transfer
includes an amount in 
gross income when he or 
she exercises the stock 
options or when the 
deferred compensation 
is paid or made available 
to him or her. 
Table 5.
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 21

Page 22 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gift Tax on Property Settlements
Generally, a transfer to a spouse who is a citizen of the 
United States isn’t subject to federal gift tax, because 
there is an unlimited deduction for transfers to a U.S. citi-
zen spouse. However, a transfer to a former spouse isn’t 
generally eligible for a martial deduction, and may be sub-
ject to federal gift tax unless the transfer qualifies for one 
or more of the exceptions explained in this discussion. If 
your transfer of property doesn’t qualify for an exception, 
or qualifies only in part, you must report it on a gift tax re-
turn. See Gift Tax Return, later.
For more information about the federal gift tax, see Es-
tate and Gift Taxes in Pub. 559, Survivors, Executors, and 
Administrators, and Form 709 and its instructions.
Exceptions
Your transfer of property to your spouse or former spouse 
isn’t subject to gift tax if it meets any of the following ex-
ceptions.
• It is made in settlement of marital support rights.
• It qualifies for the marital deduction.
• It is made under a divorce decree.
• It is made under a written agreement, and you are di-
vorced within a specified period.
• It qualifies for the annual exclusion.
• It qualifies for the unlimited exclusion for direct pay-
ments of tuition or medical care.
Settlement of marital support rights.  A transfer in set-
tlement of marital support rights isn’t subject to gift tax to 
the extent the value of the property transferred isn’t more 
than the value of those rights. This exception doesn’t ap-
ply to a transfer in settlement of dower, curtesy, or other 
marital property rights.
Marital deduction. A transfer of property to your spouse 
before receiving a final decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance isn't subject to gift tax. However, this excep-
tion doesn’t apply to:
• Transfers of certain terminable interests (for example, 
certain interests in trust), or
• Transfers to your spouse if your spouse isn’t a U.S. 
citizen.
Transfer under divorce decree.  A transfer of property 
under the decree of a divorce court having the power to 
prescribe a property settlement isn’t subject to gift tax. 
This exception also applies to a property settlement 
agreed on before the divorce if it was made part of or ap-
proved by the decree.
Transfer under written agreement.  A transfer of prop-
erty under a written agreement in settlement of marital 
rights or to provide a reasonable child support allowance 
isn’t subject to gift tax if you are divorced within the 3 -year 
period beginning 1 year before and ending 2 years after 
the date of the agreement. This exception applies whether 
or not the agreement is part of or approved by the divorce 
decree.
Annual exclusion.  The first $15,000 of gifts of present 
interests to each person during 2020 isn’t subject to gift 
tax. This includes transfers to a former spouse or transfers 
to a current spouse that don’t qualify for the marital deduc-
tion. The annual exclusion is $157,000 for transfers to a 
spouse who isn’t a U.S. citizen provided the gift would 
otherwise qualify for the gift tax marital deduction if the do-
nee were a U.S. citizen.
Present interest. A gift is considered a present inter-
est if the donee has unrestricted rights to the immediate 
use, possession, and enjoyment of the property or income 
from the property.
Direct payments of tuition or medical care.  Direct 
payments of tuition to an educational organization or to 
any person or organization that provides medical care (in-
cluding direct payments to a health insurer) aren’t subject 
to federal gift tax. Therefore, such payments made for the 
benefit of a spouse or former spouse won’t be subject to 
federal gift tax.
Gift Tax Return
Report a transfer of property subject to gift tax on Form 
709. Generally, Form 709 is due April 15 following the 
year of the transfer.
Transfer under written agreement.  If a property trans-
fer would be subject to gift tax except that it is made under 
a written agreement, and you don’t receive a final decree 
of divorce by the due date for filing the gift tax return, you 
must report the transfer on Form 709 and attach a copy of 
your written agreement. The transfer will be treated as not 
subject to the gift tax until the final decree of divorce is 
granted, but no longer than 2 years after the effective date 
of the written agreement.
Within 60 days after you receive a final decree of di-
vorce, send a certified copy of the decree to the IRS office 
where you filed Form 709.
Sale of Jointly Owned Property
If you sell property that you and your spouse own jointly, 
you must report your share of the recognized gain or loss 
on your income tax return for the year of the sale. Your 
share of the gain or loss is determined by your state law 
governing ownership of property. For information on re-
porting gain or loss, see Pub. 544.
Sale of home.  If you sold your main home, you may be 
able to exclude up to $250,000 (up to $500,000 if you and 
your spouse file a joint return) of gain on the sale. For 
more information, including special rules that apply to sep-
arated and divorced individuals selling a main home, see 
Pub. 523, Selling Your Home.
Page 22 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 23 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Costs of Getting a Divorce
You can’t deduct legal fees and court costs for getting a 
divorce. In addition, you can’t deduct legal fees paid for 
tax advice in connection with a divorce and legal fees to 
get alimony or fees you pay to appraisers, actuaries, and 
accountants for services in determining your correct tax or 
in helping to get alimony.
Other Nondeductible expenses.  You can’t deduct the 
costs of personal advice, counseling, or legal action in a 
divorce. These costs aren’t deductible, even if they are 
paid, in part, to arrive at a financial settlement or to protect 
income-producing property.
You also can’t deduct legal fees you pay for a property 
settlement. However, you can add it to the basis of the 
property you receive. For example, you can add the cost 
of preparing and filing a deed to put title to your house in 
your name alone to the basis of the house.
Finally, you can’t deduct fees you pay for your spouse 
or former spouse, unless your payments qualify as ali-
mony. (See Payments to a third party  under Alimony, ear-
lier.) If you have no legal responsibility arising from the di-
vorce settlement or decree to pay your spouse's legal 
fees, your payments are gifts and may be subject to the 
gift tax.
Tax Withholding
and Estimated Tax
When you become divorced or separated, you will ususal-
lyhave to file a new Form W -4 with your employer to claim 
your proper withholding. If you receive alimony, you may 
have to make estimated tax payments.
If you don’t pay enough tax either through with-
holding or by making estimated tax payments, 
you will have an underpayment of estimated tax 
and you may have to pay a penalty. If you don’t pay 
enough tax by the due date of each payment, you may 
have to pay a penalty even if you are due a refund when 
you file your tax return.
For more information, see Pub. 505, Tax Withholding 
and Estimated Tax.
Joint estimated tax payments.  If you and your spouse 
made joint estimated tax payments for 2020 but file sepa-
rate returns, either of you can claim all of your payments, 
or you can divide them in any way on which you both 
agree. If you can’t agree, the estimated tax you can claim 
equals the total estimated tax paid times the tax shown on 
your separate return for 2020, divided by the total of the 
tax shown on your 2020 return and your spouse's 2020 re-
turn. You may want to attach an explanation of how you 
and your spouse divided the payments.
If you claim any of the payments on your tax return, en-
ter your spouse's or former spouse's SSN in the space 
provided on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If you were divorced 
CAUTION
!
and remarried in 2020, enter your present spouse's SSN 
in that space and enter your former spouse's SSN, fol-
lowed by “DIV” to the left of Form 1040, line 26.
Community Property
If you are married and your domicile (permanent legal 
home) is in a community property state, special rules de-
termine your income. Some of these rules are explained in 
the following discussions. For more information, see Pub. 
555.
Community property states.  Community property 
states include:
• Arizona,
• California,
• Idaho,
• Louisiana,
• Nevada,
• New Mexico,
• Texas,
• Washington, and
• Wisconsin.
Community Income
If your domicile is in a community property state during 
any part of your tax year, you may have community in-
come. Your state law determines whether your income is 
separate or community income. If you and your spouse 
file separate returns, you must report half of any income 
described by state law as community income and all of 
your separate income, and your spouse must report the 
other half of any community income plus all of his or her 
separate income. Each of you can claim credit for half the 
income tax withheld from community income.
Community Property Laws Disregarded
The following discussions are situations where special 
rules apply to community property.
Certain community income not treated as community 
income by one spouse.  Community property laws may 
not apply to an item of community income that you re-
ceived but didn’t treat as community income. You will be 
responsible for reporting all of it if:
• You treat the item as if only you are entitled to the in-
come, and
• You don’t notify your spouse of the nature and amount 
of the income by the due date for filing the return (in-
cluding extensions).
Relief from liability for tax attributable to an item of 
community income.  You aren’t responsible for the tax 
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 23

Page 24 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on an item of community income if all five of the following 
conditions exist.
1. You didn’t file a joint return for the tax year.
2. You didn’t include an item of community income in 
gross income on your separate return.
3. The item of community income you didn’t include is 
one of the following.
a. Wages, salaries, and other compensation your 
spouse (or former spouse) received for services 
he or she performed as an employee.
b. Income your spouse (or former spouse) derived 
from a trade or business he or she operated as a 
sole proprietor.
c. Your spouse's (or former spouse's) distributive 
share of partnership income.
d. Income from your spouse's (or former spouse's) 
separate property (other than income described in 
(a), (b), or (c)). Use the appropriate community 
property law to determine what is separate prop-
erty.
e. Any other income that belongs to your spouse (or 
former spouse) under community property law.
4. You establish that you didn’t know of, and had no rea-
son to know of, that community income.
5. Under all facts and circumstances, it wouldn't be fair 
to include the item of community income in your gross 
income.
Equitable relief from liability for tax attributable to an 
item of community income.  To be considered for equi-
table relief from liability for tax attributable to an item of 
community income, you must meet all of the following 
conditions.
1. You timely filed your claim for relief.
2. You and your spouse (or former spouse) didn’t trans-
fer assets to one another as a part of a fraudulent 
scheme. A fraudulent scheme includes a scheme to 
defraud the IRS or another third party, such as a cred-
itor, former spouse, or business partner.
3. Your spouse (or former spouse) didn’t transfer prop-
erty to you for the main purpose of avoiding tax or the 
payment of tax.
4. You didn’t knowingly participate in the filing of a frau-
dulent joint return.
5. The income tax liability from which you seek relief is 
attributable (either in full or in part) to an item of your 
spouse (or former spouse) or an unpaid tax resulting 
from your spouse’s (or former spouse’s) income. If the 
liability is partially attributable to you, then relief can 
only be considered for the part of the liability attributa-
ble to your spouse (or former spouse). The IRS will 
consider granting relief regardless of whether the un-
derstated tax, deficiency, or unpaid tax is attributable 
(in full or in part) to you if any of the following excep-
tions apply.
a. The item is attributable or partially attributable to 
you solely due to the operation of community 
property law. If you meet this exception, that item 
will be considered attributable to your spouse (or 
former spouse) for purposes of equitable relief.
b. If the item is titled in your name, the item is pre-
sumed to be attributable to you. However, you can 
rebut this presumption based on the facts and cir-
cumstances.
c. You didn’t know, and had no reason to know, that 
funds intended for the payment of tax were misap-
propriated by your spouse (or former spouse) for 
his or her benefit. If you meet this exception, the 
IRS will consider granting equitable relief although 
the unpaid tax may be attributable in part or in full 
to your item, and only to the extent the funds in-
tended for payment were taken by your spouse (or 
former spouse).
d. You establish that you were the victim of spousal 
abuse or domestic violence before the return was 
filed, and that, as a result of the prior abuse, you 
didn’t challenge the treatment of any items on the 
return for fear of your spouse’s (or former spou-
se’s) retaliation. If you meet this exception, relief 
will be considered even though the understated 
tax or unpaid tax may be attributable in part or in 
full to your item.
e. The item giving rise to the understated tax or defi-
ciency is attributable to you, but you establish that 
your spouse’s (or former spouse’s) fraud is the 
reason for the erroneous item.
Requesting relief. For information on how and when 
to request relief from liabilities arising from community 
property laws, see Community Property Laws in Pub. 971.
Spousal agreements. In some states, spouses may en-
ter into an agreement that affects the status of property or 
income as community or separate property. Check your 
state law to determine how it affects you.
Spouses living apart all year.  If you are married at any 
time during the calendar year, special rules apply for re-
porting certain community income. You must meet all the 
following conditions for these special rules to apply.
1. You and your spouse lived apart all year.
2. You and your spouse didn’t file a joint return for a tax 
year beginning or ending in the calendar year.
3. You and/or your spouse had earned income for the 
calendar year that is community income.
4. You and your spouse haven’t transferred, directly or 
indirectly, any of the earned income in (3) between 
yourselves before the end of the year. Don’t take into 
account transfers satisfying child support obligations 
or transfers of very small amounts or value.
Page 24 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 25 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If all these conditions exist, you and your spouse must 
report your community income as explained in the follow-
ing discussions. See also Certain community income not 
treated as community income by one spouse, earlier.
Earned income. Treat earned income that isn’t trade 
or business or partnership income as the income of the 
spouse who performed the services to earn the income. 
Earned income is wages, salaries, professional fees, and 
other pay for personal services.
Earned income doesn’t include amounts paid by a cor-
poration that are a distribution of earnings and profits 
rather than a reasonable allowance for personal services 
rendered.
Trade or business income. Treat income and related 
deductions from a trade or business that isn’t a partner-
ship as those of the spouse carrying on the trade or busi-
ness.
Partnership income or loss.  Treat income or loss 
from a trade or business carried on by a partnership as 
the income or loss of the spouse who is the partner.
Separate property income.  Treat income from the 
separate property of one spouse as the income of that 
spouse.
Social security benefits.  Treat social security and 
equivalent railroad retirement benefits as the income of 
the spouse who receives the benefits. 
Other income.  Treat all other community income, 
such as dividends, interest, rents, royalties, or gains, as 
provided under your state's community property law.
Example. George and Sharon were married through-
out the year but didn’t live together at any time during the 
year. Both domiciles were in a community property state. 
They didn’t file a joint return or transfer any of their earned 
income between themselves. During the year, their in-
comes were as follows:
George Sharon 
Wages ..................... $20,000 $22,000 
Consulting business ...........   5,000 
Partnership ..................  10,000 
Dividends from separate 
property .....................   1,000   2,000 
Interest from community 
property .....................     500     500 
Totals $26,500 $34,500 
Under the community property law of their state, all the 
income is considered community income. (Some states 
treat income from separate property as separate in-
come—check your state law.) Sharon didn’t take part in 
George's consulting business.
Ordinarily, on their separate returns they would each 
report $30,500, half the total community income of 
$61,000 ($26,500 + $34,500). But because they meet the 
four conditions listed earlier under Spouses living apart all 
year, they must disregard community property law in re-
porting all their income (except the interest income) from 
community property. They each report on their returns 
only their own earnings and other income, and their share 
of the interest income from community property. George 
reports $26,500 and Sharon reports $34,500.
Other separated spouses.  If you and your spouse are 
separated but don’t meet the four conditions discussed 
earlier under Spouses living apart all year , you must treat 
your income according to the laws of your state. In some 
states, income earned after separation but before a de-
cree of divorce continues to be community income. In 
other states, it is separate income.
Ending the Marital Community
When the marital community ends as a result of divorce or 
separation, the community assets (money and property) 
are divided between the spouses. Each spouse is taxed 
on half the community income for the part of the year be-
fore the community ends. However, see Spouses living 
apart all year, earlier. Income received after the commun-
ity ended is separate income, taxable only to the spouse 
to whom it belongs.
An absolute decree of divorce or annulment ends the 
marital community in all community property states. A de-
cree of annulment, even though it holds that no valid mar-
riage ever existed, usually doesn’t nullify community prop-
erty rights arising during the “marriage.” However, you 
should check your state law for exceptions.
A decree of legal separation or of separate mainte-
nance may or may not end the marital community. The 
court issuing the decree may terminate the marital com-
munity and divide the property between the spouses.
A separation agreement may divide the community 
property between you and your spouse. It may provide 
that this property, along with future earnings and property 
acquired, will be separate property. This agreement may 
end the community.
In some states, the marital community ends when the 
spouses permanently separate, even if there is no formal 
agreement. Check your state law.
Alimony (Community Income)
Payments that may otherwise qualify as alimony aren’t de-
ductible by the payer if they are the recipient spouse's part 
of community income. They are deductible by the payer 
as alimony and taxable to the recipient spouse only to the 
extent they are more than that spouse's part of community 
income.
Example. You live in a community property state. You 
are separated but the special rules explained earlier under 
Spouses living apart all year  don’t apply. Under a written 
agreement, you pay your spouse $12,000 of your $20,000 
total yearly community income. Your spouse receives no 
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 25

Page 26 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
other community income. Under your state law, earnings 
of a spouse living separately and apart from the other 
spouse continue as community property.
On your separate returns, each of you must report 
$10,000 of the total community income. In addition, your 
spouse must report $2,000 as alimony received. You can 
deduct $2,000 as alimony paid.
Amounts paid as alimony or separate mainte-
nance payments under a divorce or separation in-
strument executed after 2018 won’t be deductible 
by the payer. Such amounts also won’t be includible in the 
income of the recipient. The same is true of alimony paid 
under a divorce or separation instrument executed before 
2019 and modified after 2018 if the modification expressly 
states that the alimony isn’t deductible to the payer or in-
cludible in the income of the recipient.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue, need help prepar-
ing your tax return, or want to download free publications, 
forms, or instructions, go to IRS.gov and find resources 
that can help you right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After receiving all 
your wage and earnings statements (Form W -2, W -2G, 
1099-R, 1099 -MISC, 1099 -NEC, etc.); unemployment 
compensation statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 1099 -G); 
and interest, dividend, and retirement statements from 
banks and investment firms (Forms 1099), you have sev-
eral options to choose from to prepare and file your tax re-
turn. You can prepare the tax return yourself, see if you 
qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax professional to 
prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation.  Go to IRS.gov to see 
your options for preparing and filing your return online or 
in your local community, if you qualify, which include the 
following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare and file your 
federal individual income tax return for free using 
brand-name tax-preparation-and-filing software or 
Free File fillable forms. However, state tax preparation 
may not be available through Free File. Go to IRS.gov/
FreeFile to see if you qualify for free online federal tax 
preparation, e-filing, and direct deposit or payment op-
tions.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) 
program offers free tax help to people with 
low-to-moderate incomes, persons with disabilities, 
and limited-English-speaking taxpayers who need 
help preparing their own tax returns. Go to IRS.gov/
VITA, download the free IRS2Go app, or call 
800-906-9887 for information on free tax return prepa-
ration.
• TCE. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) pro-
gram offers free tax help for all taxpayers, particularly 
CAUTION
!
those who are 60 years of age and older. TCE volun-
teers specialize in answering questions about pen-
sions and retirement-related issues unique to seniors. 
Go to IRS.gov/TCE, download the free IRS2Go app, 
or call 888-227-7669 for information on free tax return 
preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed Forces and 
qualified veterans may use MilTax, a free tax service 
offered by the Department of Defense through Military 
OneSource.
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, which can 
be completed online and then filed electronically re-
gardless of income.
Using online tools to help prepare your return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Tools for the following.
• The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant (IRS.gov/
EITCAssistant) determines if you’re eligible for the 
earned income credit (EIC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) helps you 
get an employer identification number (EIN).
• The Tax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/W4app) 
makes it easier for everyone to pay the correct amount 
of tax during the year. The tool is a convenient, online 
way to check and tailor your withholding. It’s more 
user-friendly for taxpayers, including retirees and 
self-employed individuals. The features include the 
following.
– Easy to understand language.
– The ability to switch between screens, correct pre-
vious entries, and skip screens that don’t apply.
– Tips and links to help you determine if you qualify 
for tax credits and deductions.
– A progress tracker.
– A self-employment tax feature.
– Automatic calculation of taxable social security ben-
efits.
• The First Time Homebuyer Credit Account Look-up 
(IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool provides information on 
your repayments and account balance.
• The Sales Tax Deduction Calculator (IRS.gov/
SalesTax) figures the amount you can claim if you 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax questions. On 
IRS.gov, you can get up -to-date information on 
current events and changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you get an-
swers to some of the most common tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive Tax Assistant, a tool that 
will ask you questions on a number of tax law topics 
and provide answers.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, and publica-
tions. You will find details on 2020 tax changes and 
hundreds of interactive links to help you find answers 
to your questions.
Page 26 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 27 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You may also be able to access tax law information in 
your electronic filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return?  There are 
various types of tax return preparers, including tax prepar-
ers, enrolled agents, certified public accountants (CPAs), 
attorneys, and many others who don’t have professional 
credentials. If you choose to have someone prepare your 
tax return, choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax pre-
parer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall substantive accu-
racy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax identification 
number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs the return, 
you're ultimately responsible for providing all the informa-
tion required for the preparer to accurately prepare your 
return. Anyone paid to prepare tax returns for others 
should have a thorough understanding of tax matters. For 
more information on how to choose a tax preparer, go to 
Tips for Choosing a Tax Preparer on IRS.gov.
Coronavirus. Go to IRS.gov/Coronavirus for links to in-
formation on the impact of the coronavirus, as well as tax 
relief available for individuals and families, small and large 
businesses, and tax-exempt organizations.
Tax reform.  Tax reform legislation affects individuals, 
businesses, and tax -exempt and government entities. Go 
to IRS.gov/TaxReform for information and updates on 
how this legislation affects your taxes.
Employers can register to use Business Services On-
line. The Social Security Administration (SSA) offers on-
line service at SSA.gov/employer for fast, free, and secure 
online W -2 filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled 
agents, and individuals who process Form W -2, Wage 
and Tax Statement, and Form W-2c, Corrected Wage and 
Tax Statement.
IRS social media. Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia to see the 
various social media tools the IRS uses to share the latest 
information on tax changes, scam alerts, initiatives, prod-
ucts, and services. At the IRS, privacy and security are 
paramount. We use these tools to share public informa-
tion with you. Don’t post your SSN or other confidential in-
formation on social media sites. Always protect your iden-
tity when using any social networking site.
The following IRS YouTube channels provide short, in-
formative videos on various tax -related topics in English, 
Spanish, and ASL.
• Youtube.com/irsvideos.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio presentations 
for individuals, small businesses, and tax professionals.
Online tax information in other languages.  You can 
find information on IRS.gov/MyLanguage if English isn’t 
your native language.
Free interpreter service.  Multilingual assistance, provi-
ded by the IRS, is available at Taxpayer Assistance Cen-
ters (TACs) and other IRS offices. Over -the-phone inter-
preter service is accessible in more than 350 languages.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to IRS.gov/
Forms to view, download, or print all of the forms, instruc-
tions, and publications you may need. You can also down-
load and view popular tax publications and instructions 
(including the Instructions for Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR) 
on mobile devices as an eBook at IRS.gov/eBooks. Or 
you can go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to place an order.
Access your online account (individual taxpayers 
only). Go to IRS.gov/Account to securely access infor-
mation about your federal tax account.
• View the amount you owe, pay online, or set up an on-
line payment agreement.
• Access your tax records online.
• Review your payment history.
• Go to IRS.gov/SecureAccess to review the required 
identity authentication process.
Using direct deposit.  The fastest way to receive a tax 
refund is to file electronically and choose direct deposit, 
which securely and electronically transfers your refund di-
rectly into your financial account. Direct deposit also 
avoids the possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
or returned undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 10 taxpayers 
use direct deposit to receive their refunds. The IRS issues 
more than 90% of refunds in less than 21 days.
Getting a transcript of your return.  The quickest way 
to get a copy of your tax transcript is to go to IRS.gov/
Transcripts. Click on either “Get Transcript Online” or “Get 
Transcript by Mail” to order a free copy of your transcript. 
If you prefer, you can order your transcript by calling 
800-908-9946.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related identity 
theft issues. 
• Tax-related identity theft happens when someone 
steals your personal information to commit tax fraud. 
Your taxes can be affected if your SSN is used to file a 
fraudulent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with taxpayers by 
email, text messages, telephone calls, or social media 
channels to request personal or financial information. 
This includes requests for personal identification num-
bers (PINs), passwords, or similar information for 
credit cards, banks, or other financial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Identity Theft 
Central webpage, for information on identity theft and 
data security protection for taxpayers, tax professio-
nals, and businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of tax-related 
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 27

Page 28 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
identity theft, you can learn what steps you should 
take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP PINs are 
six-digit numbers assigned to eligible taxpayers to 
help prevent the misuse of their SSNs on fraudulent 
federal income tax returns. When you have an IP PIN, 
it prevents someone else from filing a tax return with 
your SSN. To learn more, go to IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Checking on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• The IRS can’t issue refunds before mid-February 2021 
for returns that claimed the EIC or the additional child 
tax credit (ACTC). This applies to the entire refund, 
not just the portion associated with these credits.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your mobile de-
vice to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 800-829-1954.
Making a tax payment.  The IRS uses the latest encryp-
tion technology to ensure your electronic payments are 
safe and secure. You can make electronic payments on-
line, by phone, and from a mobile device using the 
IRS2Go app. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or money order. Go to 
IRS.gov/Payments for information on how to make a pay-
ment using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill or estima-
ted tax payment directly from your checking or sav-
ings account at no cost to you.
• Debit or Credit Card: Choose an approved payment 
processor to pay online, by phone, or by mobile de-
vice.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Offered only when filing 
your federal taxes using tax return preparation soft-
ware or through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal Tax Payment System: Best option 
for businesses. Enrollment is required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment to the ad-
dress listed on the notice or instructions.
• Cash: You may be able to pay your taxes with cash at 
a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: You may be able to do same-day 
wire from your financial institution. Contact your finan-
cial institution for availability, cost, and cut-off times.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/Payments for 
more information about your options.
• Apply for an online payment agreement (IRS.gov/
OPA) to meet your tax obligation in monthly install-
ments if you can’t pay your taxes in full today. Once 
you complete the online process, you will receive im-
mediate notification of whether your agreement has 
been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier to see if 
you can settle your tax debt for less than the full 
amount you owe. For more information on the Offer in 
Compromise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  You can now file Form 
1040-X electronically with tax filing software to amend 
2019 Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR. To do so, you must have 
e-filed your original 2019 return. Amended returns for all 
prior years must be mailed. See Tips for taxpayers who 
need to file an amended tax return  and go to IRS.gov/
Form1040X for information and updates.
Checking the status of your amended return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of Form 1040 -X amen-
ded returns. Please note that it can take up to 3 weeks 
from the date you filed your amended return for it to show 
up in our system, and processing it can take up to 16 
weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter you’ve re-
ceived. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to find additional informa-
tion about responding to an IRS notice or letter.
Contacting your local IRS office.  Keep in mind, many 
questions can be answered on IRS.gov without visiting an 
IRS Taxpayer Assistance Center (TAC). Go to IRS.gov/
LetUsHelp for the topics people ask about most. If you still 
need help, IRS TACs provide tax help when a tax issue 
can’t be handled online or by phone. All TACs now pro-
vide service by appointment, so you’ll know in advance 
that you can get the service you need without long wait 
times. Before you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to find 
the nearest TAC and to check hours, available services, 
and appointment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, under 
the Stay Connected tab, choose the Contact Us option 
and click on “Local Offices.”
The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) 
Is Here To Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the IRS that 
helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer rights. Their job is 
to ensure that every taxpayer is treated fairly and that you 
know and understand your rights under the Taxpayer Bill 
of Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your Taxpayer 
Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic rights that 
all taxpayers have when dealing with the IRS. Go to 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to help you understand what 
these rights mean to you and how they apply. These are 
your rights. Know them. Use them.
What Can TAS Do For You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you can’t resolve 
with the IRS. And their service is free. If you qualify for 
their assistance, you will be assigned to one advocate 
who will work with you throughout the process and will do 
Page 28 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 29 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
everything possible to resolve your issue. TAS can help 
you if:
• Your problem is causing financial difficulty for you, 
your family, or your business;
• You face (or your business is facing) an immediate 
threat of adverse action; or
• You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS but no one 
has responded, or the IRS hasn’t responded by the 
date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of Columbia, 
and Puerto Rico . Your local advocate’s number is in your 
local directory and at TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/
Contact-Us. You can also call them at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that affect 
many taxpayers. If you know of one of these broad issues, 
please report it to them at IRS.gov/SAMS.
TAS for Tax Professionals
TAS can provide a variety of information for tax professio-
nals, including tax law updates and guidance, TAS pro-
grams, and ways to let TAS know about systemic prob-
lems you’ve seen in your practice.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS. LITCs represent in-
dividuals whose income is below a certain level and need 
to resolve tax problems with the IRS, such as audits, ap-
peals, and tax collection disputes. In addition, clinics can 
provide information about taxpayer rights and responsibili-
ties in different languages for individuals who speak Eng-
lish as a second language. Services are offered for free or 
a small fee for eligible taxpayers. To find a clinic near you, 
visit TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/about-us/Low-Income-
Taxpayer-Clinics-LITC/ or see IRS Pub. 4134, Low 
Income Taxpayer Clinic List.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
A
Absence, temporary 8
Address, change of 2
Aliens (See Nonresident aliens)
Alimony 11, 17
Community income 25
Deductibility 12
Defined 12
Inclusion in income 12
Annual exclusion, gift tax 22
Annulment decrees:
Absolute decree 25
Amended return required 3
Considered unmarried 3
Archer MSA 20
Assistance (See Tax help)
B
Basis:
Property received in settlement 21
Benefits paid under QDROs 19
Birth of dependent 7
C
Change of address 2
Change of name 2
Child custody 8
Children:
Birth of child:
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as 7
Claiming parent, when child is head 
of household 7
Custody of 8
Death of child:
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as 7
Photographs of missing children 2
Child support:
Alimony, difference from 14
Clearly associated with 
contingency 16
Contingency relating to child 16
Payment specifically designated 
as 16
Child support under pre-1985 
agreement 11
Community income 23–26
Community property 23–26
 (See also Community income)
Ending the marital community 25
Laws disregarded 23
States 23
Costs of getting divorce:
Nondeductible, generally 23
Nondeductible expenses 23
Other nondeductible expenses 23
Custody of child 8
D
Death of dependent 7
Death of recipient spouse. 15
Debts of spouse:
Refund applied to 4
Deductions:
Alimony paid 13
Alimony recapture 17
Limits on IRAs 19
Marital 22
Dependents:
Qualifying child 8
Qualifying child (Table 3) 9
Qualifying relative 8
Qualifying relative (Table 3) 9
Social security numbers 2
Divorce decrees:
Absolute decree 25
Amended 13
Defined for purposes of alimony 13
Invalid 13
Unmarried persons 3
Divorced parents 8
Child custody 8
Domestic relations 
orders (See Qualified domestic 
relations orders (QDROs))
Domicile 23
E
Earned income 25
Equitable relief (See Relief from joint 
liability)
Estimated tax 23
Joint payments 23
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 29

Page 30 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
F
Filing status 3
Head of household 6
Form 1040:
Deducting alimony paid before 
2018 13
Reporting alimony received 13
Form 1040X:
Annulment, decree of 3
Form 8332:
Release of claims to an exemption 
to noncustodial parent 10
Form 8379:
Injured spouse 4
Form 8857:
Innocent spouse relief 4
Former spouse:
Defined for purposes of alimony 13
Form W-4:
Withholding 23
Form W-7:
Individual taxpayer identification 
number (ITIN) 2
G
Gift tax 22
H
Head of household 6
Health care law 1
Health savings accounts 
(HSAs) 20
Home owned jointly:
Alimony payments for 14
Sale of 22
HSAs (Health savings 
accounts) 20
I
Identification number 2
Income 23
 (See also Community income)
Alimony received 13
Individual retirement arrangements 
(IRAs) 19
Individual taxpayer identification 
numbers (ITINs):
Processing 2
Renewal 2
Injured spouse 4
Innocent spouse relief 4
Insurance premiums 14
Invalid decree 13
IRAs (Individual retirement 
arrangements) 19
Itemized deductions on separate 
returns 5
ITINs (Individual taxpayer 
identification numbers) 2
J
Joint liability:
Relief from 2, 4
Jointly owned home:
Alimony payments for 14
Sale of 22
Joint returns 4
Change from separate return 6
Change to separate return 6
Divorced taxpayers 4
Joint and individual liability 4
Relief from joint liability 4
Signing 4
K
Kidnapped child:
Head of household status and 8
L
Liability for taxes (See Relief from 
joint liability)
Life insurance premiums as 
alimony 14
M
Marital community, ending 25
Marital status 3
Married persons 3
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs) 20
Missing children, photographs of 2
Mortgage payments as alimony 14
MSAs (Medical savings 
accounts) 20
N
Name, change of 2
Nondeductible expenses 23
Nonresident aliens:
Joint returns 4
Withholding 13
P
Parent:
Head of household, claim for 7
Parents, divorced or separated 8
Property settlements 19–22
Publications (See Tax help)
Q
Qualified domestic relations orders 
(QDROs) 19
Qualifying child, tests for claiming 
(Table 3) 9
Qualifying person, head of 
household 7
Table 2 7
Qualifying relative, tests for 
claiming (Table 3) 9
R
Recapture of alimony 16
Refunds:
Spouse debts, applied to 4
Release of exemption to 
noncustodial parent 10
Relief from joint liability 2, 4
Relief from separate return liability:
Community income 23
Reporting requirements:
Alimony received 13
Returns:
Amended return required 3
Joint (See Joint returns)
Separate (See Separate returns)
Revocation of release of claim to 
an exemption 11
Rollovers 19
S
Sales of jointly owned property 22
Section 1041 election 21
Separated parents 8
Separate maintenance decrees 3, 
13, 25
Separate returns 5
Change to or from joint return 6
Community or separate income 5
Itemized deductions 5
Relief from liability 23
Separate liability 5
Tax consequences 5
Separation agreements 25
Defined for purposes of alimony 13
Separation of liability (See Relief 
from joint liability)
Settlement of 
property (See Property 
settlements)
Social security benefits 25
Social security numbers (SSNs):
Alimony recipient's number 
required 13
Dependents 2
Spousal IRA 19
Spouse:
Defined for purposes of alimony 13
Refund applied to debts 4
Statute of limitations:
Amended return 3
Injured spouse allocation 4
Page 30 Publication 504 (2020)

Page 31 of 31  Fileid: … tions/P504/2020/A/XML/Cycle03/source 15:34 - 16-Feb-2021
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
T
Tables and figures:
Property transferred pursuant to 
divorce (Table 5) 21
Qualifying person for head of 
household (Table 2) 7
Rules for claiming dependents 
(Table 3) 9
Tax help 26
Taxpayer identification numbers:
Processing 2
Renewal 2
Tax withholding (See Withholding)
Third parties:
Alimony payments to 14, 15
Property settlements, transfers 
to 20
Tiebreaker rules 11
U
Underpayment of alimony 14
Unmarried persons 3
W
Withholding:
Change of 23
Nonresident aliens 13
Worksheets:
Recapture of alimony (Worksheet 
1) 17
Publication 504 (2020)   Page 31