Contents
Important Changes ............................................1
Important Reminders.........................................2
Introduction .......................................................2
Filing Status ......................................................2
Joint Return ....................................................3
Separate Returns ...........................................4
Head of Household .........................................4
Exemptions ........................................................6
Personal Exemptions .......................................6
Exemptions for Dependents ...........................6
Dependency Tests ..........................................6
Support Test for Children of Divorced or
Separated Parents ...................................8
Multiple Support Agreement ...........................10
Phaseout of Exemptions ................................11
Alimony ..............................................................11
General Rules .................................................12
Instruments Executed After 1984 ...................13
Instruments Executed Before 1985 ................16
Qualified Domestic Relations Order ...............18
Individual Retirement Arrangements ..............18
Property Settlements ........................................18
Transfer Between Spouses ............................18
Gift Tax on Property Settlements ...................20
Sale of Jointly-Owned Property ......................21
Costs of Getting a Divorce ..............................21
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ...............22
Community Property ........................................22
Community Income .........................................22
Alimony (Community Income) .........................23
How To Get Tax Help.........................................24
Index ...................................................................26
Important Changes
Photographs of missing children.The Internal Rev-
enue Service is a proud partner with the National Cen-
ter for Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of
missing children selected by the Center may appear in
this publication on pages that would otherwise be blank.
You can help bring these children home by looking at
the photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST
(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child.
Paid preparer authorization. Beginning with your re-
turn for 2000, you can check a box and authorize the
IRS to discuss your tax return with the paid preparer
who signed it. If you check the “Yes” box in the signa-
ture area of your return, the IRS can call your paid
preparer to answer any questions that may arise during
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Publication 504
Cat. No. 15006I
Divorced
or Separated
Individuals
For use in preparing
2000 Returns


the processing of your return. Also, you are authorizing
your paid preparer to perform certain actions. See your
income tax package for details.
Important Reminders
Relief from joint liability.In some cases, one spouse
may be relieved of joint liability for tax, interest, and
penalties on a joint tax return. For more information,
see Relief from joint liability under Joint Return.
Social security numbers for dependents.You must
include the taxpayer identification number (generally
the social security number) of every person for whom
you claim an exemption. See Exemptions for Depen-
dents under Exemptions, later.
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).
The IRS will issue an ITIN to a nonresident or resident
alien who does not have and is not eligible to get a
social security number (SSN). To apply for an ITIN,
Form W–7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
Identification Number, must be filed with the IRS. It
usually takes about 30 days to get an ITIN. The ITIN
is entered wherever an SSN is requested on a tax re-
turn. If you are required to include another person's
SSN on your return and that person does not have and
cannot get an SSN, enter that person's ITIN.
Change of address. If you change your mailing ad-
dress, be sure to notify the Internal Revenue Service
using Form 8822,  Change of Address. Mail it to the
Internal Revenue Service Center for your old address.
(Addresses for the Service Centers are on the back of
the form.)
Change of name. If you change your name, be sure
to notify the Social Security Administration using Form
SS–5,  Application for a Social Security Card.
Introduction
This publication explains tax rules that apply if you are
divorced or separated from your spouse. It covers
general filing information and can help you choose your
filing status. It also can help you decide which ex-
emptions you are entitled to claim, including exemptions
for dependents.
The publication also discusses payments and trans-
fers of property that often occur as a result of divorce
and how you must treat them on your tax return. Ex-
amples include alimony, child support, other court-
ordered payments, property settlements, and transfers
of individual retirement arrangements. In addition, this
publication also explains deductions allowed for some
of the costs of obtaining a divorce and how to handle
tax withholding and estimated tax payments.
The last part of the publication explains special rules
that may apply to persons who live in community
property states.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome your
comments about this publication and your suggestions
for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web site at
www.irs.gov/help/email2.html.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications Branch
W:CAR:MP:FP:P
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore,
it would be helpful if you would include your daytime
phone number, including the area code, in your corre-
spondence.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publications
/H18554501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and Filing
Information
/H18554544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
/H18554 555 Community Property
/H18554590 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
(Including Roth IRAs and Education IRAs)
/H18554971 Innocent Spouse Relief (And Separation of
Liability and Equitable Relief)
Form (and Instructions)
/H185548332 Release of Claim to Exemption for Child of
Divorced or Separated Parents
/H185548857 Request for Innocent Spouse Relief (And
Separation of Liability and Equitable Relief)
Filing Status
Your filing status is used in determining whether you
must file a return, your standard deduction, and the
correct tax. It may also determine whether you can
claim certain deductions and credits. The filing status
you can choose depends partly on your marital status
on the last day of your tax year.
Marital status.If you are considered unmarried, your
filing status is single or, if you meet certain require-
ments, head of household or qualifying widow(er). If you
are considered married, your filing status is either
married filing a joint return or married filing a separate
return. For information about the single and qualifying
widow(er) filing statuses, see Publication 501.
Considered unmarried. You are considered un-
married for the whole year if either of the following ap-
plies.
1) You have obtained a final decree of divorce or
separate maintenance by the last day of your tax
Page 2

year. You must follow your state law to determine
if you are divorced or legally separated.
Exception. If you and your spouse obtain a di-
vorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing tax
returns as unmarried individuals, and at the time
of divorce you intend to remarry each other and do
so in the next tax year, you and your spouse must
file as married individuals.
2) You have obtained a decree of annulment, which
holds that no valid marriage ever existed. You must
file amended returns (Form 1040X, Amended U.S.
Individual Income Tax Return) for all tax years af-
fected by the annulment that are not closed by the
period of limitations. The period of limitations gen-
erally does not end until 3 years after the due date
of your original return. On the amended return you
will change your filing status to single, or if you meet
certain requirements, head of household.
Considered married.You are considered married
for the whole year if you are separated but you have
not obtained a final decree of divorce or separate
maintenance by the last day of your tax year. An
interlocutory decree is not a final decree.
Exception.If you live apart from your spouse, under
certain circumstances you may be considered unmar-
ried and can file as head of household. See Head of
Household, later.
Joint Return
If you are married, you and your spouse can choose to
file a joint return. If you file jointly, you both must include
all your income, exemptions, deductions, and credits
on that return. You can file a joint return even if one of
you had no income or deductions.
TIP
If both you and your spouse have income, you
should usually figure your tax on both a joint
return and separate returns to see which gives
you the lower tax.
To file a joint return, at least one of you must be a
U.S. citizen or resident at the end of the tax year. If
either of you was a nonresident alien at any time during
the tax year, you can file a joint return only if you agree
to treat the nonresident spouse as a resident of the
United States. This means that your combined world-
wide incomes are subject to U.S. income tax. These
rules are explained in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide
for Aliens.
Signing a joint return.Both you and your spouse
must sign the return, or it will not be considered a joint
return.
Joint and individual liability.Both you and your
spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for the
tax and any interest or penalty due on your joint return.
This means that one spouse may be held liable for all
the tax due even if all the income was earned by the
other spouse.
Divorced taxpayers.If you are divorced, you are
still jointly and individually responsible for any tax, in-
terest, and penalties due on a joint return for a tax year
ending before your divorce. This responsibility applies
even if your divorce decree states that your former
spouse will be responsible for any amounts due on
previously filed joint returns.
Relief from joint liability.In some cases, a spouse
will be relieved of the tax, interest, and penalties on a
joint return. You can ask for relief no matter how small
the liability.
There are three types of relief available.
1) Separation of liability, which may apply to joint filers
who are divorced, widowed, legally separated, or
have not lived together for the past 12 months.
2) Innocent spouse relief, which may apply to all joint
filers.
3) Equitable relief, which applies to all joint filers.
Innocent spouse relief and separation of liability ap-
ply only to items incorrectly reported on the return. If a
spouse does not qualify for innocent spouse relief or
separation of liability, the IRS may grant equitable relief.
Each of these kinds of relief is different, and they
each have different requirements. You must file Form
8857 to request any of these kinds of relief. Publication
971 explains these kinds of relief and who may qualify
for them.
The relief from liability rules discussed here apply to
tax liabilities arising after July 22, 1998, and tax liabil-
ities arising on or before July 22, 1998, that were unpaid
as of that date.
Tax refund applied to spouse's debts.The over-
payment shown on your joint return may be used to pay
the past-due amount of your spouse's debts. You can
get your share of the refund if you qualify as an injured
spouse.
Injured spouse.You are an injured spouse if you
file a joint return and all or part of your share of the
overpayment was, or is expected to be, applied against
your spouse's past-due federal tax, state income tax,
child or spousal support, or federal nontax debt, such
as a student loan. You should file Form 8379, Injured
Spouse Claim and Allocation, if you meet all three of
the following conditions.
1) You are not required to pay the past-due amount.
2) You reported income such as wages, taxable in-
terest, etc., on the joint return.
3) You made and reported payments such as federal
income tax withheld from your wages or estimated
tax payments or you claimed refundable credits
(such as the earned income credit) on the joint re-
turn.
If all three of the above apply and you want your
share of the overpayment shown on the joint return re-
funded to you, complete Form 8379. If your main home
was in a community property state, you can file Form
8379 if only item 1 applies. Follow the instructions on
the form.
Page 3

CAUTION
!
Refunds that involve community property states
must be divided according to local law. If you
live in a community property state in which all
community property is subject to the debts of either
spouse, your entire refund can be used to pay those
debts.
Separate Returns
If you and your spouse file separate returns, you should
each report only your own income, exemptions, de-
ductions, and credits on your individual return. You can
file a separate return even if only one of you had in-
come. For information on exemptions you can claim on
your separate return, see Exemptions, later.
Community or separate income. If you live in a
community property state and file a separate return,
your income may be separate income or community
income for income tax purposes. For more information,
see Community Income under Community Property,
later.
Separate liability.If you and your spouse file sepa-
rately, you each are responsible only for the tax due
on your own return.
Itemized deductions. If you and your spouse file
separate returns and one of you itemizes deductions,
the other spouse will not qualify for the standard de-
duction and should also itemize deductions.
Dividing itemized deductions.You may be able
to claim itemized deductions on a separate return for
certain expenses that you paid separately or jointly with
your spouse. See Table 1.
Separate returns may give you a higher tax.Some
married couples file separate returns because each
wants to be responsible only for his or her own tax. But
in almost all instances, if you file separate returns, you
will pay more combined federal tax than you would with
a joint return. This is because the tax rate is higher for
married persons filing separately. The following rules
also apply if you file a separate return.
1) You cannot take the credit for child and dependent
care expenses in most cases.
2) You cannot take the earned income credit.
3) You cannot take the exclusion or credit for adoption
expenses in most instances.
4) You cannot take the credit for higher education ex-
penses or the deduction for student loan interest.
5) You cannot exclude the interest from qualified
savings bonds that you used for higher education
expenses.
6) If you lived with your spouse at any time during the
tax year:
a) You cannot claim the credit for the elderly or the
disabled,
b) You will have to include in income up to 85%
of any social security or equivalent railroad re-
tirement benefits you received, and
c) You cannot roll over amounts from a traditional
IRA into a Roth IRA during a year you file a
separate return.
7) You will become subject to the limit on the child tax
credit, itemized deductions, and the phaseout of the
deduction for personal exemptions at income levels
that are half of those for a joint return.
Joint return after separate returns.If either you or
your spouse files a separate return, you can change to
a joint return any time within 3 years from the due date
(not including extensions) of the separate returns. This
applies even if either of you filed as head of household.
Use Form 1040X.
Separate returns after joint return.After the due date
of your return, you and your spouse cannot file sepa-
rate returns if you previously filed a joint return.
Exception. A personal representative for a dece-
dent can change from a joint return elected by the sur-
viving spouse to a separate return for the decedent. The
personal representative has one year from the due date
of the joint return to make the change.
Head of Household
You may be eligible to file as head of household if you
meet the requirements discussed later.
Filing as head of household has the following ad-
vantages.
1) You can claim the standard deduction even if your
spouse files a separate return and itemizes de-
ductions.
2) Your standard deduction is higher than is allowed
on a single or married filing separate return.
3) Your tax rate may be lower than it is on a single
or married filing separate return.
4) You may be able to claim certain credits (such as
child care credit and earned income credit) you
cannot claim on a married filing separate return.
5) You will become subject to the limit on itemized
deductions and the phaseout of the deduction for
personal exemptions at income levels that are
higher than the levels for a single or a married filing
separate return.
Requirements. You can file as head of household only
if you were unmarried or considered unmarried on the
last day of the year. You also must have paid more than
half the cost of keeping up a home that was the main
home for more than half the year (except for temporary
absences, such as for school) for you and any of the
following qualifying persons.
1)Certain unmarried children. This includes your
unmarried child, grandchild, stepchild, foster child,
or adopted child. A foster child must qualify as your
Page 4

Table 1. Itemized Deductions on Separate Returns
This table shows itemized deductions you can claim on your separate return whether you paid the
expenses separately with your own funds or jointly with your spouse. Caution: If you live in a
community property state, these rules do not apply. See Community Income.
Itemized Deduction IF you...
THEN you can deduct on your
separate return...
Medical expenses
State income tax
Property tax
Mortgage interest
Casualty loss
Paid with funds deposited in a joint
checking account in which you and your
spouse have an equal interest
File a separate state income tax return
File a joint state income tax return and
you and your spouse are jointly and
individually liable for the full amount of
the state income tax
File a joint state income tax return and
you are liable for only your own share of
state income tax
Paid on property held as tenants by the
entirety
Paid on property held as tenants by the
entirety
Have a casualty loss on a home you own
as tenants by the entirety
One-half of the total medical expenses,
unless you can show that you alone paid
the expenses.
The amount of state income tax you
alone paid during the year.
The amount of state income tax you
alone paid during the year.
The smaller of:
● The state income tax you alone paid
during the year, or
● The total state income tax you and
your spouse paid during the year
multiplied by the following fraction.
The numerator is the amount of your
gross income and the denominator is
your combined gross income.
The amount of property tax that you
alone paid.
The amount of mortgage interest that
you alone paid.
Half of the loss. Neither spouse may
report the total casualty loss.
dependent and must have lived in your home for the
entire year.
2)Certain married children. This includes your mar-
ried child, grandchild, stepchild, foster child, or
adopted child for whom you can claim an ex-
emption. This also includes your married child,
grandchild, stepchild, or adopted child for whom
you could claim an exemption except that:
a) By your written declaration you allow the non-
custodial parent to claim the exemption, or
b) The noncustodial parent provided at least $600
for the support of the dependent and claims the
exemption under a pre-1985 agreement.
3)Other relatives. This includes any other relative for
whom you can claim an exemption. However, your
parent for whom you can claim an exemption does
not have to live with you. (See  Father or mother,
later.) For a list of persons who are relatives for
purposes of these requirements, see 1. Member of
Household or Relationship Test under Dependency
Tests, later.
Your married child or other relative will not qualify you
as a head of household if you claim an exemption for
that person under a multiple support agreement (dis-
cussed later).
Father or mother.If your parent for whom you can
claim an exemption does not live with you, you can file
as head of household if you paid more than half the cost
of keeping up a home that was your parent's main home
for the entire year. This includes paying more than half
the cost of keeping your parent in a rest home or home
for the elderly.
Considered unmarried.Even if you are married, you
will be considered unmarried on the last day of the year
if you meet all of the following tests.
1) You do not file a joint return.
2) You paid more than half the cost of keeping up your
home for the tax year.
3) Your spouse did not live in your home during the
last 6 months of the tax year.
4) Your home was, for more than half the year, the
main home of your child, stepchild, adopted child,
Page 5

or for the entire year, the main home for your foster
child. You generally must be able to claim an ex-
emption for your child. However, you can still meet
this test if you cannot claim an exemption for your
child only because: 
a) By your written declaration you allow the non-
custodial parent to claim the exemption, or
b) The noncustodial parent provided at least $600
for the support of the child and claims the ex-
emption under a pre-1985 agreement. 
Nonresident alien spouse.If your spouse was a
nonresident alien at any time during the tax year, and
you have not chosen to treat your spouse as a resident
alien, you are considered unmarried for head of
household purposes. However, your spouse is not a
qualifying person for head of household purposes. You
must have paid most of the cost of keeping up a home
that was the main home for most of the year for you
and a qualifying person (other than your spouse) and
meet the other requirements to file as head of house-
hold.
Keeping up a home.You are keeping up a home only
if you pay more than half the cost of its upkeep. This
includes rent, mortgage interest, taxes, insurance on
the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home.
This does not include the cost of clothing, education,
medical treatment, or transportation for any member of
the household.
More information.For more information on filing as
head of household, get Publication 501.
Exemptions
Generally, you can deduct $2,800 for each exemption
you claim in 2000. However, if your adjusted gross in-
come is more than $96,700, see Phaseout of Ex-
emptions, later.
There are two types of exemptions: personal ex-
emptions and exemptions for dependents. If you are
entitled to claim an exemption for a dependent (such
as your child), that dependent cannot claim his or her
personal exemption on his or her own tax return.
Personal Exemptions
You can claim your own exemption unless someone
else can claim it. If you are married, you may be able
to take an exemption for your spouse. These are called
personal exemptions.
Exemption for Your Spouse
Your spouse is never considered your dependent. You
may be able to take an exemption for your spouse only
because you are married.
Joint return.On a joint return, you can claim one ex-
emption for yourself and one for your spouse.
If your spouse had any gross income, you can
claim his or her exemption only if you file a joint return.
Separate return.If you file a separate return, you can
take an exemption for your spouse only if your spouse
had no gross income and was not the dependent of
another taxpayer. If your spouse is the dependent of
another taxpayer, you cannot claim an exemption for
your spouse even if the other taxpayer does not actually
claim your spouse's exemption.
Alimony paid. If you paid alimony to your spouse,
you cannot take an exemption for your spouse. This is
because alimony is gross income to the spouse who
received it.
Divorced or separated spouse.You cannot take an
exemption for your former spouse for the year in which
you were divorced or legally separated under a final
decree. This rule applies even if you paid all your former
spouse's support that year.
Exemptions for Dependents
You can take an exemption for each person who meets
all five of the dependency tests discussed later.
CAUTION
!
If you can claim an exemption for your de-
pendent, the dependent cannot claim his or her
own exemption on his or her own tax return.
This is true even if you do not claim the dependent's
exemption on your return or if the exemption will be
reduced or eliminated under the phaseout rule for
high-income individuals.
Dependency Tests
The following five tests must be met for you to claim
an exemption for a person (dependent) other than
yourself or your spouse.
1) Member of Household or Relationship Test.
2) Citizen or Resident Test.
3) Joint Return Test.
4) Gross Income Test.
 5) Support Test.
1. Member of Household
or Relationship Test
To meet this test, the person must either:
1) Be related to you, or
2) Live with you for the entire year as a member of
your household. 
Related.A person related to you in any of the following
ways meets this test even if he or she did not live with
you for the entire year as a member of your household.
Page 6

Any relationships that have been established by mar-
riage are not considered ended by death or divorce.
Child. Your child is:
1) Your son, daughter, stepson, stepdaughter, or le-
gally adopted son or daughter,
2) A child who lived with you in your home as a
member of your family, if placed with you by an
authorized placement agency for legal adoption, or
3) A foster child (any child who lived with you in your
home as a member of your family for the entire
year). 
Member of household. If the person is not related to
you, he or she must have lived in your home as a
member of your household for the entire year (except
for temporary absences, such as for vacation or
school). A person is not a member of your household
if at any time during your tax year the relationship be-
tween you and that person violates local law.
2. Citizen or Resident Test
To meet the citizen or resident test, a person must be
a U.S. citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or
Mexico for some part of the calendar year in which your
tax year begins.
Children usually are citizens or residents of the
country of their parents. If you were a U.S. citizen when
your child was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen
although the other parent was a nonresident alien and
the child was born in a foreign country. If so, and the
other dependency tests are met, the child is your de-
pendent and you may take the exemption. It does not
matter if the child lives abroad with the nonresident al-
ien parent.
Special rule for your adopted child.If you are a U.S.
citizen living abroad who has legally adopted a child
who meets the other dependency tests, the citizen or
resident test does not apply. You can take the ex-
emption if your home is the child's main home and the
child is a member of your household for the entire year.
3. Joint Return Test
Even if the other dependency tests are met, you are
generally not allowed an exemption for a person other
than yourself or your spouse if he or she files a joint
return. However, this test does not apply if a joint return
is filed by a dependent and his or her spouse merely
Child Stepmother as a claim for refund and no tax liability would exist for
either spouse on the basis of separate returns.
4. Gross Income Test
Generally, you cannot take an exemption for a person
other than yourself or your spouse if that person had
gross income of $2,800 or more for the year. All income
in the form of money, property, and services that is not
exempt from tax is gross income. Gross income does
not include nontaxable income, such as welfare benefits
or nontaxable social security benefits.
Special rules for your child.The gross income test
does not apply if your child:
1) Is under age 19 at the end of the year, or
2) Is a student during the year and is under age 24
at the end of the year. 
Child.See 1. Member of Household or Relationship
Test, earlier, for the definition of “child.”
Student. To qualify as a student, your child must
be, during some part of each of 5 calendar months
during the year (not necessarily consecutive):
1) A full-time student at a school that has a regular
teaching staff and course of study, and a regularly
enrolled body of students in attendance, or
2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm training course
given by a school described in (1) above or by a
state, county, or local government.
A full-time student is one who is enrolled for the
number of hours or courses the school considers to be
full-time attendance.
The term “school” includes elementary schools, jun-
ior and senior high schools, colleges, universities, and
technical, trade, and mechanical schools. It does not
include on-the-job training courses, correspondence
schools, or night schools.
5. Support Test
You must provide more than half of a person's total
support for the calendar year to meet the support test.
If you file a joint return, the support could have come
from you or your spouse. Even if you did not provide
over half the person's support, you will be treated as
having provided over half the support if you meet the
tests explained later under Multiple Support Agreement.
If you are divorced or separated and you or the other
parent, or both together, provided over half your child's
support for the year, the support test for your child may
be based on a special rule. See Support Test for Chil-
dren of Divorced or Separated Parents, later.
In figuring total support, you must include money the
person provided for his or her own support, even if this
money was not taxable (for example, gifts, savings, and
welfare benefits). If your child was a student, do not
include amounts he or she received as scholarships
while a full-time student.
Support includes food, a place to live, clothes, med-
ical and dental care, recreation, and education. In fig-
uring support, use the actual cost of these items.
Stepchild Stepfather
Mother Mother-in-law
Father Father-in-law
Grandparent Brother-in-law
Great-grandparent Sister-in-law
Brother Son-in-law
Sister Daughter-in-law
Grandchild If related by blood:
Great-grandchild Uncle
Half-brother Aunt
Half-sister Nephew
Stepbrother Niece
Stepsister
Page 7

However, the cost of a place to live is figured at its fair
rental value.
Support does not include income tax, social security
and Medicare taxes, premiums for life insurance, or
funeral expenses.
Joint ownership of home.If the person lives with you
in a home that is jointly owned by you and your spouse
or former spouse, and each of you has the right to use
and live in the home, each of you is considered to
provide half of the person's lodging. However, if your
decree of divorce gives only you the right to use and live
in the home, you are considered to provide the person's
entire lodging. This is true even though legal title to the
home remains in the names of both you and your for-
mer spouse.
Capital items.You must include capital items such
as a car or furniture in figuring support, but only if they
were actually given to, or bought by, the person for his
or her use or benefit. Do not include the cost of a
capital item for the use or benefit of other members of
the household. For example, include in support a bicy-
cle purchased by and used solely by the person for
transportation; do not include a lawn mower you pur-
chase that is occasionally used by the person.
Support Test for
Children of Divorced
or Separated Parents
The support test for a child of divorced or separated
parents is based on the special rule explained here and
in Figure 1.However, the special rule applies only if
the parents meet all three of the following require-
ments.
1) The parents are:
a) Divorced or legally separated under a decree
of divorce or separate maintenance, 
b) Separated under a written separation agree-
ment, or
c) Lived apart at all times during the last 6 months
of the calendar year.
2) One or both parents provide more than half the
child's total support for the calendar year.
3) One or both parents have custody of the child for
more than half the calendar year.
The special rule does not apply if:
 The child's support is determined under a multiple
support agreement discussed later, or
 The child's parents never married each other.
Child is defined earlier under 1. Member of House-
hold or Relationship Test.
Support provided by others.Support provided to a
child of a divorced or separated parent by a relative or
friend is not included as support provided by the parent.
However, if you remarried, the support your new
spouse provided is treated as provided by you.
Example 1. You are divorced. During the whole
year, you and your child lived with your mother in a
house she owns. You must include your child's share
of the fair rental value of the home in figuring total
support, but not as part of the support provided by you.
Example 2. You have two children from a former
marriage who lived with you. You remarried and lived
in a home owned by your present spouse. Your child's
share of the fair rental value of the home is treated as
provided by you.
Custodial parent.Under the special rule, the parent
who had custody of the child for the greater part of the
year (the custodial parent) is generally treated as the
parent who provided more than half of the child's sup-
port. This parent is usually allowed to claim the ex-
emption for the child if the other dependency tests are
met. However, see Noncustodial parent, later.
Custody. Custody is usually determined by the
terms of the most recent decree of divorce or separate
maintenance, or a later custody decree. If there is no
decree, it will be determined by the written separation
agreement.
If neither a decree nor an agreement establishes
custody, then the parent who had physical custody of
the child for the greater part of the year is considered
to have custody of the child. This also applies if a de-
cree or agreement calls for “split” custody, or if the va-
lidity of a decree or agreement awarding custody is
uncertain because of legal proceedings pending on the
last day of the calendar year.
If the parents were divorced or separated during the
year after having had joint custody of the child before
the separation, the parent who had custody for the
greater part of the rest of the year is considered the
custodial parent.
Example 1. Under the terms of your divorce decree,
you had custody of your child for 10 months of the year.
Your former spouse had custody for the other 2 months.
You and your former spouse provided the child's total
support. You are considered to have provided more
than half the child's support because you are the cus-
todial parent.
Example 2. You and your former spouse provided
your child's total support for the year. You had custody
of your child under your 1990 divorce decree, but in
October 2000, a new custody decree granted custody
to your former spouse. Because you had custody for the
greater part of the year, you are the custodial parent
and are considered to have provided more than half of
your child's support.
Example 3. You were separated on June 1. Before
the separation, you and your spouse had joint custody
of your child. Your spouse had custody from June
through September and you had custody from October
through December. Because your spouse had custody
for 4 of the 7 months following the separation, your
spouse was the custodial parent for the year and is
treated as having provided more than half of the child's
support for the year.
Page 8

Figure 1. Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents
Start Here
No
Yes
Are the parents divorced
or legally separated,
separated under a written
agreement, or did they
live apart the last 6
months of the year?
Did one or both parents
furnish over half of the
child’s total support?
Is the child in the custody
of one or both parents for
more than half of the
year?
Did the custodial parent
sign a Form 8332 or
similar statement
releasing the exemption?
Did any one person
provide over half of
the child’s total
support?
The person who provided
over half of the child’s
support meets the
support test.
See Multiple Support
Agreement.
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
after 1984 that
unconditionally
entitles the
noncustodial parent
to the exemption?
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
before 1985 (and not
modified after 1984)
that entitles the
noncustodial parent
to the exemption?
Did the noncustodial
parent provide at
least $600 of the
child’s support
during the year?
The custodial
parent meets the
support test.
The noncustodial parent
meets the support test.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074/H17074/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
NoYes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Page 9

Noncustodial parent. Under the special rule, the
parent who did not have custody, or who had it for the
shorter time, is the noncustodial parent. The noncusto-
dial parent is treated as the parent who provided more
than half of the child's support if any one of the following
three conditions is met.
1) The custodial parent signs a written declaration that
he or she will not claim the exemption for the child,
and the noncustodial parent attaches this written
declaration to his or her return.
2) A decree or agreement went into effect after 1984
and states the noncustodial parent can claim the
child as a dependent without regard to any condi-
tion, such as payment of support.
3) A decree or agreement executed before 1985 pro-
vides that the noncustodial parent is entitled to the
exemption, and he or she gave at least $600 for the
child's support during the year. This is true unless
the pre-1985 decree or agreement was modified
after 1984 to specify that this provision will not ap-
ply.
Example 1. Under your 1984 divorce decree, your
former spouse has custody of your child. The decree
specifically states that you can claim the child's ex-
emption. You provided $1,000 of your child's support
during the year and your spouse provided the rest. You
are considered to have provided over half the child's
support. See item (3) above.
Example 2. You and your spouse provided all of
your child's support. Under your 1988 written sepa-
ration agreement, your spouse has custody of your
child. Because the agreement was made after 1984,
you are considered to have provided over half the
child's support only if your spouse agrees not to claim
the child's exemption by signing a written declaration.
See item (1) above.
Written declaration.The custodial parent should
use Form 8332, or a similar statement, to make the
written declaration to release the exemption to the
noncustodial parent. The noncustodial parent must at-
tach the form or statement to his or her tax return. 
The exemption can be released for a single year, for
a number of specified years (for example, alternate
years), or for all future years, as specified in the dec-
laration. If the exemption is released for more than one
year, the original release must be attached to the return
of the noncustodial parent for the first year, and a copy
of the release must be attached to the return for each
succeeding taxable year for which the noncustodial
parent claims the exemption.
Divorce decree or separation agreement made
after 1984. If your divorce decree or separation
agreement went into effect after 1984 and it states that
you can claim the exemption for your child without re-
gard to any condition, such as payment of support,
you can attach a copy of the following pages from the
decree or agreement instead of Form 8332.
1) The cover page (write the other parent's social se-
curity number on this page).
2) The page that states you can claim the exemption
for your child.
3) The signature page with the other parent's signa-
ture and the date of the agreement.
CAUTION
!
If your divorce decree or separation agreement
went into effect after 1984 and it states that you
can claim the exemption for your child if you
meet certain conditions, you must attach to your re-
turn Form 8332 or a similar statement from the custodial
parent releasing the exemption.
Divorce decree or separation agreement made
before 1985. If you are a noncustodial parent who
claims a child's exemption under a decree or agreement
made before 1985, you must give at least $600 for that
child's support.
Child support. Child support payments received
from the noncustodial parent are considered used for
the child's support, even if actually spent on things other
than support.
Example. Your 1982 divorce decree requires you
to pay child support to the custodial parent and states
that you can claim your child's exemption. The custodial
parent paid for all support items and put the $1,000
child support you paid during the year into a savings
account for the child. Because your payments are
considered used for support, you are considered to
have provided over half the child's support.
Back child support.If you fail to pay child support
in the year it is due, but pay it in a later year, any pay-
ment of the overdue amount is not considered child
support either for the year it was due or for the year in
which it is paid. It is payment of an amount owed to the
custodial parent, but it is not child support provided by
you.
Example. You and your former spouse provide all
your child's support. Your 1984 divorce decree requires
you to pay $800 child support each year to the custodial
parent and allows you to claim your child's exemption.
Last year you paid only $500, but you made up the
$300 you owed by paying $1,100 this year. The $300
back child support you paid this year is not considered
support for last year or for this year.
Medical Expenses
A child of divorced or separated parents whose support
test is based on the special rule described in this sec-
tion is treated as a dependent of both parents for the
medical expense deduction. A parent can deduct med-
ical expenses he or she paid for the child even if an
exemption for the child is claimed by the other parent.
Multiple Support Agreement
Sometimes no one individual provides more than half
of the support of a person. Instead, two or more people,
each of whom would be able to take the exemption but
for the support test, together provide more than half of
the person's support. One of those people can claim
an exemption for that person if the requirements in
Figure 2 are met.
Page 10

Figure 2. Can You Claim an Exemption for a Person
Under a Multiple Support Agreement?
If no one person alone pays more than half of another person ’s support, use this chart to see if you can claim
an exemption for that person under a multiple support agreement.
Start Here
Yes
No
Did you pay over 10% of another person ’s support?
Could you claim the other person ’s exemption were it not for the
support test?
Could at least one other individual claim the other person ’s
exemption were it not for the support test?
Did you and that other individual or those other people together
pay over half of the other person ’s support?
Did anyone alone pay over half of the other person ’s support?
Are you attaching to your tax return a Form 2120 signed by every
other individual who paid over 10% of the other person ’s support
and could claim the person ’s exemption were it not for the
support test?
You can claim the person ’s exemption under a
multiple support agreement.
You cannot claim the person ’s exemption under a
multiple support agreement.
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074 /H17074
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
Phaseout of Exemptions
The amount you can claim as a deduction for ex-
emptions is phased out if your adjusted gross income
(AGI) for 2000 falls within the range shown below for
your filing status.
If your AGI is more than the highest amount for your
filing status, your deduction for exemptions is zero. If
your AGI falls within the range, use the Deduction for
Exemptions Worksheet in the instructions for Form
1040 to figure your deduction.
Alimony
Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or former
spouse under a divorce or separation instrument. It
does not include voluntary payments that are not made
under a divorce or separation instrument.
Alimony is deductible by the payer and must be in-
cluded in the spouse's or former spouse's income. Al-
though this discussion is generally written for the payer
of the alimony, the recipient can use the information to
determine whether an amount received is alimony.
To be alimony, a payment must meet certain re-
quirements. Different requirements apply to payments
under instruments executed after 1984 and to payments
under instruments executed before 1985. These re-
quirements are discussed later.
Filing Status AGI
Single ........................................................... $128,950 – $251,450
Married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er) . $193,400 – $315,900
Married filing separately ............................... $96,700 – $157,950
Head of household ....................................... $161,150 – $283,650
Page 11

Spouse or former spouse. Unless otherwise stated
in the following discussions about alimony, the term
“spouse” includes former spouse.
Divorce or separation instrument.The term “divorce
or separation instrument” means:
1) A decree of divorce or separate maintenance or a
written instrument incident to that decree,
2) A written separation agreement, or
3) A decree or any type of court order requiring a
spouse to make payments for the support or main-
tenance of the other spouse. This includes a tem-
porary decree, an interlocutory (not final) decree,
and a decree of alimony pendente lite (while
awaiting action on the final decree or agreement).
Invalid decree.Payments under a divorce decree
can be alimony even if the decree's validity is in ques-
tion. A divorce decree is valid for tax purposes until a
court having proper jurisdiction holds it invalid.
Amended instrument. An amendment to a divorce
decree may change the nature of your payments.
Amendments are not ordinarily retroactive for federal
tax purposes. However, a retroactive amendment to a
divorce decree correcting a clerical error to reflect the
original intent of the court will generally be effective
retroactively for federal tax purposes.
Example 1. A court order retroactively corrected a
mathematical error under your divorce decree to ex-
press the original intent to spread the payments over
more than 10 years. This change also is effective
retroactively for federal tax purposes.
Example 2. Your original divorce decree did not fix
any part of the payment as child support. To reflect the
true intention of the court, a court order retroactively
corrected the error by designating a part of the payment
as child support. The amended order is effective
retroactively for federal tax purposes.
Deducting alimony paid.You can deduct alimony you
paid, whether or not you itemize deductions on your
return. You must file Form 1040. You cannot use Form
1040A or Form 1040EZ.
Enter the amount of alimony you paid on line 31a
(Form 1040). In the space provided on line 31b, enter
your spouse's social security number.
If you paid alimony to more than one person, enter
the social security number of one of the recipients.
Show the social security number and amount paid to
each other recipient on an attached statement. Enter
your total payments on line 31a.
CAUTION
!
If you do not provide your spouse's social se-
curity number, you may have to pay a $50
penalty and your deduction may be disallowed.
Reporting alimony received.Report alimony you re-
ceived on line 11 of Form 1040. You cannot use Form
1040A or Form 1040EZ.
CAUTION
!
You must give the person who paid the alimony
your social security number. If you do not, you
may have to pay a $50 penalty.
Withholding on nonresident aliens.If you are a U.S.
citizen or resident and you pay alimony to a nonresident
alien spouse, you must withhold income tax at a rate
of 30% (or lower treaty rate) on each payment unless
you are exempted by an income tax treaty. For more
information, get Publication 515, Withholding of Tax on
Nonresident Aliens and Foreign Corporations.
General Rules
The following rules apply to alimony regardless of when
the divorce or separation instrument was executed.
Payments not alimony.Not all payments under a di-
vorce or separation instrument are alimony. Alimony
does not include:
 1) Child support,
2) Noncash property settlements,
3) Payments that are your spouse's part of community
income, as explained later under Community Prop-
erty,
4) Payments to keep up the payer's property, or
5) Use of property.
Example. Under your written separation agreement,
your spouse lives rent-free in a home you own and you
must pay the mortgage, real estate taxes, insurance,
repairs, and utilities for the home. Because you own the
home and the debts are yours, your payments for the
mortgage, real estate taxes, insurance, and repairs are
not alimony. Neither is the value of your spouse's use
of the home.
If they otherwise qualify, you can deduct the pay-
ments for utilities as alimony. Your spouse must report
them as income. If you itemize deductions, you can
deduct the real estate taxes and, if the home is a
qualified home, you can also include the interest on the
mortgage in figuring your deductible interest.
Child support.To determine whether a payment is
child support, see the separate discussions under In-
struments Executed After 1984 or Instruments Exe-
cuted Before 1985, later.
Underpayment. If both alimony and child support
payments are called for by your divorce or separation
instrument, and you pay less than the total required, the
payments apply first to child support and then to
alimony.
Example. Your divorce decree calls for you to pay
your former spouse $200 a month as child support and
$150 a month as alimony. If you pay the full amount
of $4,200 during the year, you can deduct $1,800 as
alimony and your former spouse must report $1,800 as
alimony received. If you pay only $3,600 during the
year, $2,400 is child support. You can deduct only
$1,200 as alimony and your former spouse must report
$1,200 as alimony received.
Page 12

Payments to a third party.Cash payments (including
checks and money orders) to a third party on behalf of
your spouse under the terms of your divorce or sepa-
ration instrument may be alimony, if they otherwise
qualify. These include payments for your spouse's
medical expenses, housing costs (rent, utilities, etc.),
taxes, tuition, etc. The payments are treated as re-
ceived by your spouse and then paid to the third party.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you must
pay your former spouse's medical and dental expenses.
If the payments otherwise qualify, you can deduct them
as alimony on your return. Your former spouse must
report them as alimony received and can include them
in figuring deductible medical expenses.
Example 2. Under your separation agreement, you
must pay the real estate taxes, mortgage payments,
and insurance premiums on a home owned by your
spouse. If they otherwise qualify, you can deduct the
payments as alimony on your return, and your spouse
must report them as alimony received. If itemizing de-
ductions, your spouse can deduct the real estate taxes
and, if the home is a qualified home, also include the
interest on the mortgage in figuring deductible interest.
Life insurance premiums. Alimony includes premi-
ums you must pay under your divorce or separation
instrument for insurance on your life to the extent your
spouse owns the policy.
Payments for jointly-owned home.If your divorce
or separation instrument states that you must pay ex-
penses for a home owned by you and your spouse or
former spouse, some of your payments may be
alimony. See Table 2.
Instruments Executed After 1984
The following rules for alimony apply to payments under
divorce or separation instruments executed after 1984.
They also apply to alimony payments under earlier in-
struments that were modified after 1984 to:
1) Specify that these rules will apply, or
2) Change the amount or period of payment or add
or delete any contingency or condition. 
The rules in this section do not apply to divorce or
separation instruments executed after 1984 if the terms
for alimony are unchanged from an instrument executed
before 1985. For the rules for alimony payments under
other pre-1985 instruments, see Instruments Executed
Before 1985, later.
Example 1. In November 1984, you and your former
spouse executed a written separation agreement. In
February 1985, a decree of divorce was substituted for
the written separation agreement. The decree of di-
vorce did not change the terms for the alimony you pay
your former spouse. The decree of divorce is treated
as executed before 1985. Alimony payments under this
decree are not subject to the rules for payments under
instruments executed after 1984.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example
1 except that the decree of divorce changed the amount
of the alimony. In this example, the decree of divorce
is not treated as executed before 1985. The alimony
payments are subject to the rules for payments under
instruments executed after 1984.
Alimony Requirements
A payment to or for a spouse under a divorce or sepa-
ration instrument is alimony if the spouses do not file
a joint return with each other and all the following re-
quirements are met.
1) The payment is in cash.
2) The instrument does not designate the payment as
not alimony.
3) The spouses are not members of the same house-
hold at the time the payments are made. This re-
quirement applies only if the spouses are legally
separated under a decree of divorce or separate
maintenance.
4) There is no liability to make any payment (in cash
or property) after the death of the recipient spouse.
5) The payment is not treated as child support.
Each of these requirements is discussed below.
Payment must be in cash. Only cash payments, in-
cluding checks and money orders, qualify as alimony.
The following do not qualify as alimony.
 Transfers of services or property (including a debt
instrument of a third party or an annuity contract). 
 Execution of a debt instrument by the payor.
 The use of property. 
Payments to a third party.Cash payments to a
third party under the terms of your divorce or separation
instrument can qualify as a cash payment to your
spouse. See Payments to a third party under General
Rules, earlier.
Also, cash payments made to a third party at the
written request of your spouse qualify as alimony if all
the following requirements are met.
1) The payments are in lieu of payments of alimony
directly to your spouse.
2) The written request states that both spouses intend
the payments to be treated as alimony.
3) You receive the written request from your spouse
before you file your return for the year you made the
payments.
Payments designated as not alimony.You and your
spouse can designate that otherwise qualifying pay-
ments are not alimony. You do this by including a pro-
vision in your divorce or separation instrument that
states the payments are not deductible by you and are
excludable from your spouse's income. For this pur-
pose, any instrument (written statement) signed by both
of you that makes this designation and that refers to a
Page 13

Table 2. Expenses for a Jointly-Owned Home
Use the table below to find how much of your payment is alimony and how much you can claim as
an itemized deduction.
IF you must pay all of
the...
AND your home is... THEN you can deduct
and your spouse (or
former spouse) must
include as alimony...
AND you can claim as
an itemized deduction...
Mortgage payments
(principal and interest)
Real estate taxes and
home insurance
Jointly-owned
Held as tenants in
common
Held as tenants by the
entirety or in joint
tenancy
One-half of the total
payments
One-half of the total
payments
None of the payments
One-half of the interest as
interest expense (if the
home is a qualified
home).
1
One-half of the real estate
taxes
2 
and none of the
home insurance.
All of the real estate taxes
and none of the home
insurance.
1
Your spouse (or former spouse) can deduct the other one-half of the interest if the home is a qualified home.
2
Your spouse (or former spouse) can deduct the other one-half of the real estate taxes.
previous written separation agreement is treated as a
written separation agreement. If you are subject to
temporary support orders, the designation must be
made in the original or a later temporary support order.
Your spouse can exclude the payments from income
only if he or she attaches a copy of the instrument
designating them as not alimony to his or her return.
The copy must be attached each year the designation
applies.
Spouses cannot be members of the same house-
hold.Payments to your spouse while you are members
of the same household are not alimony if you are legally
separated under a decree of divorce or separate
maintenance. A home you formerly shared is consid-
ered one household, even if you physically separate
yourselves in the home.
You are not treated as members of the same
household if one of you is preparing to leave the
household and does leave no later than one month after
the date of the payment.
Exception. If you are not legally separated under
a decree of divorce or separate maintenance, a pay-
ment under a written separation agreement, support
decree, or other court order may qualify as alimony
even if you are members of the same household when
the payment is made.
Liability for payments after death of recipient
spouse. If you must continue to make payments for
any period after your spouse's death, none of the pay-
ments made before or after the death are alimony.
The divorce or separation instrument does not have
to expressly state that the payments cease upon the
death of your spouse if, for example, the liability for
continued payments would end under state law.
Example. You must pay your former spouse
$10,000 in cash each year for 10 years. Your divorce
decree states that the payments will end upon your
former spouse's death. You must also pay your former
spouse or your former spouse's estate $20,000 in cash
each year for 10 years. The death of your spouse would
not terminate these payments under state law.
The $10,000 annual payments are alimony. But be-
cause the $20,000 annual payments will not end upon
your former spouse's death, they are not alimony.
Substitute payments.If you must make any pay-
ments in cash or property after your spouse's death as
a substitute for continuing otherwise qualifying pay-
ments, the otherwise qualifying payments are not
alimony. To the extent that your payments begin, ac-
celerate, or increase because of the death of your
spouse, otherwise qualifying payments you made may
be treated as payments that were not alimony. Whether
or not such payments will be treated as not alimony
depends on all the facts and circumstances.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you must
pay your former spouse $30,000 annually. The pay-
ments will stop at the end of 6 years or upon your for-
mer spouse's death, if earlier.
Your former spouse has custody of your minor chil-
dren. The decree provides that if any child is still a mi-
nor at your spouse's death, you must pay $10,000 an-
nually to a trust until the youngest child reaches the age
of majority. The trust income and corpus (principal) are
to be used for your children's benefit.
These facts indicate that the payments to be made
after your former spouse's death are a substitute for
$10,000 of the $30,000 annual payments. $10,000 of
each of the $30,000 annual payments is not alimony.
Example 2. Under your divorce decree, you must
pay your former spouse $30,000 annually. The pay-
ments will stop at the end of 15 years or upon your
former spouse's death, if earlier. The decree provides
that if your former spouse dies before the end of the
15-year period, you must pay the estate the difference
between $450,000 ($30,000 × 15) and the total amount
paid up to that time. For example, if your spouse dies
Page 14

at the end of the tenth year, you must pay the estate
$150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000).
These facts indicate that the lump-sum payment to
be made after your former spouse's death is a substi-
tute for the full amount of the $30,000 annual payments.
None of the annual payments are alimony. The result
would be the same if the payment required at death
were to be discounted by an appropriate interest factor
to account for the prepayment.
Child support.A payment that is specifically desig-
nated as child support or treated as specifically desig-
nated as child support under your divorce or separation
instrument is not alimony. The designated amount or
part may vary from time to time. Child support payments
are neither deductible by the payer nor taxable to the
payee.
Specifically designated as child support.A pay-
ment will be treated as specifically designated as child
support to the extent that the payment is reduced either:
1) On the happening of a contingency relating to your
child, or
2) At a time that can be clearly associated with the
contingency.
A payment may be treated as specifically designated
as child support even if other separate payments are
specifically designated as child support.
Contingency relating to your child.A contingency
relates to your child if it depends on any event relating
to that child. It does not matter whether the event is
certain or likely to occur. Events relating to your child
include the child's:
 Becoming employed,
 Dying,
 Leaving the household,
 Leaving school,
 Marrying, or
 Reaching a specified age or income level.
Clearly associated with a contingency.Payments
are presumed to be reduced at a time clearly associ-
ated with the happening of a contingency relating to
your child only in the following situations.
1) The payments are to be reduced not more than 6
months before or after the date the child will reach
18, 21, or local age of majority.
2) The payments are to be reduced on two or more
occasions that occur not more than one year before
or after a different one of your children reaches a
certain age from 18 to 24. This certain age must
be the same for each child, but need not be a whole
number of years. 
In all other situations, reductions in payments are not
treated as clearly associated with the happening of a
contingency relating to your child.
Either you or the IRS can overcome the presumption
in the two situations above. This is done by showing
that the time at which the payments are to be reduced
was determined independently of any contingencies
relating to your children. For example, if you can show
that the period of alimony payments is customary in the
local jurisdiction, such as a period equal to one-half of
the duration of the marriage, you can treat the amount
as alimony.
Recapture of Alimony
If your alimony payments decrease or terminate during
the first 3 calendar years, you may be subject to the
recapture rule. If you are subject to this rule, you have
to include in income in the third year part of the alimony
payments you previously deducted. Your spouse can
deduct in the third year part of the alimony payments
he or she previously included in income.
The 3-year period starts with the first calendar year
you make a payment qualifying as alimony under a
decree of divorce or separate maintenance or a written
separation agreement. Do not include any time in
which payments were being made under temporary
support orders. The second and third years are the next
2 calendar years, whether or not payments are made
during those years.
The reasons for a reduction or termination of alimony
payments that can require a recapture include:
 A change in your divorce or separation instrument,
 A failure to make timely payments,
 A reduction in your ability to provide support, or 
 A reduction in your spouse's support needs.
When to apply the recapture rule.You are subject
to the recapture rule in the third year if the alimony you
pay in the third year decreases by more than $15,000
from the second year or the alimony you pay in the
second and third years decreases significantly from the
alimony you pay in the first year.
When you figure a decrease in alimony, do not in-
clude the following amounts.
1) Payments made under a temporary support order.
2) Payments required over a period of at least 3 cal-
endar years of a fixed part of your income from a
business or property, or from compensation for
employment or self-employment.
3) Payments that decrease because of the death of
either spouse or the remarriage of the spouse re-
ceiving the payments.
How to figure and report the recapture.Both you
and your spouse can use Table 3 to figure recaptured
alimony.
Including the recapture in income.If you must
include a recapture amount in income, show it on Form
1040, line 11 (“Alimony received”). Cross out
“received” and write “recapture.” On the dotted line next
to the amount, enter your spouse's last name and social
security number.
Deducting the recapture.If you can deduct a re-
capture amount, show it on Form 1040, line 31a
(“Alimony paid”). Cross out “paid” and write
Page 15

“recapture.” In the space provided, enter your spouse's
social security number.
Example. You pay your former spouse $50,000
alimony the first year, $39,000 the second year, and
$28,000 the third year. You complete Table 3 as shown
on Filled-in Table 3. In the third year, you report $1,500
as income on line 11, Form 1040, and your former
spouse reports $1,500 as a deduction on line 31a, Form
1040.
Instruments Executed Before 1985
The following rules for alimony apply to payments under
divorce or separation instruments executed before
1985. However, if the instrument was modified after
1984 to specify that the rules for instruments executed
after 1984 apply, or to change the terms regarding the
amount or period of payment or other contingency or
condition, follow the rules under Instruments Executed
After 1984, earlier.
Alimony Requirements
A payment to or for a spouse under a divorce or sepa-
ration instrument is alimony if the spouses do not file
a joint return and the payment meets both of the fol-
lowing requirements.
1) It is based on the marital or family relationship. 
2) It is not child support. 
In addition, the spouses must be separated and living
apart for a payment under a separation agreement or
court order to qualify as alimony.
Payments of a fixed sum.If you must pay a fixed sum
in installments, your payments during the year that you
treat as alimony cannot be more than 10% of the fixed
sum. This limit applies to payments for the current year
and payments in advance, but not to late payments for
an earlier year.
However, do not treat any part of a late installment
payment as alimony if the fixed sum was payable over
a period ending 10 years or less from the date of the
divorce or separation instrument.
Payments subject to contingencies.Payments
are not considered installment payments of a fixed sum
if they are to end or change in amount on the happening
of one or more of the following contingencies.
1) The death of you or your spouse.
2) The remarriage of your spouse.
3) A change in the economic status of you or your
spouse. 
The contingency may be either specified in your in-
strument or imposed by local law.
Marital or family relationship.To be alimony, your
payments must be based on your obligation, because
of the marital or family relationship, to continue sup-
porting your spouse. Any payment that does not arise
out of that support obligation, such as the repayment
of a loan, is not alimony.
Property settlement.Payments are not based on
your obligation to continue support if they are a settle-
ment of property rights. However, even if a state court
describes payments made under a divorce decree as
payments for property rights, they are alimony if they
are made to fulfill a legal support obligation and they
otherwise qualify.
Child support.A payment that is specifically desig-
nated as child support under your divorce or separation
instrument is not alimony. If the instrument calls for
payments that otherwise qualify as alimony and does
not separately designate an amount as child support,
all the payments are alimony. This is true even if the
payments are subject to a contingency relating to your
child.
Example. Your divorce decree states that you must
pay your former spouse $400 a month for life for the
support of your former spouse and your child. The
payment is to be reduced to $300 upon the first of the
following to happen: the child's death, the child's 22nd
birthday, or the child's marriage. Despite these contin-
gencies, no amount of child support is fixed by the de-
cree. The entire payment is alimony.
Alimony Trusts, Annuities,
and Endowment Contracts
If you transferred property to a trust or bought or
transferred an annuity or endowment contract to pay
the alimony you owe, the trust income or other pro-
ceeds that would ordinarily be includible in your income
must be included in your former spouse's income as
alimony received. You do not include the payments in
your income, nor can you deduct them as alimony paid.
This rule applies whether the proceeds are from the
earnings or the principal of the transferred property. It
does not apply to any trust income that is fixed for child
support.
Example. You must make monthly alimony pay-
ments of $500. You bought your former spouse a
commercial annuity contract paying $500 a month. Your
former spouse must include the full amount received
under the contract in income, as alimony. It does not
matter whether the amount is paid out of principal or
interest. You do not include any part of the payment in
your income, nor can you deduct any part.
Annuity and endowment contracts. Proceeds from
annuity and endowment contracts bought for or trans-
ferred to a spouse after July 18, 1984, cannot be
treated as alimony. However, this does not apply to
contracts bought or transferred to pay alimony under a
divorce or separation instrument executed before July
19, 1984, unless both spouses choose to have it apply.
Proceeds not alimony. If the proceeds from an an-
nuity or endowment contract cannot be treated as
alimony, the amount received is reduced by the cost
of the contract. Get Publication 575, Pension and An-
nuity Income, for information on reporting annuities, and
Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income, for
information on reporting endowment proceeds.
Page 16

Table 3. Worksheet for Recapture of Alimony
Note: Do not enter less than zero on any line.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Alimony paid in 2nd year
Alimony paid in 3rd year
Floor
Add lines 2 and 3
Subtract line 4 from line 1
Alimony paid in 1st year
Adjusted alimony paid in 2nd year (line 1
less line 5)
Alimony paid in 3rd year
Add lines 7 and 8
Divide line 9 by 2
Floor
Add lines 10 and 11
Subtract line 12 from line 6
Recaptured alimony. Add lines 5 and 13
$15,000
$15,000
*If you deducted alimony paid, report this amount as income on line 11, Form 1040.
If you reported alimony received, deduct this amount on line 31a, Form 1040.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
*14.
Filled-in Table 3. Worksheet for Recapture of Alimony
Note: Do not enter less than zero on any line.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Alimony paid in 2nd year
Alimony paid in 3rd year
Floor
Add lines 2 and 3
Subtract line 4 from line 1
Alimony paid in 1st year
Adjusted alimony paid in 2nd year (line 1
less line 5)
Alimony paid in 3rd year
Add lines 7 and 8
Divide line 9 by 2
Floor
Add lines 10 and 11
Subtract line 12 from line 6
Recaptured alimony. Add lines 5 and 13
$15,000
$15,000
*If you deducted alimony paid, report this amount as income on line 11, Form 1040.
If you reported alimony received, deduct this amount on line 31a, Form 1040.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
*14.
28,000
39,000
28,000
67,000
33,500
39,000
0
43,000
50,000
48,500
1,500
1,500
Page 17

If the proceeds from a trust cannot be treated as
alimony, see the rules for reporting trust income in
Publication 525.
Qualified Domestic
Relations Order
A qualified domestic relations order (QDRO) is a judg-
ment, decree, or court order (including an approved
property settlement agreement) issued under a do-
mestic relations law that:
1) Relates to the rights of someone other than a par-
ticipant to receive benefits from a qualified retire-
ment plan (such as most pension and profit-sharing
plans) or a tax-sheltered annuity, 
2) Relates to payment of child support, alimony, or
marital property rights to a spouse, former spouse,
child, or other dependent of the participant, and
3) Specifies the amount or portion of the participant's
benefits to be paid to the participant's spouse, for-
mer spouse, child, or dependent.
Benefits paid to a child or dependent.Benefits paid
under a QDRO to the plan participant's child or de-
pendent are treated as paid to the participant. For in-
formation about the tax treatment of benefits from re-
tirement plans, see Publication 575.
Benefits paid to a spouse or former spouse.Ben-
efits paid under a QDRO to the plan participant's
spouse or former spouse generally must be included in
the spouse's or former spouse's income. If the partic-
ipant contributed to the retirement plan, a prorated
share of the participant's cost (investment in the con-
tract) is used to figure the taxable amount.
The spouse or former spouse can use the special
rules for lump-sum distributions if the benefits would
have been treated as a lump-sum distribution had the
participant received them. For this purpose, consider
only the balance to the spouse's or former spouse's
credit in determining whether the distribution is a total
distribution. See Lump-Sum Distributions in Publication
575 for information about the special rules.
Rollovers.If you receive an eligible rollover distri-
bution under a QDRO as the plan participant's spouse
or former spouse, you may be able to roll it over tax free
into an individual retirement arrangement (IRA) or an-
other qualified retirement plan.
For more information on the tax treatment of eligible
rollover distributions, see Publication 575.
Individual Retirement
Arrangements
The following discussions explain some of the effects
of divorce or separation on traditional individual retire-
ment arrangements (IRAs). Traditional IRAs are IRAs
other than Roth, SIMPLE, or education IRAs.
Spousal IRA. If you get a final decree of divorce or
separate maintenance by the end of your tax year, you
cannot deduct contributions you make to your former
spouse's traditional IRA. You can deduct only contri-
butions to your own traditional IRA.
IRA transferred as a result of divorce.The transfer
of all or part of your interest in a traditional IRA to your
spouse or former spouse, under a decree of divorce
or separate maintenance or a written instrument inci-
dent to the decree, is not considered a taxable transfer.
Starting from the date of the transfer, the traditional IRA
interest transferred is treated as your spouse's or for-
mer spouse's traditional IRA.
IRA contribution and deduction limits.All taxable
alimony you receive under a decree of divorce or sep-
arate maintenance is treated as compensation for the
contribution and deduction limits for traditional IRAs. 
More information.For more information about IRAs,
see Publication 590.
Property Settlements
There is no recognized gain or loss on the transfer of
property between spouses, or between former spouses
if the transfer is because of a divorce. You may, how-
ever, have to report the transaction on a gift tax return.
See  Gift Tax on Property Settlements, later. If you sell
property that you own jointly to split the proceeds as
part of your property settlement, you each must report
your share of the gain or loss on the sale. See Sale
of Jointly-Owned Property, later.
Transfer Between Spouses
No gain or loss is recognized on a transfer of property
from you to (or in trust for the benefit of):
 Your spouse, or
 Your former spouse, but only if the transfer is inci-
dent to your divorce.
This rule applies even if the transfer was in exchange
for cash, the release of marital rights, the assumption
of liabilities, or other considerations.
However, this rule does not apply if your spouse or
former spouse is a nonresident alien. Nor does it apply
to certain transfers covered under Transfers in trust,
later.
The term “property” includes all property whether real
or personal, tangible or intangible, or separate or com-
munity. It includes property acquired after the end of
your marriage and transferred to your former spouse.
It does not include services.
Medical savings accounts.If you transfer your in-
terest in a medical savings account to your spouse or
former spouse under a divorce or separation instru-
ment, it is not considered a taxable transfer. After the
transfer, the interest is treated as your spouse's medical
savings account.
Page 18

Incident to divorce.A property transfer is incident to
your divorce if the transfer:
1) Occurs within one year after the date your marriage
ends, or
2) Is related to the ending of your marriage. 
A divorce, for this purpose, includes the ending of your
marriage by annulment or due to violations of state
laws.
Related to the ending of marriage.A property
transfer is related to the ending of your marriage if both
the following conditions apply.
1) The transfer is made under your original or modified
divorce or separation instrument. 
2) The transfer occurs within 6 years after the date
your marriage ends. 
Unless these conditions are met, the transfer is pre-
sumed not to be related to the ending of your marriage.
However, this presumption will not apply if you can
show that the transfer was made to carry out the divi-
sion of property owned by you and your spouse at the
time your marriage ended. For example, the
presumption will not apply if you can show that the
transfer was made more than 6 years after the end of
your marriage because of business or legal factors
which prevented earlier transfer of the property and the
transfer was made promptly after those factors were
taken care of.
Transfers to third parties.If you transfer property to
a third party on behalf of your spouse (or former
spouse, if incident to your divorce), the transfer is
treated as two transfers:
1) A transfer of the property from you to your spouse
or former spouse, and
2) An immediate transfer of the property from your
spouse or former spouse to the third party. 
You do not recognize gain or loss on the first transfer.
Instead, your spouse or former spouse may have to
recognize gain or loss on the second transfer.
For this treatment to apply, the transfer from you to
the third party must be one of the following:
1) Required by your divorce or separation instrument,
2) Requested in writing by your spouse or former
spouse, or
3) Consented to in writing by your spouse or former
spouse. The consent must state that both you and
your spouse or former spouse intend the transfer
to be treated as a transfer from you to your spouse
or former spouse subject to the rules of section
1041 of the Internal Revenue Code. You must re-
ceive the consent before filing your tax return for the
year you transfer the property.
Transfers in trust.If you make a transfer of property
in trust for the benefit of your spouse (or former spouse,
if incident to your divorce), you generally do not recog-
nize any gain or loss.
However, you must recognize gain or loss if, incident
to your divorce, you transfer an installment obligation
in trust for the benefit of your former spouse. For infor-
mation on the disposition of an installment obligation,
see Publication 537, Installment Sales.
You also must recognize gain on the transfer of
property in trust in the amount by which the liabilities
assumed by the trust, plus the liabilities to which the
property is subject, exceed the total of your adjusted
basis in the transferred property.
Example. You own property with a fair market value
of $10,000 and an adjusted basis of $1,000. The trust
did not assume any liabilities. The property is subject
to a $5,000 liability. Your recognized gain on the
transfer of the property in trust for the benefit of your
spouse is $4,000 ($5,000 − $1,000).
Reporting income from property.You should report
income from property transferred to your spouse or
former spouse as shown on Table 4.
For information on the treatment of interest on U.S.
savings bonds, see chapter 1 of Publication 550, In-
vestment Income and Expenses.
RECORDS
When you transfer property to your spouse (or
former spouse, if incident to divorce), you must
give your spouse sufficient records to determine
the adjusted basis and holding period of the property
on the date of the transfer. If you transfer investment
credit property with recapture potential, you also must
provide sufficient records to determine the amount and
period of the recapture.
Tax treatment of property received.Property you
receive from your spouse (or former spouse, if the
transfer is incident to divorce) is treated as acquired by
gift for income tax purposes. Its value is not taxable to
you.
Basis of property received.Your basis in property
received from your spouse (or former spouse, if incident
to divorce) is the same as your spouse's adjusted basis.
This applies for determining either gain or loss when
you later dispose of the property. It applies whether the
property's adjusted basis is less than, equal to, or
greater than either its value at the time of the transfer
or any consideration you paid. It also applies even if the
property's liabilities are more than its adjusted basis.
This rule generally applies to all property received
after July 18, 1984, under a divorce or separation in-
strument in effect after that date. It also applies to all
other property received after 1983 for which you and
your spouse (or former spouse) made a section 1041
election to apply this rule. For information about that
election, see section 1.1041–1T(g) of the regulations.
Example. Karen and Don owned their home jointly.
Karen transferred her interest in the home to Don as
part of their property settlement when they divorced last
year. Don's basis in the interest received from Karen is
her adjusted basis in the home. His total basis in the
home is their joint adjusted basis.
Page 19

Table 4. Property Transferred Pursuant to Divorce
The tax treatment of items of property transferred from you to your spouse or former spouse pursuant
to divorce is shown below.
IF you transfer: THEN you: AND your spouse or
former spouse:
FOR more information,
see
Income-producing
property (such as an
interest in a business,
rental property, stocks, or
bonds)
Include on your tax
return any profit or loss,
rental income or loss,
dividends, or interest
generated or derived
from the property during
the year until the
property is transferred.
Reports any income or
loss generated or derived
after the property is
transferred.
Interest in a passive
activity with unused
passive activity losses
Investment credit
property with recapture
potential
Cannot deduct your
accumulated unused
passive activity losses
allocable to the interest.
Do not have to recapture
any part of the credit.
Increases the adjusted
basis of the transferred
interest by the amount of
the unused losses.
May have to recapture
part of the credit if he or
she disposes of the
property or changes its
use before the end of the
recapture period.
Publication 925, Passive
Activity and At-Risk Rules
Form 4225, Recapture of
Investment Credit
Property received before July 19, 1984.Your ba-
sis in property received in settlement of marital support
rights before July 19, 1984, or under an instrument in
effect before that date (other than property for which
you made a section 1041 election) is its fair market
value when you received it.
Example. Larry and Gina owned their home jointly
before their divorce in 1978. That year, Gina received
Larry's interest in the home in settlement of her marital
support rights. Gina's basis in the interest received from
Larry is the part of the home's fair market value
proportionate to that interest. Her total basis in the
home is that part of the fair market value plus her ad-
justed basis in her own interest.
Property transferred in trust.If the transferor re-
cognizes gain on property transferred in trust, as de-
scribed earlier under  Transfers in trust, the trust's basis
in the property is increased by the recognized gain.
Example. Your spouse transfers property in trust,
recognizing a $4,000 gain. Your spouse's adjusted ba-
sis in the property was $1,000. The trust's basis in the
property is $5,000 ($1,000 + $4,000).
Gift Tax on Property Settlements
The federal gift tax does not apply to most transfers of
property between spouses, or between former spouses
because of divorce. The transfers usually qualify for one
or more of the exceptions explained in this discussion.
However, if your transfer of property does not qualify
for an exception, or qualifies only in part, you must re-
port it on a gift tax return. See Gift Tax Return, later.
For more information about the federal gift tax, get
Publication 950, Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes.
Exceptions
Your transfer of property to your spouse or former
spouse is not subject to gift tax if it meets any of the
following exceptions.
1) It is made in settlement of marital support rights.
2) It qualifies for the marital deduction.
3) It is made under a divorce decree.
4) It is made under a written agreement, and you are
divorced within a specified period.
5) It qualifies for the annual exclusion.
Settlement of marital support rights.A transfer in
settlement of marital support rights is not subject to gift
tax to the extent the value of the property transferred
is not more than the value of those rights. This ex-
ception does not apply to a transfer in settlement of
dower, curtesy, or other marital property rights.
Marital deduction. A transfer of property to your
spouse before receiving a final decree of divorce or
separate maintenance is not subject to gift tax. How-
ever, this exception does not apply to:
 Transfers of certain terminable interests, or
 Transfers to your spouse if your spouse is not a U.S.
citizen.
Get the instructions for Form 709, United States Gift
(and Generation-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return, for
more information.
Page 20

Transfer under divorce decree.A transfer of property
under the decree of a divorce court having the power
to prescribe a property settlement is not subject to gift
tax. This exception also applies to a property settlement
agreed on before the divorce if it was made part of or
approved by the decree.
Transfer under written agreement.A transfer of
property under a written agreement in settlement of
marital rights or to provide a reasonable child support
allowance is not subject to gift tax if you are divorced
within the 3-year period beginning 1 year before and
ending 2 years after the date of the agreement. This
exception applies whether or not the agreement is part
of or approved by the divorce decree.
Annual exclusion.The first $10,000 of gifts of present
interests to any person during 2000 is not subject to
gift tax. The annual exclusion is $103,000 for transfers
to a spouse who is not a U.S. citizen provided the gift
would otherwise qualify for the gift tax marital deduction
if the donee were a U.S. citizen.
Present interest.A gift is considered a present in-
terest if the donee has unrestricted rights to the imme-
diate use, possession, and enjoyment of the property
and income from the property. 
Gift Tax Return
Report a transfer of property subject to gift tax on Form
709. Generally, Form 709 is due April 15 following the
year of the transfer.
Transfer under written agreement. If a property
transfer would be subject to gift tax except that it is
made under a written agreement, and you do not re-
ceive a final decree of divorce by the due date for filing
the gift tax return, you must report the transfer on Form
709 and attach a copy of your written agreement. The
transfer will be treated as not subject to the gift tax until
the final decree of divorce is granted, but no longer than
2 years after the effective date of the written agreement.
Within 60 days after you receive a final decree of
divorce, send a certified copy of the decree to the IRS
office where you filed Form 709.
Sale of Jointly-Owned Property
If you sell property that you and your spouse own
jointly, you must report your share of the gain or loss
on your income tax return for the year of the sale. Your
share of the gain or loss is determined by your state law
governing ownership of property. For information on
reporting gain or loss, get Publication 544.
Sale of home. If you sold your main home, you may
be able to exclude up to $250,000 (up to $500,000 if
you and your spouse file a joint return) of gain on the
sale. For more information, see Publication 523, Selling
Your Home.
Costs of Getting a Divorce
You cannot deduct legal fees and court costs for getting
a divorce. But you may be able to deduct legal fees paid
for tax advice in connection with a divorce and legal
fees to get alimony. In addition, you may be able to
deduct fees you pay to appraisers, actuaries, and ac-
countants for services in determining your correct tax
or in helping to get alimony.
TIP
Fees you pay may include charges that are
deductible and charges that are not deductible.
You should request a breakdown showing the
amount charged for each service performed.
You can claim deductible fees only if you itemize
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Claim them
as miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. For more informa-
tion, get Publication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.
Fees for tax advice.You can deduct fees for advice
on federal, state, and local taxes of all types, including
income, estate, gift, inheritance, and property taxes.
If a fee is also for other services, you must determine
and prove the expense for tax advice. The following
examples show how you can meet this requirement.
Example 1. The lawyer handling your divorce con-
sults another law firm, which handles only tax matters,
to get information on how the divorce will affect your
taxes. You can deduct the part of the fee paid over to
the second firm and separately stated on your bill,
subject to the 2% limit.
Example 2. The lawyer handling your divorce uses
the firm's tax department for tax matters related to your
divorce. Your statement from the firm shows the part
of the total fee for tax matters. This is based on the time
used, the difficulty of the tax questions, and the amount
of tax involved. You can deduct this part of your bill,
subject to the 2% limit.
Example 3. The lawyer handling your divorce also
works on the tax matters. The fee for tax advice and
the fee for other services are shown on the lawyer's
statement. They are based on the time spent on each
service and the fees charged locally for similar services.
You can deduct the fee charged for tax advice, subject
to the 2% limit.
Fees for getting alimony.Because you must include
alimony you receive in your gross income, you can
deduct fees you pay to get or collect alimony.
Example. You pay your attorney a fee for handling
your divorce and an additional fee that is for services
in getting and collecting alimony. You can deduct the
fee for getting and collecting alimony, subject to the 2%
limit, if it is separately stated on your attorney's bill.
Nondeductible expenses. You cannot deduct the
costs of personal advice, counseling, or legal action in
a divorce. These costs are not deductible, even if they
Page 21

are paid, in part, to arrive at a financial settlement or to
protect income-producing property.
However, you can add certain legal fees you pay
specifically for a property settlement to the basis of the
property you receive. For example, you can add the
cost of preparing and filing a deed to put title to your
house in your name alone to the basis of the house.
You cannot deduct fees you pay for your spouse or
former spouse, unless your payments qualify as
alimony. (See Payments to a third party in the earlier
discussion of the general rules for alimony.) If you have
no legal responsibility arising from the divorce settle-
ment or decree to pay your spouse's legal fees, your
payments are gifts and may be subject to the gift tax.
Tax Withholding
and Estimated Tax
When you become divorced or separated, you will
usually have to file a new Form W–4, Employee's
Withholding Allowance Certificate, with your employer
to claim your proper withholding allowances. If you
receive alimony, you may have to make estimated tax
payments.
CAUTION
!
If you do not pay enough tax either through
withholding or by making estimated tax pay-
ments, you will have an underpayment of esti-
mated tax and you may have to pay a penalty. If you
do not pay enough tax by the due date of each pay-
ment, you may have to pay a penalty even if you are
due a refund when you file your tax return.
For more information, get Publication 505, Tax
Withholding and Estimated Tax.
Joint estimated tax payments. If you and your
spouse made joint estimated tax payments for 2000 but
file separate returns, either of you can claim all of your
payments, or you can divide them in any way on which
you both agree. If you cannot agree, you must divide
the payments in proportion to your individual tax
amounts as shown on your separate returns for 2000.
If you claim any of the payments on your tax return,
enter your spouse's or former spouse's social security
number in the space provided on the front of Form 1040
or Form 1040A. If you were divorced and remarried in
2000, enter your present spouse's social security num-
ber in that space. Also write your former spouse's social
security number, followed by “DIV” to the left of line 59,
Form 1040, or line 37, Form 1040A.
Community Property
If you are married and your domicile (permanent legal
home) is in a community property state, special rules
determine your income. Some of these rules are ex-
plained in the following discussions. For more informa-
tion, get Publication 555.
Community property states.The community property
states are:
 Arizona,
 California,
 Idaho,
 Louisiana,
 Nevada,
 New Mexico,
 Texas,
 Washington, and
 Wisconsin. 
Community Income
If your domicile is in a community property state during
any part of your tax year, you may have community
income. Your state law determines whether your in-
come is separate or community income. If you and your
spouse file separate returns, you must report half of any
income described by state law as community income,
and your spouse must report the other half. Each of you
can claim credit for half the income tax withheld from
community income.
Community property laws disregarded.Community
property laws do not apply to an item of community
income, and you will be responsible for reporting all of
it if:
1) You treat the item as if only you are entitled to the
income, and
2) You do not notify your spouse of the nature and
amount of the income by the due date for filing the
return (including extensions). 
Relief from separate return liability for community
income. You are not responsible for reporting an item
of community income if all of the following conditions
exist.
1) You do not file a joint return for the tax year.
2) You do not include an item of community income
in gross income on your separate return.
3) You establish that you did not know of, and had no
reason to know of, that community income.
4) Under all facts and circumstances, it would not be
fair to include the item of community income in your
gross income. 
Requesting relief.For information on how to re-
quest relief from separate return liability, see Commu-
nity Property Laws in Publication 971.
Spousal agreements. In some states a husband and
wife may enter into an agreement that affects the status
of property or income as community or separate prop-
erty. Check your state law to determine how it affects
you.
Page 22

Spouses Living Apart All Year
Special rules apply if all the following conditions exist.
1) You and your spouse live apart all year.
2) You and your spouse do not file a joint return for a
tax year beginning or ending in the calendar year.
3) You or your spouse has earned income for the
calendar year that is community income.
4) You and your spouse have not transferred, directly
or indirectly, any of the earned income in (3) be-
tween yourselves before the end of the year. Do
not take into account transfers satisfying child sup-
port obligations or transfers of very small amounts
or value. 
If all these conditions exist, you and your spouse
must report your community  income as explained in
the following discussions.
Earned income. Treat earned income that is not trade
or business or partnership income as the income of the
spouse who performed the services to earn the income.
Earned income is wages, salaries, professional fees,
and other pay for personal services.
Earned income does not include amounts paid by a
corporation that are a distribution of earnings and profits
rather than a reasonable allowance for personal ser-
vices rendered.
Trade or business income.Treat income and related
deductions from a trade or business that is not a part-
nership as those of the spouse carrying on the trade
or business.
If capital investment and personal services both
produce business income, treat all of the income as
trade or business income.
Partnership income or loss.Treat income or loss
from a trade or business carried on by a partnership
as the income or loss of the spouse who is the partner.
Separate property income. Treat income from the
separate property of one spouse as the income of that
spouse.
Social security benefits.Treat social security and
equivalent railroad retirement benefits as the income
of the spouse who receives the benefits.
Other income.Treat all other community income, such
as dividends, interest, rents, royalties, or gains, as
provided under your state's community property law.
Example. George and Sharon were married
throughout the year but did not live together at any time
during the year. Both domiciles were in a community
property state. They did not file a joint return or transfer
any of their earned income between themselves. During
the year their incomes were as follows:
Under the community property law of their state, all
the income is considered community income. (Some
states treat income from separate property as separate
income—check your state law.) Sharon did not take
part in George's consulting business.
Ordinarily, they would each report $30,500, half the
total community income, on their separate returns. But
because they meet the four conditions listed earlier
under Spouses Living Apart All Year, they must disre-
gard community property law in reporting all their in-
come except the interest income from community
property. They each report on their returns only their
own earnings and other income, and their share of the
interest income from community property. George re-
ports $26,500 and Sharon reports $34,500.
Ending the Community
When the marital community ends, the community as-
sets (money and property) are divided between the
spouses. Income received before the community ended
is treated according to the rules explained earlier. In-
come received after the community ended is separate
income, taxable only to the spouse to whom it belongs.
An absolute decree of divorce or annulment ends
the community in all community property states. A de-
cree of annulment, even though it holds that no valid
marriage ever existed, usually does not nullify commu-
nity property rights arising during the “marriage.” How-
ever, you should check your state law for exceptions.
A decree of legal separation or of separate
maintenance may or may not end the community. The
court issuing the decree may terminate the community
and divide the property between the spouses.
A separation agreement may divide the community
property between you and your spouse. It may provide
that this property, along with future earnings and prop-
erty acquired, will be separate property. This agreement
may end the community.
In some states, the community ends when the
spouses permanently separate, even if there is no
formal agreement. Check your state law.
Alimony (Community Income)
Payments that may otherwise qualify as alimony are
not deductible by the payer if they are the recipient
spouse's part of community income. They are deduct-
ible as alimony only to the extent they are more than
that spouse's part of community income.
Example. You live in a community property state.
You are separated but the special rules explained ear-
lier under Spouses Living Apart All Year do not apply.
Under a written agreement, you pay your spouse
$12,000 of your $20,000 total yearly community in-
come. Your spouse receives no other community in-
come. Under your state law, earnings of a spouse living
George Sharon
Wages ......................................................... $20,000 $22,000
Consulting business .................................... 5,000
Partnership .................................................. 10,000
Dividends from separate property .............. 1,000 2,000
Interest from community property ............... 500
500
Totals $26,500$34,500
Page 23

separately and apart from the other spouse continue
as community property.
On your separate returns, each of you must report
$10,000 of the total community income. In addition,
your spouse must report $2,000 as alimony received
on line 11 of Form 1040. You can deduct $2,000 as
alimony paid on line 31a of Form 1040.
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get more
information from the IRS in several ways. By selecting
the method that is best for you, you will have quick and
easy access to tax help.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. If you have
attempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully,
you should contact your Taxpayer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your interests
and concerns within the IRS by protecting your rights
and resolving problems that have not been fixed
through normal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates
cannot change the tax law or make a technical tax de-
cision, they can clear up problems that resulted from
previous contacts and ensure that your case is given
a complete and impartial review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
 Call the Taxpayer Advocate at 1–877–777–4778.
 Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.
 Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office in
your area.
 Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a TTY/TDD user.
For more information, see Publication 1546, The
Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS.
Free tax services. To find out what services are
available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free Tax Ser-
vices. It contains a list of free tax publications and an
index of tax topics. It also describes other free tax in-
formation services, including tax education and assist-
ance programs and a list of TeleTax topics.
Personal computer. With your personal com-
puter and modem, you can access the IRS on
the Internet at www.irs.gov. While visiting our
web site, you can select:
 Frequently Asked Tax Questions (located under
Taxpayer Help & Ed) to find answers to questions
you may have.
 Forms & Pubs to download forms and publications
or search for forms and publications by topic or
keyword.
 Fill-in Forms (located under Forms & Pubs) to enter
information while the form is displayed and then
print the completed form.
 Tax Info For You to view Internal Revenue Bulletins
published in the last few years.
 Tax Regs in English to search regulations and the
Internal Revenue Code (under United States Code
(USC)).
 Digital Dispatch and IRS Local News Net (both lo-
cated under Tax Info For Business) to receive our
electronic newsletters on hot tax issues and news.
 Small Business Corner (located under Tax Info For
Business) to get information on starting and oper-
ating a small business.
You can also reach us with your computer using File
Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone attached to
your fax machine, you can receive forms and
instructions by calling 703–368–9694. Follow
the directions from the prompts. When you order forms,
enter the catalog number for the form you need. The
items you request will be faxed to you.
Phone. Many services are available by phone.
 Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call
1–800–829–3676 to order current and prior year
forms, instructions, and publications.
 Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax
questions at 1–800–829–1040.
 TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to
TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–4059 to ask
tax questions or to order forms and publications.
 TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to listen to
pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services.
To ensure that IRS representatives give accurate,
courteous, and professional answers, we evaluate the
quality of our telephone services in several ways.
 A second IRS representative sometimes monitors
live telephone calls. That person only evaluates the
IRS assistor and does not keep a record of any
taxpayer's name or tax identification number.
 We sometimes record telephone calls to evaluate
IRS assistors objectively. We hold these recordings
no longer than one week and use them only to
measure the quality of assistance.
 We value our customers' opinions. Throughout this
year, we will be surveying our customers for their
opinions on our service.
Page 24

Walk-in. You can walk in to many post offices,
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain
forms, instructions, and publications. Also,
some libraries and IRS offices have:
 An extensive collection of products available to print
from a CD-ROM or photocopy from reproducible
proofs.
 The Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal
Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-
able for research purposes.
Mail. You can send your order for forms, in-
structions, and publications to the Distribution
Center nearest to you and receive a response
within 10 workdays after your request is received. Find
the address that applies to your part of the country.
 Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
 Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
 Eastern part of U.S. and foreign addresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publication 1796,
Federal Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain:
 Current tax forms, instructions, and publications.
 Prior-year tax forms, instructions, and publications.
 Popular tax forms which may be filled in electron-
ically, printed out for submission, and saved for
recordkeeping.
 Internal Revenue Bulletins.
The CD-ROM can be purchased from National
Technical Information Service (NTIS) by calling
1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet at
www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release is available in
mid-December and the final release is available in late
January.
IRS Publication 3207, The Business Resource
Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that contains infor-
mation important to small businesses. It is available in
mid-February. You can get one free copy by calling
1–800–829–3676.
Page 25

Index
A
Address, change of ................. 2
Alimony ............... 11, 12, 13, 15,
16, 21, 23
 Community income ............ 23
 Deduction ........................... 12
Fees for getting .................. 21
Instruments executed after
1984 ............................... 13
Instruments executed before
1985 ............................... 16
 Recapture .......................... 15
 Trusts ................................. 16
Withholding, nonresident al-
ien ................................... 12
 Annuities ................................ 16
 Annulment decree ................... 3
Assistance (See Tax help)           
C
Change of name ...................... 2
 Child .................................... 4, 7
Child support ....... 10, 12, 15, 16
Citizen or resident test ............ 7
 Comments ............................... 2
 Community property ........ 22, 23
 Alimony paid ...................... 23
 Income ............................... 22
Custodial parent, dependency
exemption ............................ 8
D
 Deductions ............................... 4
 Dependency tests .................... 6
 Dependent:
 Child ..................................... 4
 Custodial parent ................... 8
 Noncustodial parent ........... 10
Social security number ........ 2
Divorce decree ............ 2, 12, 21
 Amended ............................ 12
Costs of getting .................. 21
 Invalid ................................. 12
 Domicile ................................. 22
E
 Earned income ................ 18, 23
 Endowment contracts ............ 16
 Estimated tax ......................... 22
 Exemptions:
 Dependent ........................... 6
 Personal ............................... 6
 Phaseout ............................ 11
 Spouse ................................. 6
F
 Filing status:
Head of household .............. 4
 Joint return ........................... 3
 Separate returns .................. 4
 Form:
 709 ..................................... 21
 2120 ................................... 10
 8332 ................................... 10
 8822 ..................................... 2
 W–4 .................................... 22
Free tax services ................... 24
G
Gift tax on property
settlements ......................... 20
Gross income test ................... 7
H
Head of household .................. 4
Help (See Tax help)                     
Home owned jointly:
 Payments for ...................... 13
Support for dependent ......... 8
I
 Identification number ............... 2
 Important changes ................... 1
 Important reminders ................ 2
Individual retirement arrange-
ments (IRAs) ...................... 18
 Injured spouse ......................... 3
 Innocent spouse ...................... 2
 Itemized deductions ................ 4
 ITIN .......................................... 2
J
 Joint liability ......................... 2, 3
 Relief from ....................... 2, 3
 Joint return .............................. 3
Joint return test for dependents 7
L
Life insurance premiums ....... 13
M
 Marital status ........................... 2
Medical expenses, child of di-
vorced or separated
parents ............................... 10
Medical savings accounts ..... 18
Member of household or re-
lationship test ....................... 6
More information (See Tax help)
Multiple support agreement ... 10
N
Name, change of ..................... 2
 Noncustodial parent, exemption
for dependent ..................... 10
 Nonresident alien .................... 6
 spouse ................................. 6
Nonresident alien, withholding
on alimony ......................... 12
Number, taxpayer identification 2
P
Paid preparer authorization ..... 1
Phaseout of exemptions ........ 11
Property settlements . 18, 20, 21
 Gift tax ............................... 20
Jointly-owned property, sale
of .................................... 21
Publications (See Tax help)         
Q
Qualified domestic relations or-
der (QDRO) ....................... 18
R
Recapture of alimony ............ 15
S
Sale of jointly-owned property 21
Section 1041 election ............ 19
Separate maintenance de-
cree ................................ 2, 12
 Separate returns ...................... 4
 Separation agreement ........... 12
Social security number, depen-
dents .................................... 2
 Suggestions ............................. 2
Support test, dependents:
Children of divorced or sepa-
rated parents .................... 8
Multiple support agreement 10
T
Tax advice, fees for ............... 21
 Tax help ................................. 24
 Tax withholding ..................... 22
 Taxpayer Advocate ............... 24
 TTY/TDD information ............ 24
/H18549
Page 26

Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2001
Highlights of 2000 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
and Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Tax Benefits for Work-Related
Education
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other
Information for Members of the
Clergy and Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Scholarships and Fellowships
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
(Business and Nonbusiness)
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With
Income From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care
Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) (Including Roth IRAs and
Education IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and Power
of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of
the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaraci ón de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
508
514
516
517
519
520
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
534
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax,
phone, and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration
of Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes Attributable to IRAs, Other
Qualified Retirement Plans, Annuities,
Modified Endowment Contracts, and MSAs
Alternative Minimum Tax –Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A & B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Higher Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Page 27