Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P334.cvt (16-Dec-2002) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 334
Catalog Number 11063pTax Guide for
Department Small Business For use in
of the
preparingTreasury
(For Individuals Who UseInternal 2002Revenue
Service Schedule C or C–EZ) Returns


Page 2 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.

Page 3 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This publication does not cover the topics listed in the
following table.Contents
Introduction.............................. 3
If you need information about: You should
Important Changes for 2002.................. 3 see:
Important Changes for 2003.................. 5 Partnerships.................. Publication 541
Important Reminders....................... 5 Corporations.................. Publication 542
1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes......... 6 S corporations................ Instructions for
Form 1120S2. Accounting Periods and Methods.......... 13
Farming ..................... Publication 225
3. Dispositions of Business Property......... 18 Direct selling.................. Publication 911
4. General Business Credit................. 20 Commercial fishing............. Publication 595
Recordkeeping................ Publication 5835. Business Income....................... 21
6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold......... 27
What you need to know.Table A (shown later) provides7. Figuring Gross Profit.................... 29 a list of questions you need to answer to help you meet
your federal tax obligations. After each question is the8. Business Expenses..................... 30
location in this publication where you will find the related
9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss............... 39 discussion.
10. Sample Returns........................ 40 IRS mission.Provide America’s taxpayers top quality
service by helping them understand and meet their tax11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer............... 57
responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity
12. How To Get More Information............. 58 and fairness to all.
Index .................................... 62 Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and your suggestions for
future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web site atIntroduction
www.irs.gov.
The purpose of this publication is to provide general infor-You can write to us at the following address:
mation about the federal tax laws that apply to small
business owners who are sole proprietors and to statutoryInternal Revenue Service
employees. Tax Forms and Publications
W:CAR:MP:FPA sole proprietor is someone who owns an unincorpor-
1111 Constitution Ave. NWated business by himself or herself. However, if you are the
Washington, DC 20224sole member of a domestic limited liability company (LLC),
you are not a sole proprietor if you elect to treat the LLC as
a corporation. A statutory employee has a checkmark in We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, itbox 13 of his or her Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement. would be helpful if you would include your daytime phoneStatutory employees have to use Schedule C or C–EZ tonumber, including the area code, in your correspondence.report their wages and expenses.
To use this publication, you will generally need the
following forms. Important Changes for 2002
• Form 1040 and its instructions. The following are some of the tax changes for 2002. For
• Schedule C or C–EZ and its instructions. information on other changes, see Publication 553, High-
lights of 2002 Tax Changes.See chapter 12 for information on ordering these forms.
Self-employment tax.The maximum net self-employ-Husband-wife business.If you and your spouse jointlyment earnings subject to the social security part (12.4%) ofown and operate a business and share in the profits andthe self-employment tax increased to $84,900 for 2002.losses, you are partners in a partnership, whether or notFor more information, see Self-Employment Tax in chapteryou have a formal partnership agreement. Do not use 1.Schedule C or C-EZ. You must file Form 1065. For more
information on partnerships, see Publication 541, Partner- Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for the
ships. cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in
Page 3

Page 4 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note: The following is a list of questions you need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax
return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What Must I Know  Where To Find The Answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1.
What forms must I file? See chapter 1.
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1.
Do I have to start my tax year in January? Or may I start it in any other See Accounting Periods in chapter 2.
month?
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2.
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5.
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See chapter 8.
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8.
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9.
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3.
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11.
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12.
2002 is 36
1/2 cents a mile for all business miles. See Car lowance) for qualified property (or Liberty Zone property)
and Truck Expenses in chapter 8. you place in service during 2002. The allowance is an
additional deduction of 30% of the property’s depreciableCredit for employer-provided child care facilities andbasis. For more information, see Publication 946, How Toservices.You can receive a tax credit of 25% of theDepreciate Property.qualified expenses you paid for employee child care and
10% of qualified expenses you paid for child care resourceIncreased section 179 deduction for enterprise zoneand referral services. This credit is limited to $150,000businesses.If you placed section 179 property in serviceeach year. For more information, see Form 8882, Credit for in an empowerment zone during 2002, you may be able toEmployer-Provided Child Care Facilities and Services.increase your section 179 deduction by as much as
Credit for small business pension plan startup costs.$35,000 (up from $20,000).
If you begin a new qualified defined benefit or definedFor information on empowerment zones and enterprise
contribution plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan,communities, see Publication 954.or simplified employee pension, you can receive a tax
credit of 50% of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs.Increased section 179 deduction for businesses in the
For more information, see Form 8881, Credit for Small Liberty Zone.If you placed section 179 property in serv-
Employer Pension Plan Startup Costs. ice in the New York Liberty Zone during 2002, you may be
able to increase your section 179 deduction by as much asNew credit for New York Liberty Zone business em-
$35,000. For more information, see Publication 946.ployee.The New York Liberty Zone business employee
credit is the result of expanding the work opportunity creditHealth insurance deduction for the self-employed.Forto include a new targeted group of employees in the Liberty2002, this deduction is 70% of the amount you paid forZone. You can claim the credit if you pay or incur “qualifiedmedical insurance for yourself and your family. For morewages” to a “Liberty Zone business employee.” The creditinformation, see Insurance in chapter 8.is for wages paid or incurred to new and existing employ-
ees for work performed during 2002 or 2003. For moreTax shelter disclosure statement.You must file a dis-
information, see Form 8884 and Publication 954, Tax In- closure statement for each reportable tax shelter transac-centives for Empowerment Zones and Other Distressedtion in which you participated, directly or indirectly, if yourCommunities. federal income tax liability was affected by the transaction.
For more information, see the tax shelter disclosure state-Special depreciation allowance.You can take a special
ment discussion in the Schedule C (1040) instructions.depreciation allowance (or Liberty Zone depreciation al-
Page 4

Page 5 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tions identified by the IRS, (2) transactions offered to you
under conditions of confidentiality, (3) transactions forImportant Changes for 2003
which you have contractual protection against disallow-
The following are some of the tax changes for 2003. Forance of the tax benefits, (4) transactions that result in
information on other changes, see Publication 553, High- losses of at least $2 million in any single year or $4 million
lights of 2002 Tax Changes. in any combination of years, (5) transactions resulting in
book-tax differences of more than $10 million, and (6)Health insurance deduction for the self-employed.For transactions with asset holding periods of less than 452003, this deduction is 100% of the amount you paid fordays and that result in tax credits exceeding $250,000. Formedical insurance for yourself and your family. For more
more information, see the Instructions for Form 8886.information, see Insurance in chapter 8.
Self-employment tax.The maximum net self-employ-
ment earnings subject to the social security part of theImportant Remindersself-employment tax increases to $87,000 for 2003.
Section 179 deduction.For 2003, the total cost you canAccounting methods. Certain small business taxpayers
elect to deduct under section 179 of the Code is increasedmay be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method of
to $25,000. For more information on the section 179 de-accounting and may not be required to account for invento-
duction, see Depreciation in chapter 8. ries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2.
Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for thePhotographs of missing children.The Internal Reve-
cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck innue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for2003 is 36 cents a mile for all business miles. Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missing
children selected by the Center may appear in this publica-Reportable transactions.New disclosure rules require
tion on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can helpyou to file Form 8886,Reportable Transaction Disclosure
bring these children home by looking at the photographsStatement, to report certain transactions entered into after
and calling 1–800–THE–LOST (1–800–843–5678) if2002. Reportable transactions include (1) transactions the
same as or substantially similar to tax avoidance transac- you recognize a child.
Page 5

Page 6 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get an
SSN. To apply for an ITIN, file Form W–7, Application for
1. IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number, with the
IRS. It usually takes about 4-6 weeks to get an ITIN. Enter
it wherever an SSN is requested on a tax return. If youFiling and Paying must include another person’s SSN on your return and that
person does not have and cannot get an SSN, enter that
Business Taxes person’s ITIN. 
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle the
holder to social security benefits or change the
Introduction
holder’s employment or immigration status.CAUTION
!
This chapter explains the business taxes you may have to
pay and the forms you may have to file. It also discusses
Employer identification number (EIN).You must alsotaxpayer identification numbers.
have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number ifTable 1–2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay,
you do either of the following.their due dates, and the forms you use to report them.
Table 1–3 provides checklists that highlight the typical
• Pay wages to one or more employees.forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out
• File pension or excise tax returns.of business.
You may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen- If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSNdars for 2003. It has tax calendars that tell youon your Schedule C or C–EZ.when to file returns and make tax payments.
TIP
You can get an EIN by mail, telephone, or by fax. But
first you must fill out Form SS–4, Application for Employer
Identification Number. You can get Form SS-4 at SSAUseful Items offices or by calling the IRS at 1–800–829–3676 . It is alsoYou may want to see: available from the IRS web site at www.irs.gov. 
Publication New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either the
form or the ownership of your business changes. For more❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax information, see Publication 1635, Understanding Your
EIN.Form (and Instructions)
When you need identification numbers of other per-❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
sons. In operating your business, you will probably make❏ 1040–ES Estimated Tax for Individuals certain payments you must report on information returns.
These payments are discussed under Information Re-❏ Sch C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss From Business
turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient of❏ Sch C–EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit From Business these payments (the payee) a statement showing the total
amount paid during the year. You must include the payee’s❏ Sch SE (Form 1040)Self-Employment Tax
identification number and your identification number on theSee chapter 12 for information about getting publica-returns and statements.tions and forms.
Employee. If you have employees, you must get an
SSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of
each employee exactly as they are shown on theIdentification Numbers employee’s social security card. If the employee’s name is
not correct as shown on the card, the employee shouldThis section explains three types of taxpayer identificationrequest a new card from the SSA. This may occur if thenumbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how toemployee’s name was changed due to marriage or di-get them. vorce.
Social security number (SSN).Generally, use your SSN If your employee does not have an SSN, he or she
as your taxpayer identification number. You must put thisshould file Form SS–5 with the SSA.
number on each of your individual income tax forms, suchOther payee.If you make payments to someone who isas Form 1040 and its schedules. not your employee and you must report the payments onTo apply for an SSN, use Form SS–5, Application for aan information return, get that person’s SSN. If you mustSocial Security Card. This form is available at Social Se-report payments to an organization, such as a corporationcurity Administration (SSA) offices or by callingor partnership, you must get its EIN.1–800–772–1213. It is also available from the SSA webTo get the payee’s SSN or EIN, use Form W–9, Re-site at www.ssa.gov. quest for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification.
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).The A payee who does not provide you with an identification
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident number may be subject to backup withholding. For infor-
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
mation on backup withholding, see the Form W–9 instruc-  To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted gross
tions and the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,income (AGI) from your originally filed 2001 income tax
5498, and W–2G. return (not from an amended return, Form 1040X, or any
math error notice from the IRS). You will also need to
provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB is
accurate and matches the information on record with the
Income Tax Social Security Administration before you e-file. To do this,
check your annual Social Security Statement.This part explains whether you have to file an income tax
If you use a Self-Select PIN, there’s nothing to sign andreturn and when you file it. It also explains how you pay the
nothing to mail—not even your Forms W-2. For moretax.
details on the Self-Select PIN program, visit the IRS Web
Site at www.irs.gov.Do I Have To File
an Income Tax Return? Forms 8453 and 8453-OL. Your return is not complete
without your signature. If you are not eligible or choose not
You have to file an income tax return for 2002 if your netto sign your return electronically, you must complete, sign,
earnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If yourand file Form 8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declara-
net earnings from self-employment were less than $400,tion for an e-file Return, or Form 8453-OL, U.S. Individual
you still have to file an income tax return if you meet anyIncome Tax Declaration for an IRS e-file On–Line Return,
other filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc-whichever applies.
tions.
State returns.In most states, you can file an electronic
state return simultaneously with your federal return. ForHow Do I File?
more information, check with your local IRS office, state
File your income tax return on Form 1040 and attach tax agency, tax professional, or the IRS web site at
Schedule C  or Schedule C–EZ.  Enter the net profit orwww.irs.gov.
loss from Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ on page 1 of
Form 1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or lossRefunds. You can have a refund check mailed to you, or
from your business. If you operated more than one busi-you can have your refund deposited directly to your check-
ness as a sole proprietorship, you must attach a separateing or savings account.
Schedule C for each business. You can use the simplerWith e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time as
Schedule C–EZ if you operated only one business as awhen filing on paper. Most refunds are issued within 3
sole proprietorship, you did not have a net loss, and youweeks. If you choose Direct Deposit, you can receive your
meet the other requirements listed in Part I of the schedule.refund in as few as 10 days.
(Part I of Schedule C–EZ is printed in chapter 10.)Offset against debts.As with a paper return, you may
not get all of your refund if you owe certain past-dueIRS e-file (Electronic Filing) amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, or
child support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed
has been offset against your debts.
Refund inquiries.You can check the status of your re-
fund if it has been at least 3 weeks from the date you filedYou may be able to file your tax returns electronically
your return. Be sure to have a copy of your tax returnusing an IRS e-file option. Table 1–1 lists the benefits of
available because you will need to know the filing status,IRS e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most of
the first social security number shown on the return, andthe manual steps needed to process paper returns. As a
the exact whole-dollar amount of the refund. To check onresult, the processing of e-file returns is faster and more
your refund, do one of the following.accurate than the processing of paper returns. As with a
paper return, you are responsible for making sure your• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on Where’s My Re-return contains accurate information and is filed on time.fund.Using e-file does not affect your chances of an IRS
• Call 1–800–829–4477  for automated refund infor-examination of your return.
mation, and follow the recorded instructions.
Electronic signatures.Paperless filing is easier than you• Call 1–800–829–1954  during the hours shown inthink and it’s available to most taxpayers who file electroni-your form instructions.cally—including those first-time filers who were 16 or older
at the end of 2002. If you file electronically using tax
preparation software or a tax professional, you may beBalance due.If you owe tax, you must pay it by April 15,
able to participate in the Self-Select PIN (personal identifi- 2003, to avoid late-payment penalties and interest. You
cation number) program. If you are married filing jointly, can make your payment electronically by scheduling an
you and your spouse will each need to create a PIN and electronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savings
enter these PINs as your electronic signatures. account or by credit card.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you cannot use the free services, you can buy taxUsing an Authorized IRS e-file Provider
preparation software at various electronics stores or com-
Many tax professionals can electronically file paperlessputer and office supply stores. You can also download
returns for their clients. You have two options. software from the Internet or prepare and file your return
completely on-line by using a tax preparation software
1) You can prepare your return, take it to an authorizedpackage available on the Internet.
IRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit it
electronically to the IRS.
Through Employers and Financial2) You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre- Institutionspare your return and transmit it for you electronically.
Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees,You will be asked to complete Form 8879 to authorize
members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask yourthe provider to enter your self-selected PIN on your return.
employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as anDepending on the provider and the specific servicesemployee, member, or customer benefit.requested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorized
IRS e-file provider near you, go to www.irs.gov or look for
an “Authorized IRS e-file Provider” sign. Free Help With Your Return
Free help in preparing your return is available nationwideUsing Your Personal Computer from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax
Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low-incomeA computer with a modem or Internet access is all youtaxpayers and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)need to file your tax return using IRS e-file. Best of all,program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or olderwhen you use your personal computer, you can e-file your with their tax returns. Some locations offer free electronicreturn from the comfort of your home any time of the day orfiling.night. Sign your return electronically using a self-selected
PIN to complete the process. There is no signature form to
submit or Forms W-2 to send in.
When Is My Tax Return Due?
Form 1040 for calendar year 2002 is due by April 15, 2003.Free Internet filing options.More taxpayers can now
If you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter 2), your returnprepare and e-file their individual income tax returns free
is due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of yourusing commercial tax preparation software accessible
fiscal year. If you file late, you may have to pay penaltiesthrough www.irs.gov or www.firstgov.gov. The IRS is
and interest. If you cannot file your return on time, usepartnering with the tax software industry to offer free prep-
Form 4868, Application for Automatic Extension of Timearation and filing services to a significant number of tax-
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to request anpayers. Security and privacy certificate programs will
automatic 4-month extension. assure tax data is safe and secure. To see if you qualify for
these services, visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage at
www.irs.gov.
Table 1–1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic Signatures • Create your own Personal Identification Number (PIN) and file a completely
paperless return through your tax preparation software or tax professional. There is
nothing to mail!
Proof of Acceptance
• You receive an electronic acknowledgement within 48 hours that the IRS has
accepted your return for processing.
Fast Refunds • You get your refund in half the time, even faster with Direct Deposit—in as few as
10 days.
Free Internet Filing • Use the IRS Web Site www.irs.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file
Options services available at no cost to eligible taxpayers.
Electronic Payment • Convenient, safe and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and
Options pay your taxes in a single step. Schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your
checking or savings account (up to and including April 15, 2003) or pay by credit
card.
Federal/State Filing
• Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits
you get from e-file.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
By not reporting all of your self-employment in-How Do I Pay Income Tax? come, you could cause your social security bene-
fits to be lower when you retire.Federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay itCAUTION
!
as you earn or receive income during the year. An em-
ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay.How to become insured under social security.You
If you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do notmust be insured under the social security system before
pay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimatedyou begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-
tax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments ifsured if you have the required number of credits (also
you expect to owe taxes, including self-employment taxcalled quarters of coverage), discussed next.
(discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file yourEarning credits in 2002 and 2003.For 2002, you re-return. Use Form 1040–ES to figure and pay the tax. If youceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for eachdo not have to make estimated tax payments, you may pay$870 ($890 for 2003) of income subject to social security.any tax due when you file your return. For more informationTherefore, for 2002, if you had income (self-employmenton estimated tax, see Publication 505. and wages) of $3,480 that was subject to social security
taxes, you received four credits ($3,480 ÷ $870).What are my payment options?You may pay your esti- For an explanation of the number of credits you mustmated tax electronically using various options. If you payhave to be insured and the benefits available to you andelectronically, there is no need to mail in Form 1040–ES.your family under the social security program, consult yourThese options include: nearest Social Security Administration (SSA) office.
1) Paying electronically through the Electronic Federal Making false statements to get or to increase
Tax Payment System (EFTPS). social security benefits may subject you to penal-
ties.CAUTION
!
2) Paying by authorizing an electronic funds withdrawal
when you file Form 1040 electronically.
The Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit for3) Paying by credit card over the phone or by Internet.
posting self-employment income.Generally, the SSAOther options include crediting an overpayment from yourwill give you credit only for self-employment income re-
2002 return to your 2003 estimated tax, and mailing aported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15
check or money order with a Form 1040–ES payment days after the tax year you earned the income. If you file
voucher. your tax return or report a change in your self-employment
income after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec-
Penalty for underpayment of tax.If you did not pay ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSA
enough income tax and self-employment tax for 2002 bywill not change its records to increase your self-employ-
withholding or by making estimated tax payments, youment income.
may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRS
will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or youWho must pay self-employment tax.You must pay SE
can use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax bytax and file Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of the
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay afollowing applies. 
penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor-
mation, see Publication 505. 1) Your net earnings from self-employment (excluding
church employee income) were $400 or more.
2) You had church employee income of $108.28 or
Self-Employment Tax more.
Self-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security and The SE tax rules apply even if you are fully in-
Medicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-sured under social security or have started re-
selves. It is similar to the social security and Medicareceiving benefits.CAUTION
!
taxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners.
If you earned income as a statutory employee,Methods for figuring net earnings.There are three
you do not pay SE tax on that income. ways to figure net earnings from self-employment.
CAUTION
!
• The regular method
• The nonfarm optional methodSocial security coverage.Your payments of SE tax con-
tribute to your coverage under the social security system if• The farm optional method
you are covered. Social security coverage provides you
with retirement benefits, disability benefits, survivor bene-You must use the regular method unless you are eligible
fits, and hospital insurance (Medicare) benefits. Socialto use one or both of the optional methods. Multiply your
security benefits are available to self-employed personstotal earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235) to get
just as they are to wage earners. your net earnings under the regular method.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1–2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF You Are Liable For: Use Form: Due By: 1
Income tax 1040 and Schedule C 2 or C–EZ 15th day of 4th month after end of
tax year
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040.
Estimated tax 1040–ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year
Social security and Medicare taxes 941 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
and income tax withholding January 31
4
8109 (to make deposits)3 See Publication 15.
Providing information on social W–2 (to employee) January 31 4
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding W–2 and W–3 (to the Social Last day of February (March 31 if
Security Administration) filing electronically)4
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax 940 or 940–EZ January 31 4
8109 (to make deposits)3 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability for
unpaid tax is more than $100
Filing information returns for See  Information Returns. Forms 1099–to the recipient by
payments to nonemployees and January 31 and to the IRS by
transactions with other persons February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically)
Other forms—See the General
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
5498, and W–2G.
Excise tax See Excise Taxes. See the instructions to the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the due date is the next business day. For more information, see
Publication 509, Tax Calendars for 2003.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 Do not use if you deposit taxes electronically.
4 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
Why use the optional methods?You use the optionalMaximum earnings subject to SE tax.Only the first
methods when you have a loss or a small net profit and any $84,900 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in
one of the following applies. 2002 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social
security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad
• You want to receive credit for social security benefitretirement (tier 1) tax.coverage.
All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2002
• You incurred child or dependent care expenses forare subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare part
which you could claim a credit. (An optional methodof SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1)
may increase your earned income, which could in-tax.
crease your credit.) If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
• You are entitled to the earned income credit. (An ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at
optional method may increase your earned income, least $84,900, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of
which could increase your credit.) the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you
must pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your
• You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (Annet earnings.optional method may increase your earned income,
which could increase your credit.) Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment
to income on line 29 of Form 1040. TIP
SE tax rate.The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
More information.For more information on the SE tax,
see Publication 533, Self-Employment Tax.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of
certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-Employment Taxes ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable gross
weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on FormIf you have employees, you will need to file forms to report
2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For moreemployment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow-
information, see the instructions for Form 2290.ing items.
• Social security and Medicare taxes. ATF forms. If you produce, sell, or import guns, tobacco,
or alcohol products, or if you manufacture equipment for• Federal income tax withholding. their production, you may be liable for one or more excise
• Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax. taxes. Report these taxes on forms filed with the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF).For more information, see Publication 15, Circular E,
Employer’s Tax Guide. That publication explains your taxDepositing excise taxes.If you have to file a quarterlyresponsibilities as an employer. excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit
To help you determine whether the people working foryour excise taxes before the return is due. For details on
you are your employees, see Publication 15–A, depositing excise taxes, see Publication 510.
Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide. That publication has
information to help you determine whether an individual is
an independent contractor or an employee. Information Returns
If you incorrectly classify an employee as an
If you make or receive payments in your business, youindependent contractor, you can be held liable for
may have to report them to the IRS on information returns.employment taxes for that worker plus a penalty.CAUTION
!
The IRS compares the payments shown on the information
An independent contractor is someone who is returns with each person’s income tax return to see if the
self-employed. You do not generally have to withhold orpayments were included in income. You must give a copy
pay any taxes on payments to an independent contractor. of each information return you are required to file to the
recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be-
low, you may have to use other returns to report certain
kinds of payments or transactions. For more details on
Excise Taxes information returns and when you have to file them, see
the Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G.This section explains the excise taxes you may have to pay
and the forms you have to file if you do any of the following.
Form 1099–MISC. Use Form 1099–MISC, Miscellane-
• Manufacture or sell certain products. ous Income, to report certain payments you make in your
business. These payments include the following items.• Operate certain kinds of businesses.
• Payments of $600 or more for services performed• Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-for your business by people not treated as your em-ucts. ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys,
• Receive payment for certain services. accountants, or directors.
For more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,• Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rents
Excise Taxes for 2003. paid to real estate agents.
• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not forForm 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Form services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows.720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-
eral broad categories of taxes, including the following.• Royalty payments of $10 or more.
• Payments to certain crew members by operators of• Environmental taxes on the sale or use of ozone-de-
fishing boats.pleting chemicals and imported products containing
or manufactured with these chemicals. You also use Form 1099–MISC to report your sales of
$5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resale• Communications and air transportation taxes.
anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment.• Fuel taxes.
Form W–2. You must file Form W–2, Wage and Tax• Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,
Statement, to report payments to your employees, such asand tractors.
wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income,• Luxury tax on the first retail sale of passenger vehi-social security, and Medicare taxes, and advance earnedcles. income credit payments. For more information on what to
report on Form W–2, see the Instructions for Forms W–2• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a variety
and W–3.of different articles.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 11

Page 12 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1–3. Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note:The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you
ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
If you are liable for: YOU may need to:
Income Tax ❏  file Schedule C or C–EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
❏  file Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or exchange
property used in your business or in which the business use of certain section 179
or listed property drops to 50% or less.
❏  file Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-Employment Tax ❏  file Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment Taxes ❏  file Form 941 for the calendar quarter in which you make final wage payments.
Note: Do not forget to check the box above line 1, If you do not have to file returns
in the future..., and enter the date final wages were paid.
❏  file Form 940 or 940–EZ for the calendar year in which final wages were paid.
Note: Do not forget to check the box, If you will not have to file returns in the
future..., under Question C box.
Information Returns ❏  provide Forms W–2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you make
final wage payments. Note: These forms are generally due by the due date of your
final Form 941.
❏  file Form W–3 to file Forms W–2. Note: These forms are generally due within 1
month after the due date of your final Form 941.
❏  provide Forms 1099–MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least $600
for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in which you go
out of business.
❏  file Form 1096 to file Forms 1099–MISC.
Penalties.The law provides for the following penalties if if you correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returns
you do not file Form 1099–MISC or Form W–2 or do notare due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater of
correctly report the information. For more information, see10 or 
1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you are
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, andrequired to file for the year.)
W–2G.
• Failure to file information returns. This penalty Form 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of Cash
applies if you do not file information returns by thePayments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,
due date, if you do not include all required informa-if you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac-
tion, or if you report incorrect information. tion, or two or more related business transactions. Cash
includes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. This
cludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier’s andpenalty applies if you do not furnish a required state-
traveler’s checks and money orders. Cash does not in-ment to a payee by the required date, if you do not
clude a check drawn on an individual’s personal accountinclude all required information, or if you report incor-
(personal check). For more information, see Publicationrect information. 
1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re-
Waiver of penalty.This penalty will not apply if you canceived in a Trade or Business).
show that the failure was due to reasonable cause and notPenalties.There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-willful neglect. ing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (orIn addition, there is no penalty for failure to include allcausing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, orthe required information, or for including incorrect informa-
structuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.tion, on a de minimis (small) number of information returns
Page 12 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintain
your books and records and report your income and ex-
2. penses for the period from January 1 through December
31 of each year.
Fiscal tax year.A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutiveAccounting Periods
months ending on the last day of any month except De-
and Methods cember. A 52–53 week tax year is a fiscal tax year that
varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on the
last day of a month.
If you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain yourIntroduction
books and records and report your income and expenses
You must figure your taxable income and file an income taxusing the same type of tax year.
return for an annual accounting period called a “tax year.”For more information on a fiscal tax year, including a
Also, you must consistently use an accounting method that52–53 week tax year, see Publication 538.
clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year.
Change in tax year.Once you have chosen your tax
year, you must, with certain exceptions, get IRS approvalUseful Items
to change it. To get approval, you must file Form 1128,You may want to see: Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year. You
may have to pay a fee. For more information, see the formPublication instructions. 
❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
tions and forms. Accounting Methods
An accounting method is a set of rules used to determine
when and how income and expenses are reported. Your
Accounting Periods accounting method includes not only the overall method of
accounting you use, but also the accounting treatment youWhen preparing a statement of income and expensesuse for any material item.(generally your income tax return), you must use yourYou choose an accounting method for your businessbooks and records for a specific interval of time called anwhen you file your first income tax return that includes aaccounting period. The annual accounting period for yourSchedule C for the business. After that, if you want toincome tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of change your accounting method, you must generally getthe following tax years. IRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.
• A calendar tax year.
Kinds of methods.Generally, you can use any of the
• A fiscal tax year. following accounting methods.
Unless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax year• Cash method.
by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. A
• An accrual method.required tax year is a tax year required under the Internal
Revenue Code and the Income tax Regulations. • Special methods of accounting for certain items of
income and expenses.
Calendar tax year.A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive
• Combination method using elements of two or moremonths beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
of the above.You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the
following apply. You must use the same accounting method to figure
• You do not keep adequate records. your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you
must use an accounting method that clearly shows your• You have no annual accounting period. income.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscal
Business and personal items.You can account for busi-year.
ness and personal items under different accounting meth-• You must use the tax year required under the Inter-ods. For example, you can figure your business incomenal Revenue Code and Income Tax Regulations. under an accrual method, even if you use the cash method
to figure personal items.If you filed your first income tax return using the calendar
tax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor,Two or more businesses.If you have two or more sepa-
you must continue to use the calendar tax year unless you rate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-
get IRS approval to change it. See Change in tax year, counting method for each if the method clearly reflects the
later. income of each business. They are separate and distinct
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
only if you maintain complete and separate books and constructively receive the income when the debt is can-
records for each business. celed or paid. See Canceled Debt under Kinds of Income
in chapter 5.
Cash Method Repayment of income. If you include an amount in in-
come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven-
you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in whichtory use the cash method because they find it easier to
you make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, akeep cash method records. However, if an inventory is
special rule applies. For details about the special rule, seenecessary to account for your income, you must generally
Repayments in chapter 13 of Publication 535, Businessuse an accrual method of accounting for sales and
Expenses.purchases. See Inventories, later.
ExpensesIncome
Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses inUnder the cash method, include in your gross income all
the tax year in which you actually pay them. This includesitems of income you actually or constructively receive
business expenses for which you contest liability. How-during your tax year. If you receive property or services,
ever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid inyou must include their fair market value in income.
advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.Example. On December 30, 2001, Mrs. Sycamore sent
you a check for interior decorating services you provided to
Expenses paid in advance.You can deduct an expenseher. You received the check on January 2, 2002. You must
you pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.include the amount of the check in income for 2002.
Constructive receipt.You have constructive receipt ofExample. You are a calendar year taxpayer and youincome when an amount is credited to your account orpay $1,000 in 2002 for a business insurance policy effec-made available to you without restriction. You do not needtive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 into have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be2002 and $500 in 2003.your agent and receive income for you, you are treated as
having received it when your agent received it. Accrual Method
Example. Interest is credited to your bank account inUnder an accrual method of accounting, you generallyDecember 2002. You do not withdraw it or enter it into yourreport income in the year earned and deduct or capitalizepassbook until 2003. You must include it in your grossexpenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrualincome for 2002. method of accounting is to match income and expenses in
Delaying receipt of income.You cannot hold checks the correct year.
or postpone taking possession of similar property from one
tax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You
Income—General Rulemust report the income in the year the property is received
or made available to you without restriction. Under an accrual method, you generally include an
amount in your gross income for the tax year in which allExample. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en-events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-titled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De-curred and you can determine the amount with reasonablecember 2002. She was told in December that her paymentaccuracy.was available. At her request, she was not paid until
January 2003. She must include this payment in her 2002Example. You are a calendar year, accrual methodincome because it was constructively received in 2002.taxpayer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2002.
You billed the customer in the first week of January 2003,Checks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the tax
but you did not receive payment until February 2003. Youyear is constructive receipt of income in that year, even if
must include the amount received for the computer in youryou cannot cash or deposit the check until the following
2002 income.year.
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-
Income—Special Rulescember 31, 2002, from a patient. She could not deposit the
check in her business account until January 2, 2003. SheThe following are special rules that apply to advance pay-must include this fee in her income for 2002. ments, estimating income, and changing a payment
schedule for services.Debts paid by another person or canceled.If your
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by your
Estimated income.If you include a reasonably estimatedcreditors, you may have to report part or all of this debt
amount in gross income, and later determine the exactrelief as income. If you receive income in this way, you
Page 14 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount is different, take the difference into account in theEconomic performance. You generally cannot deduct or
capitalize a business expense until economic performancetax year in which you make the determination.
occurs. If your expense is for property or services provided
to you, or for your use of property, economic performanceChange in payment schedule for services.If you per-
occurs as the property or services are provided or as theform services for a basic rate specified in a contract, you
property is used. If your expense is for property or servicesmust accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agree
you provide to others, economic performance occurs asto receive payments at a lower rate until you complete the
you provide the property or services. An exception allowsservices and then receive the difference.
certain recurring items to be treated as incurred during a
tax year even though economic performance has not oc-Advance payments for services.Generally, you report
curred. For more information on economic performance,an advance payment for services to be performed in a later
see Publication 538.tax year as income in the year you receive the payment.
However, if you receive an advance payment for servicesExample. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use anyou agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, youaccrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies incan choose to postpone including the advance payment inDecember 2002. You receive the supplies and the bill inincome until the next tax year. However, you cannot post-December, but you pay the bill in January 2003. You canpone including any payment beyond that tax year. deduct the expense in 2002 because all events that fix theFor more information about reporting advance pay-fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liabilityments for services, see Publication 538. That publicationcould be reasonably determined, and economic perform-also explains special rules for reporting the following typesance occurred in that year.
of income. Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.
In that case, you can deduct them in 2002, even if the• Advance payments for service agreements.
supplies are not delivered until 2003 (when economic
• Advance payments under guarantee or warranty performance occurs).
contracts.
Keeping inventories.When the production, purchase, or• Prepaid interest. sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
• Prepaid rent. business, you must generally take inventories into account
at the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you must
account for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-Advance payments for sales.Special rules apply to in-crual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.cluding income from advance payments on agreements forFor more information, see Inventories, later.future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima-
rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of yourSpecial rule for related persons.You cannot deduct
business. If the advance payments are for contracts involv-business expenses and interest owed to a related person
ing both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessarywho uses the cash method of accounting until you make
to treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes athe payment and the corresponding amount is includible in
gift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treatthe related person’s gross income. Determine the relation-
amounts that are due and payable as amounts you re-ship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which the
ceived. expense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If a
deduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con-You generally include an advance payment in income
tinue to apply even if your relationship with the personfor the tax year in which you receive it. However, you can
ends before the expense or interest is includible in theuse an alternative method. For information about the alter-
gross income of that person.native method, see Publication 538.
Related persons include members of your immediate
family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
Expenses half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
a list of other related persons, see Publication 538.Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally
deduct or capitalize a business expense when both the
Combination Methodfollowing apply.
You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,1) The all-events test has been met. The test has been
and special methods of accounting if the combinationmet when:
clearly shows your income and expenses and you use it
consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.a) All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil-
ity, and • If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-
b) The liability can be determined with reasonablecome, you must generally use an accrual method for
accuracy. purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories,
later.) You can use the cash method for all other
2) Economic performance has occurred. items of income and expenses.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 15

Page 16 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• If you use the cash method for figuring your income, prior tax year. For example, you must test 2000 and 2001
you must use the cash method for reporting your to see if you are a qualifying small business taxpayer that
expenses. can use the cash method for your eligible business and
choose to not keep an inventory for 2002. Use Table 2–2
• If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex-to determine if you are a qualifying small business tax-penses, you must use an accrual method for figuringpayer for your eligible business for 2002.your income.
Table 2–2. Are You a Qualifying Small• If you use a combination method that includes the
cash method, treat that combination method as the Business Taxpayer for Your
cash method. Eligible Business for 2002?
a) Are your average annual gross b) Do you meet the
receipts $10,000,000 or less for each test in a) for each tax
3-year period below? year below?Inventories
(1) (2) (3) Test YearGenerally, if you produce, purchase, or sell merchandise in
your business, you must keep an inventory and use the1999 2000 2001  2001
accrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise.1998 1999 2000  2000
The following taxpayers can use the cash method of ac-
c) If your answer is Yes to a) and b), you are a qualifying smallcounting even if they produce, purchase, or sell merchan-business taxpayer for your eligible business for 2002.dise. These taxpayers can also choose to not keep an
inventory, even if they do not change to the cash method.In addition, a qualifying small business taxpayer is any
taxpayer that is not prohibited from using the cash method1) A qualifying taxpayer.
under section 448.2) A qualifying small business taxpayer.
Eligible business.An eligible business is any businessFor a qualifying small business taxpayer, these rules applyfor which a qualified small business taxpayer can use theto an eligible business (defined later). cash method and choose to not keep an inventory. You
have an eligible business if you meet any of the followingQualifying taxpayer.You are a qualifying taxpayer only ifrequirements and did not previously change (and were notyou meet the gross receipts test for each prior tax yearrequired to change) from the cash method to an accrualending after December 16, 1998. To meet the test for amethod for any business as a result of becoming ineligibleprior tax year, your average annual gross receipts must beto use the cash method.$1,000,000 or less for the 3 tax years ending with the prior
tax year. For example, you must test 1998, 1999, 2000,1) Your principal business activity is described in aand 2001 to see if you are a qualifying taxpayer that canNorth American Industry Classification Systemuse the cash method and choose to not keep an inventory(NAICS) code other than any of the following.for 2002. Use Table 2–1 to determine if you are a qualify-
ing taxpayer for 2002. a) NAICS codes 211 and 212 (mining activities).
b) NAICS codes 31–33 (manufacturing).Table 2–1. Are You a Qualifying Taxpayer
for 2002? c) NAICS code 42 (wholesale trade).
d) NAICS codes 44–45 (retail trade).a) Are your average annual gross b) Do you meet the
receipts $1,000,000 or less for each test in a) for each tax
e) NAICS codes 5111 and 5122 (information indus-3-year period below? year below?
tries).
(1) (2) (3) Test Year
2) Your principal business activity is the provision of1999 2000 2001  2001
services, including the provision of property incident1998 1999 2000  2000
to those services.
1997 1998 1999 1999
3) Your principal business activity is the fabrication or1996 1997 1998 1998 modification of tangible personal property upon de-
c) If your answer is Yes to a) and b), you are a qualifying taxpayer mand in accordance with customer design or specifi-
for 2002. cations.
Information about the NAICS codes can be found atA tax shelter cannot be a qualifying taxpayer.
www.census.gov .
Qualifying small business taxpayer.You are a qualify-
ing small business taxpayer for your eligible business onlyBusiness not owned or not in existence for 3 years.If
if you meet the gross receipts test for each prior tax year you did not own your business for all of the 3-tax-year
ending on or after December 31, 2000. To meet the test for period used in figuring your average annual gross receipts,
a prior tax year, your average annual gross receipts must include the period of any predecessor. If your business has
be $10,000,000 or less for the 3 tax years ending with the not been in existence for the 3-tax-year period, base your
Page 16 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 17 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
average on the period it has existed including any short taxUniform Capitalization Rulesyears, annualizing the short tax year’s gross receipts.
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalizeNot keeping an inventory.If you choose to not keep anthe direct costs and part of the indirect costs for productioninventory, you will deduct the cost of the items you wouldor resale activities. Include these costs in the basis ofotherwise include in inventory in the year you sell theproperty you produce or acquire for resale, rather thanitems, or the year you pay for them, whichever is later. Ifclaiming them as a current deduction. You recover theyou are a producer, you can use any reasonable method tocosts through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goodsestimate the raw material in your work in process andsold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop-finished goods on hand at the end of the year to determineerty.the raw material used to produce finished goods that were
sold during the year. Activities subject to the rules.You may be subject to
the uniform capitalization rules if you do any of the follow-Changing methods.  If you are a qualifying taxpayer or
ing, unless the property is produced for your use other thansmall business taxpayer and want to change to the cash
in a business or an activity carried on for profit.method, you must file Form 3115, Application for Change
in Accounting Method. For an automatic change in ac- • Produce real or tangible personal property. For thiscounting method, you must follow the provisions in Reve-purpose, tangible personal property includes a film,nue Procedure 2002–9 in Internal Revenue Bulletin sound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop-2002–3, as modified by Revenue Procedure 2002–28, in erty.Internal Revenue Bulletin 2002–18, and Revenue Proce-
• Acquire property for resale.dure 2002–19, in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2002–13. For
additional guidance, see the provisions in Revenue Proce-
Exceptions.These rules do not apply to the followingdure 2001–10 if you are a qualifying taxpayer and Reve-
property.nue Procedure 2002–28 if you are a qualifying small
business taxpayer. Those provisions also apply if you no1) Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver-longer want to keep inventories. You may file one Formage annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.3115 if you choose to make both changes.
2) Property you produce if you meet either of the follow-More information. For more information about the quali-ing conditions.fying taxpayer exception, see Revenue Procedure
2001–10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001–2. For morea) Your indirect costs of producing the property areinformation about the qualifying small business taxpayer$200,000 or less.exception, see Revenue Procedure 2002–28 in Internal
b) You use the cash method of accounting and doRevenue Bulletin 2002–18.
not account for inventories. For more information,Items included in inventory.If you are required to ac- see Inventories, earlier.count for inventories, include the following items when
accounting for your inventory.
• Merchandise or stock in trade. Special Methods
• Raw materials. There are special methods of accounting for certain items
• Work in process. of income or expense. These include the following.
• Finished products. • Amortization, discussed in chapter 9 of Publication
535, Business Expenses.• Supplies that physically become a part of the item
intended for sale. • Bad debts, discussed in chapter 11 of Publication
535.
Valuing inventory.You must value your inventory at the
• Depletion, discussed in chapter 10 of Publication
beginning and end of each tax year to determine your cost535.
of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine the• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How Tovalue of your inventory, you need a method for identifying Depreciate Property.the items in your inventory and a method for valuing these
items. • Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In-
Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for allstallment Sales.
kinds of businesses. The method you use to value your
inventory must conform to generally accepted accounting
principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflect
Change inincome. Your inventory practices must be consistent from
Accounting Methodyear to year.
More information.For more information about invento- Once you have set up your accounting method, you must
ries, see Publication 538. generally get IRS approval before you can change to
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 17

Page 18 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
another method. A change in your accounting method ❏ Sch D (Form 1040)Capital Gains and Losses
includes a change in: See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
tions and forms.1) Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac-
crual method, and
2) Your treatment of any material item. What Is a Disposition
To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application for
Change in Accounting Method. You may have to pay a fee.of Property?
For more information, see the form instructions. 
A disposition of property includes the following transac-
Automatic change procedures.These are procedures tions.
under which certain taxpayers can presume to have IRS
• You sell property for cash or other property.approval to change their method of accounting. The ap-
proval is granted for the tax year for which the taxpayer• You exchange property for other property.
requests a change (year of change), if the taxpayer com-
• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellationplies with the provisions of the automatic change proce-
of a lease.dures. No user fee is required for an application filed under
an automatic change procedure. • You receive money for granting the exclusive use of
Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium.
matic change. See the form instructions and Revenue• You transfer property to satisfy a debt.Procedure 2002–9, as modified by Revenue Procedure
2002–19, Revenue Procedure 2002–28, and Revenue • You abandon property.
Procedure 2002–54, and Announcement 2002–17, (or • Your bank or other financial institution forecloses onany successor), for more information. Revenue Procedureyour mortgage or repossesses your property.2002–9 is in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2002–3, Revenue
Procedure 2002–19 is in Internal Revenue Bulletin • Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, and
2002–13, Revenue Procedure 2002–28 is in Internal Rev-you receive property or money in payment.
enue Bulletin 2002–18, Revenue Procedure 2002–54 is in• Your property is condemned, or disposed of underInternal Revenue Bulletin 2002–35, and Announcement the threat of condemnation, and you receive prop-2002–17 is in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2002–8. erty or money in payment.
For details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property,
see Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
details about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica-
tion 544.3.
Nontaxable exchanges.Certain exchanges of property
are not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange isDispositions of not recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gain
or loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwise
Business Property dispose of the property you receive.
Like-kind exchanges.A like-kind exchange is the ex-
change of property for the same kind of property. It is theIntroduction
most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a
If you dispose of business property, you may have a gainlike-kind exchange, the property traded and the property
or loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in somereceived must be both of the following.
cases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss that
• Business or investment property.is not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you have
a disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where to• Like property.report the gain or loss.
Report the exchange of like-kind property on Form
Useful Items 8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information about
You may want to see: like-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication 544. 
Installment sales.An installment sale is a sale of prop-Publication
erty where you receive at least one payment after the tax❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets year of the sale. If you finance the buyer’s purchase of your
property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort-Form (and Instructions) gage from a third party, you probably have an installment
❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property sale.
Page 18 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 19 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information about installment sales, see Publi-Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from a
cation 537, Installment Sales. disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or loss
for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included in
Sale of a business.The sale of a business is not usuallygross income. Recognized losses are deductible from
a sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the businessgross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer-
are sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treatedtain exchanges of property is not recognized. See Nontax-
as being sold separately for determining the treatment ofable exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a loss
gain or loss. from the disposition of property held for personal use.
Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of a
business must report to the IRS the allocation of the salesIs My Gain or Lossprice among the business assets. Use Form 8594, Asset
Ordinary or Capital?Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide this
information. The buyer and seller should each attach FormYou must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in whichor capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure yourthe sale occurred. net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capitalFor more information about the sale of a business, seegain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the mostchapter 2 of Publication 544. part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or
investment is a capital asset.
Certain property you use in your business is not aHow Do I Figure capital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this
property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you helda Gain or Loss? the property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat
the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and
losses are called section 1231 gains and losses.
Table 3–1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss For more information about ordinary and capital gains
and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544.IF your... THEN you have a...
adjusted basis is more than the Is My Capital Gain or Lossamount realized loss.
Short Term or Long Term?amount realized is more than
the adjusted basis gain. If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determine
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or lossBasis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair marketis long or short term depends on how long you own thevalue, and amount recognized are defined next. You needproperty before you dispose of it. The time you own prop-to know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.erty before disposing of it is called the holding period.
Basis.The cost or purchase price of property is usually itsTable 3–2. Do I Have a Short-Term orbasis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or other Long-Term Gain or Loss?disposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,
inheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you mustIF you hold theuse a basis other than its cost. For more information aboutproperty... THEN you have a...basis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.
1 year or less short-term capital gain or loss.Adjusted basis.The adjusted basis of property is your
original cost or other basis plus certain additions, andmore than 1 year long-term capital gain or loss.
minus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-
alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-For more information about short-term and long-term
ferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544.
are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
Amount realized.The amount you realize from a disposi-
Where Do I Reporttion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair market
value of all property or services you receive. The amount
Gains and Losses?you realize also includes any of your liabilities that were
assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which theReport gains and losses from the following dispositions onproperty you transferred is subject, such as real estatethe forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explaintaxes or a mortgage. how to fill them out.
Fair market value.Fair market value is the price at
which the property would change hands between a buyerDispositions of business property and depreciable
and a seller, neither having to buy or sell, and both havingproperty.Use Form 4797. If you have a taxable gain, you
reasonable knowledge of all necessary facts. may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business PropertyPage 19

Page 20 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Like-kind exchanges.Use Form 8824, Like-Kind Ex- opment corporation before June 30, 1999. For more infor-
changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 and mation, see Form 8847.
Schedule D (Form 1040). Credit for employer-provided child care facilities and
Installment sales.Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-services.This credit applies to the qualified expenses
come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and Scheduleyou paid for employee child care and qualified expenses
D (Form 1040). you paid for child care resource and referral services. The
credit is 25% of qualified expenses you paid for employeeCasualties and thefts.Use Form 4684, Casualties and child care and 10% of qualified expenses you paid for childThefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. care resource and referral services. This credit is limited to
Condemned property. Use Form 4797. You may also $150,000 each year. For more information, see Form
have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 8882.
Credit for small business pension startup costs.This
credit applies to pension plan startup costs. If you begin a
new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan
(including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-
4. ployee pension, you can receive a tax credit of 50% of the
first $1,000 of qualified startup costs. For more information,
see Publication 560,Retirement Plans for Small Business
General Business (SEP, Simple, and Qualified Plans.
Credit Credit for employee social security and medicare
taxes paid on certain employee tips (Form 8846).The
credit is generally equal to your (employer’s) portion of
Introduction social security and Medicare taxes paid on tips received by
employees of your food and beverage establishmentYour general business credit for the year consists of yourwhere tipping is customary. The credit applies regardlesscarryforward of business credits from prior years plus theof whether the food is consumed on or off your businesstotal of your current year business credits. In addition, yourpremises. However, you cannot get credit for your part ofgeneral business credit for the current year may be in-social security and Medicare taxes on those tips that arecreased later by the carryback of business credits fromused to meet the federal minimum wage rate that applieslater years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.to the employee under the Fair Labor Standards Act. ForAll of the following credits are part of the general busi-more information, see Form 8846.ness credit. The form you use to figure each credit is
shown in parentheses. Be sure you also read How To Disabled access credit (Form 8826).The disabled ac-Claim the Credit later because you may also have to fill outcess credit is a nonrefundable tax credit for an eligibleForm 3800, General Business Credit, in certain situations.small business that pays or incurs expenses to provide
access to persons who have disabilities. You must pay or
Useful Items incur the expenses to enable your business to comply with
You may want to see: the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. For more
information, see Form 8826.
Publication
Empowerment zone employment credit (Form 8844).
❏ 954 Tax Incentives for Empowerment Zones andYou may qualify for this credit if you have employees and
Other Distressed Communities are engaged in a business in an empowerment zone for
which the credit is available. For more information, see
Form (and Instructions) Form 8844 and Publication 954.
❏ 3800 General Business Credit Enhanced oil recovery credit (Form 8830).This credit
applies to your qualified enhanced oil recovery costs for❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
the tax year. For more information, see Form 8830.See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
tions and forms. Indian employment credit (Form 8845).This credit ap-
plies to the part of the qualified wages and health insur-Alcohol fuels credit (Form 6478).This credit applies toance costs (up to $20,000 per employee) you paid oralcohol you sold or used as fuel. Alcohol, for purposes ofincurred during a tax year that is more than the sum of thethis credit, includes ethanol and methanol. It does notcomparable costs you (or your predecessor) paid or in-include alcohol produced from petroleum, natural gas,curred during calendar year 1993. The employee must becoal, or peat. Nor does it include alcohol of less than 150an enrolled member, or the spouse of an enrolled member,proof. For more information, see Form 6478. of an Indian tribe. The employee must perform substan-
Credit for contributions to selected community devel-tially all of his or her services within an Indian reservation
opment corporations (Form 8847).This credit applies to while living on or near the reservation. For more informa-
certain contributions made to a selected community devel- tion, see Form 8845 and Publication 954.
Page 20 Chapter 4 General Business Credit

Page 21 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Investment credit (Form 3468).The investment credit isWork opportunity credit (Form 5884).The work oppor-
the total of the following three credits. tunity credit provides businesses with an incentive to hire
individuals from targeted groups that have a particularly• Energy credit. high unemployment rate or other special employment
needs. However, the credit does not apply to wages you• Reforestation credit.
pay or incur for qualified targeted group members who• Rehabilitation credit. begin work for you after December 31, 2003. For more
information, see Form 5884 and Publication 954.Energy credit.This credit applies to certain expenses
for solar or geothermal energy property you placed in
service during the tax year. For more information, see the
How To Claim the Creditinstructions for Form 3468.
Reforestation credit.The reforestation credit appliesIf you meet all the following conditions, use only the form
to part of the expenses you incur each year to forest orshown in parentheses with each of the credits discussed
reforest property you hold for growing trees for sale or useabove.
in the commercial production of timber products. For infor-• You have only one current year business credit.mation about these expenses, see chapter 9 in Publication
535, Business Expenses. • You have no carryback or carryover credit(s).
Rehabilitation credit.This credit applies to expenses• The credit (other than the low-income housing credit)
you incur to rehabilitate certain buildings. For more infor-is not from a passive activity. See Form 8582–CR,
mation, see the instructions for Form 3468. Passive Activity Credit Limitations, for information
about passive activity credits. Low-income housing credit (Form 8586).This credit
If you do not meet all these conditions, you must also fillgenerally applies to qualified low-income housing buildings
out Form 3800.placed in service after 1986. For more information, see
Form 8586.
Although the empowerment zone employment
New York Liberty Zone business employee credit credit (Form 8844) is part of the general business
(Form 8884).This credit provides businesses with an credit, do not report it on Form 3800.CAUTION
!
incentive to hire individuals from a new targeted group of
employees in the Liberty Zone. For more information, seeAlternative minimum tax (AMT).Although you may notForm 8884. owe AMT, you must still figure your tentative minimum tax
on Form 6251 if you claim a general business credit. AfterOrphan drug credit (Form 8820).The orphan drug credityou fill in Form 6251, attach it to your tax return. applies to qualified expenses incurred in testing certain
drugs, known as “orphan drugs for rare diseases and
conditions.” For more information, see Form 8820.
Renewable electricity production credit (Form 8835).
The renewable electricity production credit is available to
5.
sellers of electricity. It is based on electricity that was sold
to unrelated persons and was produced from qualified
energy resources at a qualified facility during the 10-year
Business Income
period after the facility is placed in service. For more
information, see Form 8835.
IntroductionResearch credit (Form 6765).The research credit is
This chapter primarily explains business income and howdesigned to encourage businesses to increase the
to account for it on your tax return. It also explains whatamounts they spend on research and experimental activi-
items are not considered income.ties. The credit is generally 20% of the amount by which
If there is a connection between any income you receiveyour research expenses for the year are more than your
and your business, the income is business income. Abase amount. However, the credit does not apply to ex-
connection exists if it is clear that the payment of incomepenses you pay or incur after June 30, 2004. For more
would not have been made if you did not have the busi-information, see Form 6765.
ness.
Welfare-to-work credit (Form 8861). The You can have business income even if you are not
welfare-to-work credit provides businesses with an incen- involved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Income
tive to hire long-term family assistance recipients. How- from work you do on the side in addition to your regular job
ever, the credit does not apply to wages you pay or incur can be business income.
for qualified long-term family assistance recipients who You report most business income, such as income from
begin work for you after December 31, 2003. For more the sale of your products or services, on Schedule C or
information, see Form 8861 and Publication 954. C–EZ. But you report the income from the sale of business
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
assets, such as land and office buildings, on other forms In return for accounting services you provided for the
house painter’s business, the house painter painted yourinstead of Schedule C or C–EZ. For information on selling
home. You must include in gross receipts the fair marketbusiness assets, see chapter 3.
value of the services you received from the house painter.Nonemployee compensation. Business income The house painter must include the fair market value ofincludes amounts you received in your businessyour accounting services in his or her gross receipts.that were properly shown on Forms 1099–MISC.
TIP
This includes amounts reported as nonemployee compen-Example 4. You are a member of a barter club thatsation in box 7 of the form. You can find more informationuses credit units to credit or debit members’ accounts forin the instructions on the back of the Form 1099–MISC yougoods or services provided or received. As soon as unitsreceived. are credited to your account, you can use them to buy
goods or services or sell or transfer the units to other
members.
You must include the value of credit units you receivedKinds of Income in your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units are
credited to your account.You must report on your tax return all income you receiveThe dollar value of units received for services by anfrom your business unless it is excluded by law. In mostemployee of the club, who can use the units in the samecases, your business income will be in the form of cash,manner as other members, must be included in the
checks, and credit card charges. But business income canemployee’s gross income for the tax year in which re-
be in other forms, such as property or services. These andceived. It is wages subject to social security and Medicare
other types of income are explained next. taxes (FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), and
income tax withholding. See Publication 15, Circular E,If you are a U.S. citizen who has business income
Employer’s Tax Guide.from sources outside the United States (foreign
income), you must report that income on your tax
CAUTION
!
Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and usereturn unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If you
the cash method of accounting. You join a barter club andlive outside the United States, you may be able to excludeagree to provide plumbing services to any member for apart or all of your foreign-source business income. Forspecified number of hours. Each member has access to adetails, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizensdirectory that lists the members of the club and the serv-and Resident Aliens Abroad. ices available.
Members contact each other directly and request serv-
ices to be performed. You are not required to provideBartering for Property or Services
services unless requested by another member, but you
can use as many of the offered services as you wishBartering is an exchange of property or services. You must
without paying a fee.include in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fair
You must include the fair market value of any servicesmarket value of property or services you receive in bar-
you receive from club members in your gross receiptstering. If you exchange services with another person and
when you receive them even if you have not provided anyyou both have agreed ahead of time on the value of the
services to club members.services, that value will be accepted as the fair market
value unless the value can be shown to be otherwise.Information returns.If you are involved in a bartering
transaction, you may have to file either of the following
Example 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per-forms.
form legal services for a client, a small corporation. In
• Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Broker and Barterpayment for your services, you receive shares of stock inExchange Transactions.the corporation. You must include the fair market value of
the shares in income. • Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income.
For information about these forms, see the General In-Example 2.You are an artist and create a work of art tostructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G.compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of your
apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
Real Estate Rentsclude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her
rental income. If you are a real estate dealer who receives income from
renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,
Example 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Bothwho provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,
you and a house painter are members of a barter club, anreport the rental income and expenses on Schedule C or
organization that each year gives its members a directoryC–EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind of
of members and the services each member provides.owner described in the preceding sentence, report the
Members get in touch with other members directly andrental income and expenses on Schedule E, instead of on
bargain for the value of the services to be performed.Schedule C or C–EZ.
Page 22 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Prepaid rent.Advance payments received under a leasecome. If you hold stock as a personal investment
that does not put any restriction on their use or enjoyment separately from your business activity, the dividends from
are income in the year you receive them. This is true no the stock are nonbusiness income.
matter what accounting method or period you use. If you receive dividends from business insurance premi-
ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all orLease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee forpart of the dividend as business income on your return. Togranting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in yourfind out how much you have to report, see Recovery ofgross receipts in the year it is received. items previously deducted under Other Income, later.
Lease cancellation payments.Report payments you re-
ceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in gross
Canceled Debt
receipts in the year received.
The following explains the general rule for including can-Payments to third parties.If your lessee makes pay-celed debt in income and the exceptions to the generalments to someone else under an agreement to pay yourrule.debts or obligations, include the payments in your gross
receipts when the lessee makes the payments. A common
example of this kind of income is a lessee’s payment of
General Rule
your property taxes on leased real property.
Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other thanSettlement payments.Payments you receive in settle-as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceledment of a lessee’s obligation to restore the leased propertyamount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report theto its original condition are income in the amount that thecanceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurredpayments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im-the debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,provements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon-report the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.nected by the lessee.
ExceptionsPersonal Property Rents
The following discussion covers some exceptions to theIf you are in the business of renting personal property
general rule for canceled debt.(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental
amount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule CPrice reduced after purchase.If you owe a debt to the
or C–EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described inseller for property you bought and the seller reduces the
the preceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also beamount you owe, you generally do not have income from
received for renting personal property. If you receive any ofthe reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treat
those payments, include them in your gross receipts asthe amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-
explained in that discussion. ment and reduce your basis in the property.
Deductible debt.You do not realize income from a can-Interest and Dividend Income celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would
have led to a deduction.Interest and dividends may be considered business in-
come. Example. You get accounting services for your busi-
Interest.Interest received on notes receivable that youness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-
have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi-ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Your
ness income. Interest received on loans is business in-accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for the
come if you are in the business of lending money.accounting services. How you treat the canceled debt
depends on your method of accounting.Uncollectible loans.If a loan payable to you becomes
uncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrual• Cash method – You do not include the canceled
method of accounting, you must include in gross incomedebt in income because payment of the debt would
interest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-have been deductible as a business expense.
ble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you• Accrual method – You include the canceled debt inmay be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts income because the expense was deductible whenin chapter 8. you incurred the debt.
Unstated interest.If little or no interest is charged on
an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of eachFor information on the cash and accrual methods of
payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest andaccounting, see chapter 2.
Original Issue Discount in Publication 537, Installment
Sales.
Exclusions
Dividends.Generally, dividends are business income to
dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu- Do not include canceled debt in income in the following
tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in- situations. However, you may be required to file Form 982,
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 23

Page 24 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted-a) The outstanding principal of qualified real prop-
erty business debt (immediately before the can-ness. For more information, see Form 982.  
cellation), over
1) The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy caseb) The fair market value (immediately before theunder title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank- cancellation) of the business real property that isruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. security for the debt, reduced by the outstanding
2) The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent.principal amount of any other qualified real prop-
You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you erty business debt secured by this property imme-
are insolvent. See Publication 908. diately before the cancellation.
3) The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to a2) The total adjusted bases of depreciable real propertyqualified person. See chapter 4 in Publication 225,held by you immediately before the cancellation.Farmer’s Tax Guide. These adjusted bases are determined after any ba-
sis reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy,4) The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi-
insolvency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take intoness debt. This situation is explained later.
account depreciable real property acquired in con-If a canceled debt is excluded from income because ittemplation of the cancellation.takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa-
tions (2), (3), and (4) do not apply. If it takes place whenChoice. To make this choice, complete Form 982 andyou are insolvent, the exclusions in situations (3) and (4)attach it to your income tax return for the tax year in whichdo not apply to the extent you are insolvent. the cancellation occurs. You must file your return by the
due date (including the extensions). If you timely filed yourDebt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes anyreturn for the year without making the choice, you can stilldebt for which you are liable or which attaches to propertymake the choice by filing an amended return within 6
you hold. months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-
sions). For more information, see When to file in the form
Qualified real property business debt.You can choose instructions.
to exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
real property business debt. If you make the choice, youOther Incomemust reduce the basis of your depreciable real property by
the amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginningThe following discussion explains how to treat other typesof your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel-of business income you may receive.lation occurs. However, if you dispose of the property
before that time, you must reduce its basis immediatelyRestricted property.Restricted property is property that
before the disposition. has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receive
restricted stock or other property for services performed,Cancellation of qualified real property businessthe fair market value of the property in excess of your costdebt.Qualified real property business debt is debt (otheris included in your income on Schedule C or C–EZ whenthan qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi-the restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to betions. taxed in the year you receive the property. For more
information on including restricted property in income, see1) It was incurred or assumed in connection with realPublication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.property used in a trade or business.
Gains and losses.Do not report on Schedule C or C–EZ2) It was secured by such real property.
a gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither3) It was incurred or assumed at either of the followingstock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers.times. Instead, you must report these gains and losses on other
forms. For more information, see chapter 3.a) Before January 1, 1993.
Promissory notes.Report promissory notes and otherb) After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumed
evidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange ofto acquire, construct, or substantially improve the
property that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale toreal property.
customers on Schedule C or C–EZ. In general, you report
them at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated4) It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.
interest) when you receive them.Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-
ing of debt described in (3) above, but only to the extent itLost income payments.If you reduce or stop your busi-
does not exceed the debt being refinanced. ness activities, report on Schedule C or C–EZ any pay-
ment you receive for the lost income of your business fromYou cannot exclude more than either of the following
insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C oramounts.
C–EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive
1) The excess (if any) of: the payment.
Page 24 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Damages. You must include in gross income compensa- Publication 946, How To Depreciate Property. That chap-
tion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of the ter explains how to determine whether property is used
following injuries connected with your business. more than 50% in your business.
• Patent infringement. Section 179 property.If you take a section 179 deduc-
tion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty. asset and before the end of the asset’s recovery period the
• Antitrust injury. percentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must
recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by
Economic injury.You may be entitled to a deductionincluding in income on Schedule C part of the deduction
against the income if it compensates you for actual eco-you took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount to
nomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the followinginclude on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 to
amounts. find out when you recapture the deduction.
• The amount you receive or accrue for damages inSale or exchange of depreciable property.If you sell
the tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incuror exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may have
in the tax year to recover that amount. to report as income all or part of the gain due to deprecia-
tion. You figure the income due to depreciation recapture• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de-in Part III of Form 4797. For more information, see chapterducted. 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets.Punitive damages. You must also include punitive
damages in income.
Kickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them inItems That Are Not Income
your income on Schedule C or C–EZ. However, do not
include them if you properly treat them as a reduction of aIn some cases the property or money you receive is not
related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost ofincome.
goods sold. Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is not
income.Recovery of items previously deducted.If you recover
a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year,Sales tax.State and local sales taxes imposed on theinclude the recovery in income on Schedule C or C–EZ.buyer, which you were required to collect and pay over toHowever, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years didstate or local governments, are not income.not reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not
reduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery fromAppreciation.Increases in value of your property are not
income, you must include with your return a computationincome until you realize the increases through a sale or
showing how you figured the exclusion. other taxable disposition.
Leasehold improvements.If a tenant erects buildings orExample. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in-makes improvements to your property, the increase in thecome of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and othervalue of the property due to the improvements is notallowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personalincome to you. However, if the facts indicate that theexemptions of $6,000. He would not pay income tax even ifimprovements are a payment of rent to you, then thehe did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, he will not reportincrease in value would be income.as income any part of the $300 he may recover in any
future year. Exchange of like-kind property.If you exchange your
business property or property you hold for investmentException for depreciation.This rule does not applysolely for property of a like kind to be used in your businessto depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rulesor to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized.explained next. This means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is not
deductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is theRecapture of depreciation.In the following situations,
trade-in of a business automobile for another businessyou have to recapture the depreciation deduction. This
automobile. See Nontaxable exchanges in chapter 3.means you include in income part or all of the depreciation
you deducted in previous years. Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to others
Listed property.If your business use of listed property to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandise
(explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% or remains with you, the consignor, even after the consignee
less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the property possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goods
in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia- on consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-
tion deduction. You do this by including in income on signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have
Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ- shipped out on consignment is included in your inventory
ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Business until it is sold.
Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C. Do not include merchandise you receive on consign-
See Do the Business-Use Limits Apply? in chapter 4 of ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commission
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 25

Page 26 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on merchandise consigned to you in your income whenExample. You rent out your property and the rental
you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit oragreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son.
commission, depending upon the method of accountingThe amount paid to your son is gross income to you.
you use.
Cash discounts.These are amounts the seller permitsConstruction allowances.If you enter into a lease afteryou to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment.August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con-For income tax purposes you can use either of the follow-struction allowance you receive (in cash or as a renting two methods to account for cash discounts.reduction) from your landlord if you receive it under both
the following conditions. 1) Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line
• Under a short-term lease of retail space. 36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for per-
sonal use in chapter 6).• For the purpose of constructing or improving quali-
fied long-term real property for use in your busi- 2) Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-
ness at that retail space. count.
You must use the chosen method every year for all yourAmount you can exclude.You can exclude the con-
purchase discounts.struction allowance to the extent it does not exceed the
amount you spent for construction or improvements. If you use the second method, the credit balance in the
account at the end of your tax year is business income.Short-term lease.A short-term lease is a lease (orUnder this method, you do not reduce the cost of goodsother agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space for
sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuing15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining
your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice pricewhether the lease is for 15 years or less.
of merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by the
• Take into account options to renew when figuringaverage or estimated discounts received on the merchan-
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do notdise.
take into account any option to renew at fair market
value determined at the time of renewal. Trade discounts.These are reductions from list or cata-
• Two or more successive leases that are part of thelog prices and usually are not written into the invoice or
same transaction (or a series of related transactions)charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on
for the same or substantially similar retail space areyour books of account. Instead, use only the net amount astreated as one lease. the cost of the merchandise purchased. See Trade dis-
counts in chapter 6.Retail space.Retail space is real property leased, oc-
cupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your
Payment placed in escrow.If the buyer of your propertybusiness of selling tangible personal property or services
places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you doto the general public.
not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually orQualified long-term real property.Qualified long-termconstructively receive it. However, upon completion of thereal property is nonresidential real property that is part of,terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you willor otherwise present at, your retail space and that revertshave taxable income, even if you do not accept the moneyto the landlord when the lease ends. until the next year.
Sales returns and allowances.Credits you allow cus-Accounting for Your Income tomers for returned merchandise and any other al-
lowances you make on sales are deductions from grossAccounting for your income for income tax purposes differs
sales in figuring net sales.at times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec-
tion discusses some of the more common differences that
may affect business transactions. Advance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-
Figure your business income on the basis of a tax year crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-
and according to your regular method of accounting (seevance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.
chapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producing
factor in your business, you usually have to use inventoriesInsurance proceeds.If you receive insurance or anotherto clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are nottype of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you mustallowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-subtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.tories, see chapter 2. You cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty or
theft loss.Income paid to a third party.All income you earn is
For information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income
paid to a third party. tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.
Page 26 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 27 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 35
Inventory at Beginning of Year6.
If you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost of
merchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that youHow To Figure
will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro-
ducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work in
Cost of Goods Sold
process, finished goods, and materials and supplies used
in manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2).
Opening inventory usually will be identical to the closingIntroduction
inventory of the year before. You must explain any differ-If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost ofence in a schedule attached to your return.goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-
ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-Donation of inventory.If you donate any inventory itemtory at the beginning and end of each tax year. to a charitable organization, the amount of your deductibleThis chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,contribution is the fair market value of the item minus thewholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold theness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.item at its fair market value on the date of the gift.This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-
You must remove from opening inventory the costs andness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,
expenses for the contributed property that you incurred inor painter. However, if you work in a personal service
earlier years. They are not a part of cost of goods sold forbusiness and also sell or charge for the materials and
figuring gross income for the year of the contribution. Costssupplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-
and expenses for the contributed property incurred in theplies to you.
year of the contribution are deductible as part of cost of
If you must account for an inventory in your busi-goods sold for that year if this treatment of costs and
ness, you must generally use an accrual methodexpenses is proper under your accounting method. If you
of accounting for your purchases and sales. SeeCAUTION
!
take such a deduction, those costs and expenses are not
chapter 2. treated as resulting in a basis for the contributed property.
Example 1.You are a calendar year taxpayer who uses
an accrual method of accounting. In 2002, you contributedFiguring Cost of Goods Sold –property from inventory to a church. It had a fair market
value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2001
Schedule C Lines 35 – 42 properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition of
the property, and in 2001, you properly deducted $50 ofFigure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35–42 ofadministrative and other expenses attributable to the prop-Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below and areerty as business expenses. The charitable contributionexplained in the discussion that follows. allowed for 2002 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is the
35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold the
year’s closing inventory, attach explanation...... contributed inventory at fair market value on the date of the
gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining gross36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal
income for 2002 must not include the $400. You removeu s e .................................
that amount from opening inventory for 2002.
37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to
yourself.............................. Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-
uted property in 2002 at a cost of $400, you would include38 Materials and supplies....................
the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goods
sold for 2002 and deduct the $50 of administrative and39 Other costs............................
other expenses attributable to the property for that year.
40 Add lines 35 through 39................... You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-
duction for the contributed property.41 Inventory at end of year....................
42 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40. Line 36
Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4.......
Purchases Less Cost of Items
Withdrawn for Personal Use
If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise you
bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, this
includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased for
manufacture into a finished product.
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 27

Page 28 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Trade discounts.The differences between the statedIndirect labor.Indirect labor costs are the wages you pay
prices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them are to employees who perform a general factory function that
called trade discounts. You must use the prices you pay does not have any immediate or direct connection with
(not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases. making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of
Do not show the discount amount separately as an item in the manufacturing process.
gross income. Other labor.Other labor costs not properly chargeable toAn automobile dealer must record the cost of a car inthe cost of goods sold may be deducted as selling orinventory reduced by a manufacturer’s rebate that repre-administrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of laborsents a trade discount. costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold are
the direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costsCash discounts.Cash discounts are amounts your sup-treated as overhead expenses properly charged to thepliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices formanufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39prompt payments. There are two methods of accountingOther Costs.for cash discounts. You may either credit them to a sepa-
rate discount account or deduct them from total purchases
Line 38for the year. Whichever method you use, you must be
consistent. If you want to change your method of figuring
Materials and Supplies
inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application for
Change in Accounting Method. For more information, seeMaterials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals,
Change in Accounting Method in chapter 2. used in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
If you credit cash discounts to a separate account, yousold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process
must include this credit balance in your business income atare treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
the end of the tax year. If you use this method, do notbusiness expense when you use them. Business ex-
reduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.penses are discussed in chapter 8.
Purchase returns and allowances.You must deduct allLine 39returns and allowances from your total purchases during
Other Coststhe year.
Examples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing orMerchandise withdrawn from sale.If you withdraw mer-mining process that you charge to your cost of goods soldchandise for your personal or family use, you must excludeare as follows.this cost from the total amount of merchandise you bought
for sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac-Containers.Containers and packages that are an integral
count with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per-part of the product manufactured are a part of your cost of
sonal use. You should charge the amount to your drawinggoods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-
account. tured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.
A drawing account is a separate account you should
Freight-in.Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawkeep to record the business income you withdraw to pay
materials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-for personal and family expenses. As stated above, you
dise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.also use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-
sonal or family use. This account is also known as aOverhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-“withdrawals account” or “personal account.” penses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-
ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. The
Line 37 overhead expenses you have as direct and necessary
expenses of the manufacturing operation are included in
Cost of Labor
your cost of goods sold.
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold
only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer-Line 40chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do not
Add Lines 35 through 39have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop-The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of theerly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both thegoods available for sale during the year.direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material
into a finished, saleable product.
Line 41
Direct labor.Direct labor costs are the wages you pay toInventory at End of Year
those employees who spend all their time working directly
on the product being manufactured. They also include a Subtract the value of your closing inventory (including, as
part of the wages you pay to employees who work directly appropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materials
on the product part time if you can determine that part of and supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) from
their wages. line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known as
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 29 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Minus: Cost of goods sold....................... 288,140closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory will
Gross profit................................ $96,920usually become the beginning inventory of your next taxThe cost of goods sold for this business is figured asyear. follows:
Inventory at beginning of year................... $37,845Line 42
Plus: Purchases.................... $285,900
Cost of Goods Sold Minus: Items withdrawn for personal use.... 2,650 283,250
Goods available for sale....................... $321,095
Minus: Inventory at end of year.................. 32,955When you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at the
Cost of goods sold.......................... $288,140end of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,
the remainder is your cost of goods sold during the tax
year.
Items To Check
Consider the following items before figuring your gross
profit.
7.
Gross receipts.At the end of each business day, make
sure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
receipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cashFiguring Gross Profit
registers to keep track of receipts. You should also use a
proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank account
for your business.
Introduction
After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-Sales tax collected.Check to make sure your records
ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),show the correct sales tax collected.
you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter-If you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on you
mine gross profit before you can deduct any businessas the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you must
expenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8.include the amount collected in gross receipts.
If you are filing Schedule C–EZ, your gross profit is yourIf you are required to collect state and local taxes im-
gross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained laterposed on the buyer and turn them over to state or local
under Additions to Gross Profit. governments, you generally do not include these amounts
in income. For more information, see the Schedule CBusinesses that sell products.If you are filing Scheduleinstructions.C, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts.
Figure net receipts on Schedule C by subtracting anyInventory at beginning of year.Compare this figure withreturns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts (line 1).last year’s ending inventory. The two amounts shouldReturns and allowances include cash or credit refunds youusually be the same.make to customers, rebates, and other allowances off the
actual sales price. Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-
Next, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from netsonal use — use them yourself, provide them to your
receipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from yourfamily, or give them as personal gifts, etc. — be sure to
business. remove them from the cost of goods sold. For details on
how to adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise with-Businesses that sell services.You do not have to figuredrawn from sale in chapter 6.the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not an
income-producing factor for your business. Your grossInventory at end of year.Check to make sure your pro-profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receiptscedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-minus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Mostdures should ensure all items have been included inprofessions and businesses that sell services rather thaninventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.products can figure gross profit directly from net receipts inUse inventory forms and adding machine tapes as thethis way. only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-
able at office supply stores. These forms have columns forIllustration.This illustration of the gross profit section ofrecording the description, quantity, unit price, and value ofthe income statement of a retail business shows how grosseach inventory item. Each page has space to record whoprofit is figured. made the physical count, who priced the items, who made
the extensions, and who proofread the calculations. TheseIncome Statement
forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-Year Ended December 31, 2002
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record to
Gross receipts............................... $400,000 support its validity.Minus: Returns and allowances................... 14,940
Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.Net receipts................................ $385,060
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 29

Page 30 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information about the general rules for deduct-
ing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535,Testing Gross
Business Expenses.
Profit Accuracy If you have an expense that is partly for business
and partly personal, separate the personal partIf you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can checkfrom the business part.
CAUTION
!
the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide gross
profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measures
the average spread between the merchandise cost of
Useful Itemsgoods sold and the selling price. You may want to see:Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.
Little or no difference between these two percentagesPublicationshows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
❏ 535 Business Expensesdifference between these percentages may show that you
did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, orSee chapter 12 for information about getting publica-other items of cost. You should determine the reason fortions and forms.the difference.
Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he willBad Debts
realize a gross profit of 331/3% on its sales. The net receipts
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown onIf someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isa bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts—business
$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000bad debts and nonbusiness bad debts.
($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year’sA business bad debt is generally one that comes from
results, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receiptsoperating your trade or business. You can deduct business
($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-bad debts as an expense on your business tax return.
centage of 331/3%.
Business bad debt.A business bad debt is a loss from
the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following.
Additions to Gross Profit 1) Created or acquired in your business.
If your business has income from a source other than its 2) Closely related to your business when it became
regular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of partly or totally worthless.
Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is grossA debt is closely related to your business if your primarybusiness income. If you use Schedule C–EZ, include themotive for incurring the debt is a business reason.income on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples includeBusiness bad debts are mainly the result of credit salesincome from an interest-bearing checking account, incometo customers. They can also be the result of loans tofrom scrap sales, and amounts recovered from bad debts.suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and
services customers have not paid for are shown in your
books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts or
notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad
8. debt.
You can take a bad debt deduction for these
accounts and notes receivable only if the amount
Business Expenses owed you was included in your gross incomeCAUTION
!
either for the year the deduction is claimed or for a prior
year.
Introduction
Accrual method.If you use an accrual method of ac-You can deduct the costs of running your business. Thesecounting, you normally report income as you earn it. Youcosts are known as business expenses. These are costscan take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of goodsble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-sold. come.To be deductible, a business expense must be both
ordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that Cash method. If you use the cash method of account-
is common and accepted in your field of business. A ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-
necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate ment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amounts
for your business. An expense does not have to be indis- owed to you that you have not received and cannot collect
pensable to be considered necessary. if you never included those amounts in income.
Page 30 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 31 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More information.For more information about business You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car
or truck between your home and your main orbad debts, see chapter 11 in Publication 535.
regular workplace. These costs are personalCAUTION
!
commuting expenses.Nonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-
business bad debts and deductible as short-term capital
Office in the home.Your workplace can be your homelosses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information
if you have an office in your home that qualifies as youron nonbusiness bad debts, see Publication 550, Invest-
principal place of business. See Business Use of Yourment Income and Expenses.
Home, later.
Example. You are a graphics designer. You operateCar and Truck Expenses your business out of your home. Your home qualifies as
your principal place of business. You occasionally have toIf you use your car or truck in your business, you may bedrive to your clients to deliver your completed work. Youable to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining yourcan deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be-
vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of localtween your home and your clients.
transportation and traveling away from home overnight on
business. Methods for Deducting
You may be entitled to a tax credit for an electric Car and Truck Expensesvehicle or a deduction from gross income for a
part of the cost of a clean-fuel vehicle you place For local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck,
TIP
in service during the year. The vehicle must meet certainyou generally can use one of the following methods to
requirements and you do not have to use it in your busi-figure your expenses.
ness to qualify for the credit or the deduction. For more
• Standard mileage rate.information, see chapter 12 in Publication 535.    
• Actual expenses.
Local transportation expenses.Local transportation ex-
penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all theStandard mileage rate.You may be able to use thefollowing. standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs of
operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for business• Getting from one workplace to another in the course
purposes. For 2002, the standard mileage rate is 361/2of your business or profession when you are travel-cents a mile for all business miles.ing within the city or general area that is your tax
home. Tax home is defined later. If you choose to use the standard mileage rate for
a year, you cannot deduct your actual expenses• Visiting clients or customers. for that year except for business-related parkingCAUTION
!
• Going to a business meeting away from your regularfees and tolls.
workplace.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.If you want to• Getting from your home to a temporary workplaceuse the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own,when you have one or more regular places of work.you must choose to use it in the first year the car isThese temporary workplaces can be either within theavailable for use in your business. In later years, you canarea of your tax home or outside that area. choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actual
expenses.Local business transportation does not include expenses
you have while traveling away from home overnight. ThoseIf you want to use the standard mileage rate for a car
expenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis-you lease, you must choose to use it for the entire lease
cussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment.period (including renewals).
However, if you use your car while traveling away from
Standard mileage rate not allowed.You cannot usehome overnight, use the rules in this section to figure yourthe standard mileage rate if you:car expense deduction. 
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.2) Operate two or more cars at the same time,It includes the entire city or general area in which your
business or work is located. 3) Claimed a depreciation deduction using any method
other than straight line, for example, ACRS or
Example. You operate a printing business out of rentedMACRS,
office space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to4) Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,your customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip
transportation between your customers and your print5) Claimed the special depreciation allowance on the
shop. car,
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6) Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, or acquire it. You must spread the cost over more than one
tax year and deduct part of it each year on Schedule C or7) Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-C–EZ. This method of deducting the cost of businessbursement. property is called depreciation.
The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa-Parking fees and tolls.In addition to using the stan-tion about depreciation in Publication 946, How To Depre-dard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-relatedciate Property.parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park your
car at your place of work are nondeductible commutingWhat property can be depreciated?You can depreciate
expenses.) property if it meets all the following requirements.
• It must be property you own.Actual expenses.If you do not choose to use the stan-
dard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actual• It must be used in business or held to produce in-car or truck expenses. come. You never can depreciate inventory (ex-
plained in chapter 2) because it is not held for use inIf you qualify to use both methods, figure your
your business.deduction both ways to see which gives you a
larger deduction.
TIP
• It must have a useful life that extends substantially
beyond the year it is placed in service.Actual car expenses include the costs of the following
items.
• It must have a determinable useful life, which means
that it must be something that wears out, decays,
Depreciation Lease payments Registration
gets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value
Garage rent Licenses Repairs from natural causes. You never can depreciate the
cost of land because land does not wear out, be-
Gas Oil Tires
come obsolete, or get used up.Insurance Parking fees Tolls
• It must not be excepted property. This includes
If you use your vehicle for both business and personalproperty placed in service and disposed of in the
purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi-same year.
ness and personal use. You can divide your expenses
based on the miles driven for each purpose.
Repairs. You cannot depreciate repairs and replace-
ments that do not increase the value of your property,Example. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop.
make it more useful, or lengthen its useful life. You canYou drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000
deduct these amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 ofmiles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000
Schedule C–EZ.miles were for personal use. You can claim only 80%
(16,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of operating your van as aDepreciation method.The method for depreciating mostbusiness expense. business and investment property placed in service after
1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost RecoveryMore information.For more information about the rulesSystem (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-for claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463,cation 946.Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses.
Section 179 deduction.You can choose to deduct a
Reimbursing Your Employees limited amount of the cost of certain depreciable property
in the year you place the property in service. This deduc-for Expenses tion is known as the “section 179 deduction.” For more
information, see Publication 946. It explains what propertyYou generally can deduct the amount you reimburse your
qualifies for the deduction, what limits apply to the deduc-employees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse-
tion, and when and how to recapture the deduction.ment you deduct and the manner in which you deduct it
depend in part on whether you reimburse the expensesSpecial depreciation allowance.You can take a specialunder an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. Fordepreciation allowance of 30% of the cost of qualifieddetails, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. That chapterproperty for the year the property is placed in service. Forexplains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tellsmore information, see Publication 946.you whether to report the reimbursement on your
employee’s Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement. Listed property.Listed property is any of the following.
• Most passenger automobiles.
• Most other property used for transportation.Depreciation
• Any property of a type generally used for entertain-If property you acquire to use in your business is expectedment, recreation, or amusement.to last more than one year, you generally cannot deduct
the entire cost as a business expense in the year you• Certain computer and related peripheral equipment.
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Any cellular telephone (or similar telecommunica-• Reimbursements for employee business expenses.
tions equipment). • Sick pay.
 You must follow special rules and recordkeeping re-• Vacation pay.
quirements when depreciating listed property. For more
Fringe benefits.A fringe benefit is a form of pay pro-information about listed property, see Publication 946.
vided to any person for the performance of services by that
Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-person. The following are examples of fringe benefits.
tion, if you are claiming any of the following. • Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs.
• Depreciation on property placed in service during the• Meals and lodging.current tax year.
• The use of a car.• A section 179 deduction.
• Flights on airplanes.• Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of
• Discounts on property or services.when it was placed in service).
• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.
If you have to use Form 4562, you must file • Tickets to entertainment or sporting events.Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C–EZ.
CAUTION
!
Employee benefit programs include the following.
• Accident and health plans.
• Adoption assistance.
Employees’ Pay • Cafeteria plans.
You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give• Dependent care assistance.
your employees for the services they perform for your
• Educational assistance.business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services.
To be deductible, your employees’ pay must be an • Group-term life insurance coverage.
ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or • Welfare benefit funds.incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both
the following tests. You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you
provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost• The pay must be reasonable.
falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car or• The pay must be for services performed. other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as a
rent or lease expense. If you own the property, includeChapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines these
your deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179requirements.
deduction or a depreciation deduction.You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal
You may be able to exclude all or part of the fringewithdrawals you make from your business. You are not an
benefits you provide from your employees’employee of the business.
wages. For more information about fringe bene-
TIP
If you had employees during the year, you mustfits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15–B,use Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.C–EZ.CAUTION
!
Kinds of pay.Some of the ways you may provide pay to
Insuranceyour employees are listed below. For an explanation of
each of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535.You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-
• Awards. ing kinds of insurance related to your business. 
• Bonuses. 1) Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
• Education expenses. 2) Credit insurance on losses from unpaid debts.
• Fringe benefits (discussed later). 3) Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-
ployees, including long-term care insurance.• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee
to repay if they are for personal services actually4) Liability insurance.
performed.
• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for
services.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5) Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia- insurance policy, endowment contract, or annuity
bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
damage to patients or clients. ciary. The disallowance applies without regard to
whom the policy covers.6) Workers’ compensation insurance set by state law
that covers any claims for bodily injuries or job-re-4) Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policylated diseases suffered by employees in your busi-on your life or on the life of another person with aness, regardless of fault. financial interest in your business to get or protect a
7) Contributions to a state unemployment insurance business loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as a
fund. Contributions are deductible as taxes if they business expense. Nor can you deduct the premi-
are considered taxes under state law. ums as interest on business loans or as an expense
of financing loans.8) Overhead insurance that pays you for business over-
head expenses you have during long periods of disa-
bility caused by your injury or sickness. Self-employed insurance deduction.You may be able
to deduct up to 70% of the amount you paid during 2002 for9) Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehiclesmedical and dental insurance and qualified long-term careused in your business for liability, damages, andinsurance for you and your family.other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per-
sonal use, you can deduct only the part of your How to figure the deduction.Generally, you can use
insurance premiums that applies to the business usethe worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure your
of the vehicle. If you use the standard mileage rate todeduction. However, if any of the following apply, you must
figure your car expenses, you cannot deduct any caruse the worksheet in chapter 7 of Publication 535.
insurance premiums.
• You have more than one source of income subject to
10) Life insurance covering your employees if you areself-employment tax.
not directly or indirectly the beneficiary under the• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555–EZ (relating tocontract. foreign earned income).
11) Business interruption insurance that pays you for lost• You are using amounts paid for long-term care insur-profits if your business is shut down due to a fire orance to figure the deduction.other cause.
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,Nondeductible premiums.You cannot deduct premiumseven if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to anyon the following kinds of insurance. expense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create an
asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond the1) Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct
end of the current tax year.amounts credited to a reserve you set up for self-in-
surance. This applies even if you cannot get busi-
Example. In 2002, you signed a 3-year insurance con-ness insurance coverage for certain business risks.
tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2002, 2003,However, your actual losses may be deductible. See
and 2004 when you signed the contract, you can onlyPublication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.
deduct the premium for 2002 on your 2002 tax return. You
2) Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for acan deduct in 2003 and 2004 the premium allocable to
policy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick-those years.
ness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ-
ous list. More information.For more information about deducting
insurance, see chapter 7 in Publication 535.3) Certain life insurance and annuities.
a) For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insuranceInterestpolicy covering yourself, an employee, or any per-
son with a financial interest in your business ifYou can generally deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ allyou are directly or indirectly a beneficiary of theinterest you pay or accrue during the tax year on debtspolicy. You are included among possible benefi-related to your business. Interest relates to your business ifciaries of the policy if the policy owner is obligatedyou use the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. Itto repay a loan from you using the proceeds ofdoes not matter what type of property secures the loan.the policy. A person has a financial interest inYou can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of theyour business if the person is an owner or partfollowing requirements.owner of the business or has lent money to the
business.
• You are legally liable for that debt.
b) For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen-• Both you and the lender intend that the debt be
erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life repaid.
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-
tionship. Pension Plans
You cannot deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ the interestYou can set up and maintain the following small business
retirement plans for yourself and your employees.you paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business and
part personal, you must divide the interest between the• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans.
personal part and the business part.
• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-
ees) plans.Example. In 2002, you paid $600 interest on a car loan.
During 2002, you used the car 60% for business and 40%• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans).
for personal purposes. You are claiming actual expenses
on the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% × $600) for SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. You2002 on Schedule C or C–EZ. The remaining interest of
can deduct contributions you make to the plan for your$240 is a nondeductible personal expense.
employees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a sole
proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to theMore information.For more information about deductingplan for yourself on line 31 of Form 1040. You can alsointerest, see chapter 5 in Publication 535. That chapterdeduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the plan do notexplains the following items. cover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally tax
free until you or your employees receive distributions from• Interest you can deduct. the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax credit of 50%
• Interest you cannot deduct. of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs if you begin a
new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan• How to allocate interest between personal and busi-(including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-ness use. ployee pension.
• When to deduct interest. Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-
ute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. These• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (Thisamounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax freeis a loan on which no interest is charged or on whichuntil your employees receive distributions from the plan.interest is charged at a rate below the applicableFor more information on retirement plans for small busi-federal rate.) ness, see Publication 560.
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored ways
to save for retirement.
TIP
Legal and Professional Fees
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by
accountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses
Rent Expensedirectly related to operating your business are deductible
on Schedule C or C–EZ. However, you usually cannotRent is any amount you pay for the use of property you dodeduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. Addnot own. In general, you can deduct rent on Schedule C orthem to the basis of the property. C–EZ only if the rent is for property you use in your
If the fees include payments for work of a personalbusiness. If you have or will receive equity in or title to the
nature (such as making a will), you can take a businessproperty, you cannot deduct the rent.
deduction only for the part of the fee related to your
Unreasonable rent.You cannot take a rental deductionbusiness. The personal part of legal fees for producing or
for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-collecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or forbleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Renttax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) ifpaid to a related person is reasonable if it is the sameyou itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi-amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the samecation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-
ured as a percentage of gross receipts.Tax preparation fees.You can deduct on Schedule C
Related persons include members of your immediateor C–EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax return
family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole orrelating to your business as a sole proprietor. You can
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. Fordeduct the remaining cost on Schedule A (Form 1040) if
a list of the other related persons, see Publication 538,you itemize your deductions.
Accounting Periods and Methods.You can also deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ the
amount you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficien-Rent on your home.If you rent your home and use part of
cies for your business as a sole proprietor or statutoryit as your place of business, you may be able to deduct the
employee. rent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirements
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8–1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details about
these rules, see Publication 463.)
General Rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client,
customer, or employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the
associated test.
Definitions
• Entertainmentincludes any activity generally considered to provide
entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a
customer or client.
• An ordinaryexpense is one that is common and accepted in your field of
business, trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not
necessarily required, for your business.
Tests To Be Met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or 
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
1) You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment
period, and
2) You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other
specific business benefit.
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion.
Other Rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you
are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the
circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment
expenses.
for business use of your home. For more information, seeEmployment taxes. You can deduct the social security,
Business Use of Your Home, later. Medicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes you
paid out of your own funds as an employer. Employment
Rent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid in your busi-taxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can also
ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you paydeduct payments you made as an employer to a state
rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount thatunemployment compensation fund or to a state disability
applies to your use of the rented property during the taxbenefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes.
year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over
the period to which it applies. Self-employment tax.You can deduct one-half of your
self-employment tax on line 29 of Form 1040. Self-employ-
More information.For more information about rent, seement tax is explained in chapter 1.
chapter 4 in Publication 535.
Personal property tax.You can deduct on Schedule C or
C–EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government on
personal property used in your business.Taxes You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use
property within a state or local area.You can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ various federal,
state, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to your
Example. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000business.
business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had to
Income taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ a pay $25 for their state license tags and $20 for their city
state tax on gross income (as distinguished from net registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city personal
income) directly attributable to your business. You can property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They are
deduct other state and local income taxes on Schedule A claiming their actual car expenses. Because they used the
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deduct car 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, or
federal income tax. $196, as a business expense.
Page 36 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Real estate taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or
1) Your duties require you to be away from the generalC–EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business
area of your tax home (defined later) substantiallyproperty. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
longer than an ordinary day’s work.or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general public
welfare. The taxes must be based on the assessed value2) You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demandsof the real estate and must be charged uniformly against allof your work while away from home.property under the jurisdiction of the taxing authority.
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-For more information about real estate taxes, see chap-
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.ter 6 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rules
It includes the entire city or general area in which yourfor deducting the following items.
business is located. • Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks,The following is a brief summary of the expenses youstreets, and water and sewerage systems. can deduct.
• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell propertyTransportation.You can deduct the cost of travel byduring the year. airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method ofbusiness destination.
accounting. Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine.You can deduct
fares for these and other types of transportation between
Sales tax.Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or onthe airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotel
the purchase or use of property as part of the cost of theand your work location away from home.
service or property. If the service or the cost or use of the
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost ofproperty is a deductible business expense, you can deduct
sending baggage and sample or display material betweenthe tax as part of that service or cost. If the property is
your regular and temporary work locations.merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of the
cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, addCar or truck.You can deduct the costs of operating andthe sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For informationmaintaining your vehicle when traveling away from homeon the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis of on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan-Assets. dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and Truck
Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. IfDo not deduct state and local sales taxes im-
you rent a car while away from home on business, you canposed on the buyer that you must collect and pay
over to the state or local government. Do notdeduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.CAUTION
!
include these taxes in gross receipts or sales. Meals and lodging.You can deduct the cost of meals
and lodging if your business trip is overnight or long
Excise taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ allenough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
excise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses ofperform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct only
carrying on your business. Excise taxes are discussed50% of your meal expenses.briefly in chapter 1.
Cleaning.You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning and
Fuel taxes.Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and otherlaundry while on your business trip.
motor fuels you use in your business are usually includedTelephone. You can deduct the cost of business callsas part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes aswhile on your business trip, including business communi-a separate item. cation by fax machine or other communication devices.You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federal
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. ForTips.You can deduct the tips you pay for any expense
more information, see Publication 378, Fuel Tax Credits in this list.
and Refunds. More information.For more information about travel
expenses, see Publication 463, Travel, Entertainment,
Gift, and Car Expenses.Travel, Meals,
Entertainment expenses.You may be able to deductand Entertainment business-related entertainment expenses for entertaining
a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you canThis section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-deduct only 50% of these expenses.tainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C or
The following are examples of entertainment expenses.C–EZ.
• Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs, the-Travel expenses.These are the ordinary and necessary aters, or sporting events.expenses of traveling away from home for your business.
• Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to businessYou are traveling away from home if both the following
customers or their families.conditions are met.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listedExceptions to exclusive use.You do not have to meet
the exclusive use test if you use part of your home in eitherin Table 8–1. For details about these rules, see Publica-
of the following ways.tion 463.
1) For the storage of inventory or product samples.Reimbursing your employees for expenses.You gen-
erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-2) As a day-care facility.
ees for travel and entertainment expenses. The For an explanation of these exceptions, see Publicationreimbursement you deduct and the manner in which you587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use bydeduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse theDay-Care Providers).expenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable
plan. For details, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. ThatRegular use.To qualify under the regular use test, you
chapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plansmust use a specific area of your home for business on a
and tells you whether to report the reimbursement on yourcontinuing basis. You do not meet the test if your business
employee’s Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement. use of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if you
do not use that area for any other purpose.
Principal place of business.You can have more than
Business Use one business location, including your home, for a single
trade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses for
of Your Home the business use of your home under the principal place of
business test, your home must be your principal place of
To deduct expenses related to the part of your home usedbusiness for that business. To determine your principal
for business, you must meet specific requirements. Evenplace of business, you must consider all the facts and
then, your deduction may be limited. circumstances.
Your home office will qualify as your principal place ofTo qualify to claim expenses for business use of your
business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet thehome, you must meet the following tests.
following requirements.
1) Your use of the business part of your home must be:
• You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-
tive or management activities of your business.a) Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive
use, later), • You have no other fixed location where you conduct
substantial administrative or management activitiesb) Regular, of your business.
c) For your business, AND
Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and regu-
2) The business part of your home must be one of the larly for your business, but your home office does not
following: qualify as your principal place of business based on the
previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-a) Your principal place of business (defined later),ness based on the following factors.
b) A place where you meet or deal with patients,• The relative importance of the activities performed atclients, or customers in the normal course of youreach location.
business, or
• If the relative importance factor does not determine
c) A separate structure (not attached to your home)your principal place of business, you can also con-
you use in connection with your business. sider the time spent at each location.
If, after considering your business locations, your home
cannot be identified as your principal place of business,Exclusive use.To qualify under the exclusive use test,
you cannot deduct home office expenses. However, foryou must use a specific area of your home only for your
other ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, seetrade or business. The area used for business can be a
Publication 587.room or other separately identifiable space. The space
does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition.Deduction limit.If your gross income from the business
You do not meet the requirements of the exclusive useuse of your home equals or exceeds your total business
test if you use the area in question both for business andexpenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all your
for personal purposes. business expenses related to the use of your home. If your
gross income from the business use is less than your total
Example. You are an attorney and use a den in yourbusiness expenses, your deduction for certain expenses
home to write legal briefs and prepare clients’ tax returns.for the business use of your home is limited.
Your family also uses the den for recreation. The den is notYour deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,
used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot claim a such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-
business deduction for its use. ation taken last), allocable to the business, is limited to the
Page 38 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gross income from the business use of your home minus
the sum of the following. Expenses You Cannot Deduct
1) The business part of expenses you could deductYou usually cannot deduct the following as business ex-even if you did not use your home for business (suchpenses. For more information, see Publication 535.as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualty
and theft losses that are allowable as itemized de-• Bribes and kickbacks.ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)).
• Demolition expenses or losses.2) The business expenses that relate to the business
activity in the home (for example, business phone,• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport-
supplies, and depreciation on equipment), but not to ing, airline, and hotel clubs.
the use of the home itself.
• Lobbying expenses.
Do not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half of• Penalties and fines you pay to a governmentalyour self-employment tax. agency or instrumentality because you broke theUse Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Your law.Home, to figure your deduction. 
• Political contributions.More information.For more information on deducting
• Repairs that add to the value of your property orexpenses for the business use of your home, see Publica-
significantly increase its life.tion 587.
Other Expenses
You Can Deduct 9.
You may also be able to deduct the following expenses.
See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deduct
them. Figuring Net Profit
• Advertising.
or Loss• Clean-fuel vehicles and refueling property.
• Donations to business organizations.
Introduction• Education expenses.
After figuring your business income and expenses, you are• Environmental cleanup costs.
ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.• Impairment-related expenses. You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-
ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,• Interview expense allowances.
the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-• Licenses and regulatory fees. come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are more
than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually• Moving machinery.
can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.• Outplacement services. But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter
briefly explains two of those situations. Other situations• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance or
that may limit your loss are explained in the instructions fornonperformance of a contract.
line G and line 32 of Schedule C.• Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficient
If you have more than one business, you mustoperating condition.
figure your net profit or loss for each business on• Repayments of income. a separate Schedule C.CAUTION
!
• Subscriptions to trade or professional publications.
• Supplies and materials.
• Utilities. Net Operating Losses (NOLs)
If your deductions for the year are more than your income
for the year (line 39 of your Form 1040 is a negative
number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You
can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
another year or years.
Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or LossPage 39

Page 40 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOLSchedule Cinclude, but are not limited to, losses incurred from the
following. First, Susan fills in the information required at the top of
Schedule C. She starts by entering her name and social• Your trade or business. security number. Then she completes lines A through H.
• Your work as an employee (unreimbursed employeeLine A.She enters her principal business.business expenses).
Line B.She enters 448140, which is the 6-digit business• A casualty or theft.
code for a family clothing shop. She found the code on• Moving expenses. page C–8 of the instructions for Schedule C. Susan lo-
cates the major business category that describes her busi-• Rental property.
ness. She reads down the items under “Retail Trade” to
find 448140—“Family clothing stores.”A loss from operating a business is the most common
reason for an NOL. Line C.She enters the name of her business—“FamilyFor details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper- Fashions.”ating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It
explains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claimLine D. She enters her employer identification number
an NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.(EIN). She has to have an EIN because she has employ-
ees. For information about EINs, see Identification Num-
bers in chapter 1.
Not-for-Profit Activities Line E.She enters her business address.
Line F.She checks box 2 for accrual method of account-If you do not carry on your business to make a profit, there
ing.is a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use a
loss from the activity to offset other income. Activities youLine G.Susan checks “Yes” because she materially par-do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, cometicipated in her business during the year. The materialunder this limit. participation rules are explained in the instructions forFor details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1Schedule C.in Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex-
plains how to determine whether your activity is carried onLine H.She leaves the box blank because she did not
to make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss youstart or acquire her business during the year.
can deduct.
Part I—Income and
Part III—Cost of Goods Sold
Susan enters items of income in Part I.
10.
Line 1.Susan enters her total sales of $410,000 for the
year.
Sample Returns Line 2.She enters the refunds she gave on merchandise
her customers returned, as well as other adjustments she
This chapter shows how two sole proprietors fill out theirmade to customers’ purchases. They total $1,442.
income tax returns. Susan J. Brown reports her net profit
Line 4.Susan uses Part III on page 2 of Schedule C tofrom her business on Schedule C. She cannot use Sched-
figure her cost of goods sold.ule C–EZ. Stanley Price reports his net profit from his
business on Schedule C–EZ. Part III, line 35.Her inventory at the beginning of the
year, $42,843, is the same as her inventory at the end of
last year. This figure matches the amount on Part III, line
41, of her last year’s Schedule C.
Preparing the Return
Part III, line 36.The total cost of goods she bought tofor Susan J. Brown sell to customers, minus the cost of the goods she returned
to her suppliers, was $241,026. From this stock, she with-Susan J. Brown owns and operates Family Fashions, adrew clothing and accessories for her own use that costready-to-wear clothing shop. She uses an accrual method$774. She subtracts the cost of these items from her totalof accounting and files her return on a calendar year basis.purchases to figure net purchases of $240,252.Five employees worked in her shop during the year.
She filed all the necessary employment tax forms andPart III, line 40.She adds her net purchases to her
made the required tax deposits. See Publication 15, Circu- beginning inventory. This sum is the total goods Susan had
lar E, Employer’s Tax Guide. available for sale during the year.
Page 40 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 41 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part III, line 41.Susan’s inventory at the end of the yearLine 26.Susan paid her employees a total of $59,050 for
was $43,746. the year. She does not include in wages any amounts she
paid to herself or withdrew from the business for her ownPart III, line 42.Susan subtracts her inventory at theuse. See Employees’ Pay in chapter 8.end of the year (line 41) from the goods that were available
for sale (line 40) to get the cost of goods sold during theLine 27.Susan enters the total of her other business
year. For more information on inventories, see chapter 2.expenses on this line. These expenses are not included on
For more information on cost of goods sold, see chapter 6.lines 8–26. She lists the type and amount of the expenses
separately in Part V of page 2, and carries the total enteredLine 5.Susan’s gross profit, $169,209, is the differenceon line 48 to line 27. See chapter 8 for expenses you can orbetween her net sales (line 3) and the cost of goods soldcannot deduct.(line 4).
Line 28.Susan adds all her deductions listed in Part II andLine 7.Because Susan did not have any income to reportenters the total on this line.on line 6, the gross income is the same as the gross profit
(line 5). Line 29.She subtracts her total deductions (line 28) from
her gross income (line 7). Susan has a tentative profit of
$63,424.
Part II—Expenses
Line 30.Susan did not use any part of her home forSusan enters her expense items in Part II. business, so she does not make an entry here. For infor-
Line 8.Susan paid $3,500 for ads. mation about business use of the home, see Business Use
of Your Home in chapter 8.Line 9.During the year, Susan determined that she would
not be able to collect $479 from bad checks and deductedLine 31.Susan has a net profit of $63,424 ( line 29 minus
this amount as bad debts. See Bad Debts in chapter 8. line 30). She enters her net profit here, on line 12 of Form
1040, and on line 2, Section A of Schedule SE (FormLine 10.She used her van 75% for business during the1040).year. She spent a total of $3,000 for gas and oil. She can
deduct 75% of $3,000 or $2,250 for gas and oil. Other vanLine 32.Susan does not have a loss, so she skips this
expenses include $713 (75% of $950) for insurance, $812line. If she had a loss and she was not “at risk” for all her
(75% of $1,083) for repairs and upkeep, and $75 (75% ofinvestment in the business, the amount of loss she could
$100) for tags. She enters the total, $3,850, on line 10. Seeenter on line 12 of Form 1040 might be limited. For an
Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8. explanation of an investment “at risk,” see the Schedule C
instructions for line 32.Line 13.Susan enters the $4,277 depreciation from Form
4562, discussed later.
Form 4562—DepreciationLine 15.Susan’s $238 deduction is for insurance on herand Amortizationbusiness property (van insurance is included in line 10).
The deduction is only for premiums that give her coverageSusan figures her depreciation for the year on Form 4562.for the year. See Insurance in chapter 8.
Lines 1 through 13.On May 19, Susan bought a $200Line 16b.Susan had borrowed money to use in her busi-adding machine and placed it in service on that same day.ness. The interest on these loans was $2,633 for the year.She chose to deduct its cost as a section 179 deduction.See Interest in chapter 8. See Depreciation in chapter 8.
Line 18.The $216 Susan paid for postage during the yearLine 16.Susan enters $1,117 for depreciation on assetsis her only office expense. she purchased before 1987. For items bought after 1980
Line 20b.Her rent for the store was $1,000 a month, orand before 1987, she uses the regular Accelerated Cost
$12,000 for the year. See Rent Expense in chapter 8. Recovery System (ACRS) percentages. For items bought
before 1981, she uses the straight-line method. See Publi-Line 21.She had her store counters refinished and othercation 534, Depreciating Property Placed in Servicepainting done at a total cost of $964. Before 1987, for information about ACRS.
Line 22.She spent $1,203 on supplies. Line 19b.On May 19, Susan also bought and placed in
service some used clothing racks. They cost $800. SheLine 23.Susan renewed her business license and paid
uses the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Systemproperty tax on her store fixtures. She also paid the
(MACRS) to figure depreciation. The racks are 5-yearemployer’s share of social security and Medicare taxes for
property. Susan figures depreciation using the half-yearher employees and paid state and federal unemployment
convention and the 200% declining balance method. Seetaxes. She enters the total of all these taxes, $5,727, on
Publication 946 for information about MACRS.this line. See Taxes in chapter 8.
Line 25.Susan’s total expense for heat, light, and tele-Line 21.Susan enters the depreciation on listed property
phone for the year is $3,570. from line 26 (explained next).
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 41

Page 42 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Lines 26 and 28.On March 20, Susan bought a used vanLine 9.Susan enters $390 of dividends she received from
that she placed in service in her business. The van weighs CBA Corporation.
over 6,000 pounds; therefore, it is not a passenger auto-Line 12.She enters her business net profit of $63,424mobile for the special deduction limits. The van is 5-yearfrom line 31 of Schedule C.property. She figures depreciation using the 200% declin-
ing balance method and applying the half-year conventionLine 22.Susan adds the amounts on lines 7 through 21
under MACRS. The van cost $18,667. Her basis for depre-and enters the total, $64,212.
ciation is 75% of $18,667, or $14,000, because only 75%Line 29.Susan enters one-half of her self-employmentof the total miles she drove during the year were businesstax. She got this amount from line 6 in Section A ofmiles. Susan does not choose to deduct any part of theSchedule SE.cost of the van as a section 179 deduction.
Line 30.Susan enters $1,680 as her deduction for herLines 30 through 36.Because Susan is a sole proprietor,health insurance. This is 70% of her $2,400 in healthshe must complete lines 30 through 36. insurance premiums for the year.
Line 22.Susan has a total depreciation deduction ofLine 31.Susan enters her simplified employee pension
$4,277. She enters her deduction here and on line 13 of(SEP) deduction of $2,264. She figures her deduction by
Schedule C. using Publication 560.
Line 34.Susan adds the amounts on lines 23 through 33a
Schedule SE—Self-Employment Tax and enters the total, $8,425.
After Susan prepares Schedule C, she fills out ScheduleLine 35.Susan subtracts the amount on line 34 from the
SE. She starts by entering her name and social securityamount on line 22 to arrive at her adjusted gross income,
number at the top of the schedule. Then she reads the$55,787. She also enters this amount on line 36.
chart on page 1 of the schedule, which tells her she canLine 38.She enters $4,700. This is the standard deduc-use Section A—Short Schedule SE to figure her self-em-tion for a single filer.ployment tax. She fills out the following lines in Section A.
Line 39.Susan subtracts line 38 from line 36 to getLines 2 and 3.She enters $63,424. This is her net profit$51,087.from line 31 of Schedule C.
Line 40.She multiplies $3,000 by the number of exemp-
Line 4.She multiplies $63,424 by .9235 to get her nettions claimed on line 6d to get her total exemptions,
earnings from self-employment ($58,572). This is her net$3,000.
profit subject to self-employment tax.
Line 41.Susan subtracts line 40 from line 39 to get her
Line 5. Because the amount on line 4 is less than taxable income, $48,087.
$84,900, Susan multiplies the amount on line 4 ($58,572)Line 42.Susan uses the Tax Table in the Form 1040by .153 to get her self-employment tax of $8,962. Sheinstructions to figure her income tax. In the Tax Table sheenters that amount here and on line 56 of Form 1040.looks for the income bracket that includes $48,087. She
finds the bracket for incomes of at least $48,050 but lessLine 6.She multiplies the amount on line 5 by .5 to get her
than $48,100 and sees that the tax for a person filing asdeduction for one-half of self-employment tax of $4,481.
single is $9,326. She enters this amount here.She enters that amount here and on line 29 of Form 1040.
Lines 43 and 44.Because she does not owe alternative
Form 1040 minimum tax, she enters -0- on line 43 and $9,326 on line
44.
Susan fills out Form 1040 as follows:
Lines 54 and 55.Because Susan does not have any of
Name, address, and social security number.Susan the credits listed on lines 45 through 55, she enters -0- on
enters her name, home address, and social security num-line 54 and $9,326 on line 55.
ber. Line 56.She enters $8,962 from line 5 in Section A of
Schedule SE.Presidential election campaign fund.Susan chooses to
have $3 go to this fund. She checks the box under “Yes.”Line 61.Susan adds the amounts on lines 55 through 60
and enters the total, $18,288.Line 1.Susan checks the box on this line because she is
filing as single. Line 63.She enters $17,000 of estimated tax payments
she made for the year.Lines 6a and 6d.Susan claims an exemption for herself.
She checks the box next to “Yourself” and enters “1” in theLine 69.She enters $17,000.
far right-hand entry space. She also enters “1” in the boxLine 73.Susan subtracts line 69 from line 61 to get theon line 6d. amount of tax she owes, $1,288. She writes a check
Line 8a.Susan enters $398 of taxable interest credited to payable to the United States Treasury for $1,288. On the
her personal savings account for the year. check she writes her social security number, her daytime
Page 42 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 43 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
telephone number, and “2002 Form 1040.” Her name and daytime telephone number. She assembles her original
address are printed on the check. She sends her payment Form 1040, Schedules C and SE, and Form 4562 in that
with Form 1040–V, Payment Voucher (not illustrated). order. (See “Attachment Sequence Number” in the upper
She fills out that form and sends it to the IRS with her check right corner of each schedule or form.) Then she makes a
and tax return. copy of the return for her records. Finally, she mails it to the
IRS.Signing and assembling the return.She signs her
name and enters the date signed, her occupation, and a
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 43

Page 44 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SUSAN J. BROWN
1313 EMPIRE BLVD
ANYTOWN, NY 18725
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
1
1
398 00
390
63,424
64,212
4,481
1,680
2,264
8,425
55,787
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
Department of the Treasury—Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1–Dec. 31, 2002, or other tax year beginning , 2002, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 21.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 21. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 21.
Presidential
Election Campaign
1 Single
Filing Status Married filing jointly (even if only one had income)2
Check only
one box.
3
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child (year
spouse died /H17075). (See page 21.)
6a Yourself. If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent on his or her tax
return, do not check box 6aExemptions
Spouseb
(4) if qualifying
child for child tax
credit (see page 22)
Dependents:c (2) Dependent’s
social security number
(3) Dependent’s
relationship to
you(1) First name Last name
If more than five
dependents,
see page 22.
d Total number of exemptions claimed
7Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Attach Form(s) W-27
8a8a Taxable interest. Attach Schedule B if requiredIncome
8bb Tax-exempt interest. Do not include on line 8aAttach 
Forms W-2 and
W-2G here.
Also attach
Form(s) 1099-R
if tax was
withheld.
99 Ordinary dividends. Attach Schedule B if required
1010 Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes (see page 24)
1111 Alimony received
1212 Business income or (loss). Attach Schedule C or C-EZ
Enclose, but do
not attach, any
payment. Also,
please use
Form 1040-V.
13
13 Capital gain or (loss). Attach Schedule D if required. If not required, check here /H17075
1414 Other gains or (losses). Attach Form 4797
15a 15bIRA distributions b Taxable amount (see page 25)15a
16b16aPensions and annuities b Taxable amount (see page 25)16a
1717 Rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Attach Schedule E
1818 Farm income or (loss). Attach Schedule F
1919 Unemployment compensation
20b20a b Taxable amount (see page 27)20a Social security benefits
2121
22 Add the amounts in the far right column for lines 7 through 21. This is your total income /H1707522
24IRA deduction (see page 29)
23
Archer MSA deduction. Attach Form 8853
26
25
One-half of self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
27
Self-employed health insurance deduction (see page 33)
26
28
27
Self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans
29
28
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings
30
29
Alimony paid  b Recipient’s SSN /H17075
34Add lines 23 through 33a
30
Subtract line 34 from line 22. This is your adjusted gross income /H17075
31
Adjusted
Gross
Income
35
If you did not
get a W-2,
see page 23. Form
Married filing separately. Enter spouse’s SSN above
and full name here. /H17075
Cat. No. 11320B
/H17075
/H20854
Label
Form 1040 (2002)
IRS Use Only—Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 21.) If
the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent, enter
this child’s name here. 
/H17075
Other income. List type and amount (see page 29)
Moving expenses. Attach Form 3903
24
25
For Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 76.
No. of boxes
checked on
6a and 6b
No. of children
on 6c who:
Dependents on 6c
not entered above
Add numbers
on lines
above
/H17075
● lived with you
● did not live with
you due to divorce
or separation
(see page 22)
32 32
Student loan interest deduction (see page 31)
31
33a
/H17073/H17073Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
(See page 21.)
(99)
Tuition and fees deduction (see page 32)
34
33a
2002
4
5
35
23Educator expenses (see page 29)
Page 44 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 45 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
55,787 00
4,700
51,087
3,000
48,087
9,326
- 0 -
9,326
8,962
18,288
17,000
17,000
1,288
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
3/27/03 Retail shop owner
Susan J. Brown
- 0 -
9,326 00
555 735-0001
Itemized deductions (from Schedule A) or your standard deduction (see left margin)
Add lines 62 through 68. These are your total payments /H17075
Page 2Form 1040 (2002)
Amount from line 35 (adjusted gross income)36 36
Check if:37aTax and
Credits 37aAdd the number of boxes checked above and enter the total here /H17075
Single,
$4,700
If you are married filing separately and your spouse itemizes deductions, or
you were a dual-status alien, see page 34 and check here /H17075
b
37b
38 38
39Subtract line 38 from line 3639
40
If line 36 is $103,000 or less, multiply $3,000 by the total number of exemptions claimed on
line 6d. If line 36 is over $103,000, see the worksheet on page 35
40
41Taxable income. Subtract line 40 from line 39. If line 40 is more than line 39, enter -0-41
42 42
46
47
52
Education credits. Attach Form 8863
45
50
Other credits. Check applicable box(es):
49
54
55
Add lines 45 through 53. These are your total credits
49
Subtract line 54 from line 44. If line 54 is more than line 44, enter -0- /H17075
54
Self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
55
Other
Taxes
56
70
Social security and Medicare tax on tip income not reported to employer. Attach Form 4137
58Tax on qualified plans, including IRAs, and other tax-favored accounts. Attach Form 5329 if required
57
59
Add lines 55 through 60. This is your total tax /H17075
60 60
Federal income tax withheld from Forms W-2 and 109962 62
632002 estimated tax payments and amount applied from 2001 return63
Payments
64
67Amount paid with request for extension to file (see page 56)
66
65Excess social security and tier 1 RRTA tax withheld (see page 56)
67
69
Other payments from:68
71a71a
72 72
If line 69 is more than line 61, subtract line 61 from line 69. This is the amount you overpaid
73 73
Amount of line 70 you want refunded to you /H17075
Refund
74
Amount of line 70 you want applied to your 2003 estimated tax /H17075
Estimated tax penalty (see page 57)
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
74
You were 65 or older, Blind; Spouse was 65 or older, Blind.
a Form 3800
b Form 8801 c Specify
a Form 2439 b Form 4136
58
Household employment taxes. Attach Schedule H
59
68
Amount
You Owe
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
Tax (see page 36). Check if any tax is from:
Amount you owe. Subtract line 69 from line 61. For details on how to pay, see page 57 /H17075
b
Direct deposit?
See page 56
and fill in 71b,
71c, and 71d.
Routing number
Account number
c Checking Savings
a Form(s) 8814 Form 4972
b
d
/H17075
/H17075
69
48
45
Retirement savings contributions credit. Attach Form 8880
56
57
Advance earned income credit payments from Form(s) W-2
70
/H17075
Child tax credit (see page 39)
Credits from:
48
52
50
Additional child tax credit. Attach Form 8812
65
66
Head of
household,
$6,900
Married filing
jointly or
Qualifying
widow(er),
$7,850
Married
filing
separately,
$3,925
Standard
Deduction
for—
Joint return?
See page 21.
Daytime phone number
()
Earned income credit (EIC)
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Attach Schedule R
43
44
46
Alternative minimum tax (see page 37). Attach Form 6251
Add lines 42 and 43 /H17075
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Attach Form 2441
47
If you have a
qualifying
child, attach
Schedule EIC.
43
44
64
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2002)
● People who
checked any
box on line
37a or 37b or
who can be
claimed as a
dependent,
see page 34.
● All others:
Designee’s
name /H17075
Do you want to allow another person to discuss this return with the IRS (see page 58)?Third Party
Designee Phone
no. /H17075()
Yes. Complete the following. No
Personal identification
number (PIN) /H17075
53
Foreign tax credit. Attach Form 1116 if required
53
a Form 8396 b Form 8859
5151 Adoption credit. Attach Form 8839
61 61
Type:
c Form 8885
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 45

Page 46 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
8140
1012345 67
Susan J. Brown
Retail, Family clothing
Family Fashions
725 Big Sur Drive
Anytown, NY 18725
410,000
1,442
408,558
239,349
169,209
169,209
00
00
00
00
00
00
3,500
479
3,850
4,277
238
2,633
216
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
12,000
964
1,203
5,727
3,570
59,050
8,078
105,785
63,424
63,424
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
44
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE C
(Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business
(Sole Proprietorship)
/H17075Partnerships, joint ventures, etc., must file Form 1065 or 1065-B.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 09/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or 1041. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule C (Form 1040).
Name of proprietor Social security number (SSN)
A Principal business or profession, including product or service (see page C-1 of the instructions) B Enter code from pages C-7, 8, & 9
/H17075
D Employer ID number (EIN), if anyBusiness name. If no separate business name, leave blank.C
Accounting method:
E
F
Yes NoG
H
Did you “materially participate” in the operation of this business during 2002? If “No,” see page C-3 for limit on losses
If you started or acquired this business during 2002, check here /H17075
Income
Gross receipts or sales. Caution. If this income was reported to you on Form W-2 and the “Statutory
employee” box on that form was checked, see page C-3 and check here /H17075
1
1
22 Returns and allowances
33 Subtract line 2 from line 1
44 Cost of goods sold (from line 42 on page 2)
5Gross profit. Subtract line 4 from line 35
6Other income, including Federal and state gasoline or fuel tax credit or refund (see page C-3)6
7 Gross income. Add lines 5 and 6 /H170757
Expenses. Enter expenses for business use of your home only on line 30.
8
21Repairs and maintenance21
Advertising8
22Supplies (not included in Part III)22
Bad debts from sales or
services (see page C-3)
9
23
9
Taxes and licenses23
10
Travel, meals, and entertainment:24
Car and truck expenses
(see page C-3)
10
24a
11
Travela
Commissions and fees11
12Depletion12
Meals and
entertainment
b
Depreciation and section 179
expense deduction (not included
in Part III) (see page C-4)
13
Enter nondeduct-
ible amount in-
cluded on line 24b
(see page C-5)
c
13
14 Employee benefit programs
(other than on line 19)
24d
14
Subtract line 24c from line 24bd
25
15
Utilities25
Insurance (other than health)15
26Wages (less employment credits)26
Interest:16
16aMortgage (paid to banks, etc.)a
Other expenses (from line 48 on
page 2)
27
16bOtherb
17
Legal and professional
services
17
18Office expense18
19Pension and profit-sharing plans19
Rent or lease (see page C-5):20
20aVehicles, machinery, and equipmenta
b Other business property 20b
Total expenses before expenses for business use of home. Add lines 8 through 27 in columns /H1707528 28
31
31
All investment is at risk.32a
32
Some investment is not
at risk.
32b
Schedule C (Form 1040) 2002For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions.
(1) Cash (2) Accrual (3) Other (specify) /H17075
Business address (including suite or room no.) /H17075
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code
Cat. No. 11334P
29
30
Tentative profit (loss). Subtract line 28 from line 7
Expenses for business use of your home. Attach Form 8829
29
30
/H20854
Part I
Part II
27
Net profit or (loss). Subtract line 30 from line 29.
● If a profit, enter on Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2 (statutory employees,
see page C-6). Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.
● If a loss, you must go to line 32.
If you have a loss, check the box that describes your investment in this activity (see page C-6).
● If you checked 32a, enter the loss on Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2
(statutory employees, see page C-6). Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.
● If you checked 32b, you must attach Form 6198.
/H20854
(99)
2002
Page 46 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 47 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
42,843
240,252
283,095
43,746
239,349
00
00
00
00
00
180
60
6,000
1,600
238
8,078
00
00
00
00
00
00
Bank service charges
Chamber of Commerce
Free Credit Card Co.
Trash removal
Window washing
Page 2Schedule C (Form 1040) 2002
Cost of Goods Sold (see page C-6)
35Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last year’s closing inventory, attach explanation
33
36Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal use
34
37Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to yourself
35
38Materials and supplies
36
39Other costs
37
40Add lines 35 through 39
38
41Inventory at end of year
39
Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40. Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4
40
42
Part IV
Part III
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming car or truck expenses on
line 10 and are not required to file Form 4562 for this business. See the instructions for line 13 on page
C-4 to find out if you must file.
41
When did you place your vehicle in service for business purposes? (month, day, year) /H17075 .
42
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2002, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
a Business b Commuting c Other
45 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
46 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
47a Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
b If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Yes No
Other Expenses. List below business expenses not included on lines 8–26 or line 30.
48 Total other expenses. Enter here and on page 1, line 27
//
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
48
Part V
Method(s) used to
value closing inventory: Cost b Other (attach explanation)
Was there any change in determining quantities, costs, or valuations between opening and closing inventory? If
“Yes,” attach explanation
Lower of cost or market ca
NoYes
43
44
Schedule C (Form 1040) 2002
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 47

Page 48 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Susan J. Brown 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
63,424
58,572
8,962
4,481
00
00
00
00
63,424 00
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE SE
Self-Employment Tax(Form 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 17/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Name of person with self-employment income (as shown on Form 1040) Social security number of person
with self-employment income /H17075
Who Must File Schedule SE
You must file Schedule SE if:
● You had net earnings from self-employment from other than church employee income (line 4 of Short Schedule SE or line 4c of
Long Schedule SE) of $400 or more or
Exception. If your only self-employment income was from earnings as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian Science
practitioner and you filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval not to be taxed on those earnings, do not file Schedule SE. Instead,
write “Exempt–Form 4361” on Form 1040, line 56.
Section A—Short Schedule SE. Caution. Read above to see if you can use Short Schedule SE.
Net farm profit or (loss) from Schedule F , line 36, and farm partnerships, Schedule K-1 (Form
1065), line 15a
1
1
Net profit or (loss) from Schedule C, line 31; Schedule C-EZ, line 3; Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),
line 15a (other than farming); and Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 9. Ministers and members
of religious orders, see page SE-1 for amounts to report on this line. See page SE-2 for other
income to report
2
2
3Combine lines 1 and 23
Net earnings from self-employment. Multiply line 3 by 92.35% (.9235). If less than $400,
do not file this schedule; you do not owe self-employment tax /H17075
4
4
5 Self-employment tax. If the amount on line 4 is: 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule SE (Form 1040) 2002
● You had church employee income of $108.28 or more. Income from services you performed as a minister or a member of a
religious order is not church employee income. See page SE-1.
Cat. No. 11358Z
Deduction for one-half of self-employment tax. Multiply line 5 by
50% (.5). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 29
● $84,900 or less, multiply line 4 by 15.3% (.153). Enter the result here and on 
Form 1040, line 56.
● More than $84,900, multiply line 4 by 2.9% (.029). Then, add $10,527.60 to the
result. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 56.
May I Use Short Schedule SE or Must I Use Long Schedule SE?
Did You Receive Wages or Tips in 2002?
Was the total of your wages and tips subject to social security
or railroad retirement tax plus your net earnings from
self-employment more than $84,900?
Did you receive tips subject to social security or Medicare tax
that you did not report to your employer?
Are you using one of the optional methods to figure your net
earnings (see page SE-3)?
Are you a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian
Science practitioner who received IRS approval not to be taxed
on earnings from these sources, but you owe self-employment
tax on other earnings?
Did you receive church employee income reported on Form
W-2 of $108.28 or more?
You May Use Short Schedule SE Below You Must Use Long Schedule SE on the Back
/H17074 /H17074Yes
/H17074YesNo
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
No
No
Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074
/H17074 /H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Note. Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE and
use either “optional method” in Part II of Long Schedule SE. See page SE-3.
6
5
6
/H20854
(99)
2002
Page 48 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 49 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Susan J. Brown Family Fashions 1 1 1 - 00 - 1 1 1 1
200
- 0 -
24,000
200
200
- 0 -
24,000
200
Adding machine 200 200
800 5 HY 200 DB 160
2,800
4,277
OMB No. 1545-0172Depreciation and Amortization4562Form
(Including Information on Listed Property)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 67/H17075See separate instructions.
Identifying numberName(s) shown on return Business or activity to which this form relates
Election To Expense Certain Tangible Property Under Section 179
Note: If you have any listed property, complete Part V before you complete Part I.
$24,0001Maximum amount. See page 2 of the instructions for a higher limit for certain businesses1
2Total cost of section 179 property placed in service (see page 2 of the instructions)2
$200,0003Threshold cost of section 179 property before reduction in limitation3
4Reduction in limitation. Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-4
Dollar limitation for tax year. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. If married
filing separately, see page 2 of the instructions
5
5
(a) Description of property (b) Cost (business use only) (c) Elected cost
6
7Listed property. Enter the amount from line 297
88 Total elected cost of section 179 property. Add amounts in column (c), lines 6 and 7
9Tentative deduction. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 89
10Carryover of disallowed deduction from line 13 of your 2001 Form 456210
11Business income limitation. Enter the smaller of business income (not less than zero) or line 5 (see instructions)11
12Section 179 expense deduction. Add lines 9 and 10, but do not enter more than line 1112
13 Carryover of disallowed deduction to 2003. Add lines 9 and 10, less line 12 /H1707513
Note: Do not use Part II or Part III below for listed property. Instead, use Part V.
MACRS Depreciation (Do not include listed property.) (See page 4 of the instructions.)
(b) Month and
year placed in
service
(c) Basis for depreciation
(business/investment use
only—see instructions)
(d) Recovery
period(a) (e) Convention (f) Method (g) Depreciation deduction
Section B—Assets Placed in Service During 2002 Tax Year Using the General Depreciation System
3-year property19a
5-year propertyb
7-year propertyc
10-year propertyd
15-year propertye
20-year propertyf
S/LMM27.5 yrs.Residential rental
property
h
S/LMM27.5 yrs.
S/LMMNonresidential real
property
i
S/LMM
Section C—Assets Placed in Service During 2002 Tax Year Using the Alternative Depreciation System
S/L20a Class life
12 yrs. S/Lb 12-year
40 yrs. MM S/Lc 40-year
Special Depreciation Allowance and Other Depreciation (Do not include listed property.)
MACRS deductions for assets placed in service in tax years beginning before 200217 17
15Property subject to section 168(f)(1) election (see page 4 of the instructions)15
Other depreciation (including ACRS) (see page 4 of the instructions)16 16
Summary (see page 6 of the instructions)
2121 Listed property. Enter amount from line 28
Total. Add amounts from line 12, lines 14 through 17, lines 19 and 20 in column (g), and line 21.
Enter here and on the appropriate lines of your return. Partnerships and S corporations—see instr.
22
22
23 For assets shown above and placed in service during the current year,
enter the portion of the basis attributable to section 263A costs 23
Form 4562 (2002)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see separate instructions. Cat. No. 12906N
Part IV
Part I
Part II
Part III
/H17075Attach to your tax return.
39 yrs.
Section A
18 If you are electing under section 168(i)(4) to group any assets placed in service during the tax
year into one or more general asset accounts, check here /H17075
Classification of property
25-year propertyg 25 yrs. S/L
Special depreciation allowance for qualified property (other than listed property) placed in
service during the tax year (see page 3 of the instructions)
14
14
2002
1,117
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 49

Page 50 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
7,500
2,025
475
10,000
USA 280 VAN 3-20-02 75 18,667 14,000 5 yr 200 DB/HY 2,800 - 0 -
- 0 -
2,800
Page 2Form 4562 (2002)
Listed Property (Include automobiles, certain other vehicles, cellular telephones, certain computers, and
property used for entertainment, recreation, or amusement.)
Note: For any vehicle for which you are using the standard mileage rate or deducting lease expense, complete only
24a, 24b, columns (a) through (c) of Section A, all of Section B, and Section C if applicable.
Section A—Depreciation and Other Information (Caution: See page 8 of the instructions for limits for passenger automobiles. )
24b24a NoYesIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?NoYesDo you have evidence to support the business/investment use claimed?
(i)
Elected
section 179
cost
(h)
Depreciation
deduction
(g)
Method/
Convention
(f)
Recovery
period
(e)
Basis for depreciation
(business/investment
use only)
(d)
Cost or other
basis
(c)
Business/
investment
use
percentage
(b)
Date placed in
service
(a)
Type of property (list
vehicles first)
Property used more than 50% in a qualified business use (see page 7 of the instructions):26
%
%
%
Property used 50% or less in a qualified business use (see page 7 of the instructions):27
% S/L –
% S/L –
S/L –%
28 Add amounts in column (h), lines 25 through 27. Enter here and on line 21, page 1 28
Add amounts in column (i), line 26. Enter here and on line 7, page 129 29
Section B—Information on Use of Vehicles
(f)
Vehicle 6
(e)
Vehicle 5
(d)
Vehicle 4
(c)
Vehicle 3
(b)
Vehicle 2
(a)
Vehicle 1Total business/investment miles driven during
the year ( do not include commuting miles—
see page 2 of the instructions)
30
Total commuting miles driven during the year31
Total other personal (noncommuting)
miles driven
32
Total miles driven during the year.
Add lines 30 through 32
33
NoYes NoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesWas the vehicle available for personal
use during off-duty hours?
34
Was the vehicle used primarily by a
more than 5% owner or related person?
35
Is another vehicle available for
personal use?
36
Section C—Questions for Employers Who Provide Vehicles for Use by Their Employees
NoYesDo you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits all personal use of vehicles, including commuting,
by your employees?
37
Do you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits personal use of vehicles, except commuting, by your employees?
See page 8 of the instructions for vehicles used by corporate officers, directors, or 1% or more owners
38
Do you treat all use of vehicles by employees as personal use?39
Do you provide more than five vehicles to your employees, obtain information from your employees about
the use of the vehicles, and retain the information received?
40
Do you meet the requirements concerning qualified automobile demonstration use? (See page 9 of the instructions.)41
Note: If your answer to 37, 38, 39, 40, or 41 is “Yes,” do not complete Section B for the covered vehicles.
Amortization
(e)
Amortization
period or
percentage
(b)
Date amortization
begins
(c)
Amortizable
amount
(d)
Code
section
(f)
Amortization for
this year
(a)
Description of costs
42 Amortization of costs that begins during your 2002 tax year (see page 9 of the instructions):
43 Amortization of costs that began before your 2002 tax year 43
44 Total. Add amounts in column (f). See page 9 of the instructions for where to report 44
Complete this section for vehicles used by a sole proprietor, partner, or other “more than 5% owner,” or related person.
If you provided vehicles to your employees, first answer the questions in Section C to see if you meet an exception to completi ng this section for those vehicles.
Part VI
Part V
Answer these questions to determine if you meet an exception to completing Section B for vehicles used by employees who
are not more than 5% owners or related persons (see page 8 of the instructions).
Form 4562 (2002)
Special depreciation allowance for qualified listed property placed in service during the tax
year and used more than 50% in a qualified business use (see page 7 of the instructions)
25
25
Page 50 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 51 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040, and on line 2, Section A of Schedule SE (Form
1040).Preparing the Return
for Stanley Price Part III–Information on Your Vehicle
Stanley Price owns and operates Stan’s Barber Shop. HeStanley leaves this part blank because he is not deductinghas been in business for 32 years. Stanley uses the cashcar or truck expenses.method of accounting and files his return on a calendar
year basis.
Schedule SE—Self-Employment Tax
Schedule C–EZ After Stanley prepares Schedule C–EZ, he fills out Sched-
ule SE. He starts by entering his name and social securityStanley uses Schedule C–EZ to report the net profit fromnumber at the top of the schedule. Then he reads the charthis business because he meets all of the requirementson page 1 of the schedule, which tells him he can uselisted in Part I of the schedule. Stanley enters his name andSection A—Short Schedule SE to figure his self-employ-social security number at the top of the schedule.ment tax. He fills out the following lines in Section A.
Lines 2 and 3.He enters $24,670. This is his net profitPart I–General Information from line 3 of Schedule C–EZ.
Stanley fills out Part I as follows: Line 4.He multiplies $24,670 by .9235 to get his net
earnings from self-employment ($22,783). This is his netLine A.He enters his principal business. profit subject to self-employment tax.
Line B.He enters 812111, which is the 6-digit businessLine 5. Because the amount on line 4 is less thancode for a barber shop. He found the code on page C–8 of$84,900, Stanley multiplies the amount on line 4 ($22,783)the instructions for Schedule C. Stanley locates the majorby .153 to get his self-employment tax of $3,486. He entersbusiness category that describes his business. He readsthat amount here and on line 56 of Form 1040.down the items under “Other Services” to find 812111—
“Barber shops.” Line 6.He multiplies the amount on line 5 by .5 to get his
deduction for one-half of self-employment tax of $1,743.Line C. He enters the name of his business—“Stan’sHe enters that amount here and on line 29 of Form 1040.Barber Shop.”
Line D.Stanley leaves this line blank. He does not haveForm 1040
an employer identification number (EIN) because he is not
required to have one. For information about EINs, seeStanley fills out Form 1040 as follows:
Identification Numbers in chapter 1. Name, address, and social security number.Stanley
enters his name, home address, and social security num-Line E.He enters his business address.
ber.
Presidential election campaign fund.Stanley choosesPart II–Figure Your Net Profit
to have $3 go to this fund. He checks the box under “Yes.”
Stanley fills out Part II as follows: Line 1.Stanley checks the box on this line because he is
Line 1–Gross receipts.Stanley enters his gross receiptsfiling as single.
from cutting hair. They include the amounts he charged forLines 6a and 6d.Stanley claims an exemption for him-haircuts and all the tips received from his customers. Theself. He checks the box next to “Yourself” and enters “1” intotal for the year was $27,000. the far right-hand entry space. He also enters “1” in the box
on line 6d.Line 2–Total expenses.Stanley enters his expenses for
the year. They total $2,330 and consist of the following:Line 8a.Stanley enters $295 of taxable interest credited
• Advertising in the local newspaper—$145 to his personal savings account for the year.
• Supplies—$475 Line 9.Stanley enters $145 of dividends he received from
ABC Corporation.• Business licenses—$150
Line 12.He enters his business net profit of $24,670 from• Utilities (electricity and water)—$360
line 3 of Schedule C–EZ.
• Rent—$1,200
Line 22.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 7 through 21
and enters the total, $25,110.Line 3–Net profit.Stanley subtracts his total expenses
($2,330) from his gross receipts ($27,000) to get his netLine 24.Stanley enters the $2,000 contribution he made
profit of $24,670. He enters his net profit here, on line 12 of for the year to his individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 51

Page 52 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
According to the Form 1040 instructions, he can deductLines 54 and 55.Because Stanley does not have any of
this amount. the credits listed on lines 45 through 53, he enters -0- on
line 54 and $1,751 on line 55.Line 29.Stanley enters one-half of his self-employment
tax. He got this amount from line 6 in Section A of ScheduleLine 56.He enters $3,486 from line 5 in Section A ofSE. Schedule SE.
Line 34.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 23 through
33a and enters the total, $3,743. Line 61.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 55 through 60
and enters the total, $5,237.Line 35.Stanley subtracts the amount on line 34 from the
amount on line 22 to arrive at his adjusted gross income,Line 63.He enters $6,000 of estimated tax payments he$21,367. He also enters this amount on line 36. made for the year.
Line 38.He enters $4,700. This is the standard deduction
for a single filer. Line 69.He enters $6,000.
Line 39.Stanley subtracts line 38 from line 36 to get
Lines 70 and 71a.Stanley subtracts line 61 from line 69$16,667.
to arrive at the amount he overpaid, $763. He wants this
Line 40.He multiplies $3,000 by the number of exemp-amount refunded to him so he enters it on line 71a. The
tions claimed on line 6d to get his total exemptions, $3,000.IRS will send him a check for this amount provided he
owes no other taxes, child support, spousal support, orLine 41.Stanley subtracts line 40 from line 39 to get his
certain other federal nontax debt. If Stanley wanted thetaxable income, $13,667.
refund deposited directly into his checking or savings ac-Line 42.Stanley uses the Tax Table in the Form 1040count, he would have had to complete lines 71b, c, and d.instructions to figure his income tax. In the Tax Table he
looks for the income bracket that includes $13,667. HeSigning and assembling the return.He signs his namefinds the bracket for incomes of at least $13,650, but lessand enters the date signed, his occupation, and a daytimethan $13,700 and sees that the tax for a person filing astelephone number. He assembles his original Form 1040single is $1,751. He enters this amount here. and Schedules C–EZ and SE in that order. (See “Attach-
ment Sequence Number” in the upper right corner of eachLines 43 and 44.Because he does not owe alternative
schedule or form.) Then he makes a copy of the return forminimum tax, he enters -0- on line 43 and $1,751 on line
44. his records. Finally, he mails it to the IRS.
Page 52 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 53 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
STANLEY PRICE
99 OAK ST
ANYTOWN, TX 70000
000 00 0000
1
1
295 00
145
24,670
25,110
1,743
2,000
3,743
21,367
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
Department of the Treasury—Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1–Dec. 31, 2002, or other tax year beginning , 2002, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 21.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 21. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 21.
Presidential
Election Campaign
1 Single
Filing Status Married filing jointly (even if only one had income)2
Check only
one box.
3
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child (year
spouse died /H17075). (See page 21.)
6a Yourself. If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent on his or her tax
return, do not check box 6aExemptions
Spouseb
(4) if qualifying
child for child tax
credit (see page 22)
Dependents:c (2) Dependent’s
social security number
(3) Dependent’s
relationship to
you(1) First name Last name
If more than five
dependents,
see page 22.
d Total number of exemptions claimed
7Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Attach Form(s) W-27
8a8a Taxable interest. Attach Schedule B if requiredIncome
8bb Tax-exempt interest. Do not include on line 8aAttach 
Forms W-2 and
W-2G here.
Also attach
Form(s) 1099-R
if tax was
withheld.
99 Ordinary dividends. Attach Schedule B if required
1010 Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes (see page 24)
1111 Alimony received
1212 Business income or (loss). Attach Schedule C or C-EZ
Enclose, but do
not attach, any
payment. Also,
please use
Form 1040-V.
13
13 Capital gain or (loss). Attach Schedule D if required. If not required, check here /H17075
1414 Other gains or (losses). Attach Form 4797
15a 15bIRA distributions b Taxable amount (see page 25)15a
16b16aPensions and annuities b Taxable amount (see page 25)16a
1717 Rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Attach Schedule E
1818 Farm income or (loss). Attach Schedule F
1919 Unemployment compensation
20b20a b Taxable amount (see page 27)20a Social security benefits
2121
22 Add the amounts in the far right column for lines 7 through 21. This is your total income /H1707522
24IRA deduction (see page 29)
23
Archer MSA deduction. Attach Form 8853
26
25
One-half of self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
27
Self-employed health insurance deduction (see page 33)
26
28
27
Self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans
29
28
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings
30
29
Alimony paid  b Recipient’s SSN /H17075
34Add lines 23 through 33a
30
Subtract line 34 from line 22. This is your adjusted gross income /H17075
31
Adjusted
Gross
Income
35
If you did not
get a W-2,
see page 23. Form
Married filing separately. Enter spouse’s SSN above
and full name here. /H17075
Cat. No. 11320B
/H17075
/H20854
Label
Form 1040 (2002)
IRS Use Only—Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 21.) If
the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent, enter
this child’s name here. 
/H17075
Other income. List type and amount (see page 29)
Moving expenses. Attach Form 3903
24
25
For Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 76.
No. of boxes
checked on
6a and 6b
No. of children
on 6c who:
Dependents on 6c
not entered above
Add numbers
on lines
above
/H17075
● lived with you
● did not live with
you due to divorce
or separation
(see page 22)
32 32
Student loan interest deduction (see page 31)
31
33a
/H17073/H17073Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
(See page 21.)
(99)
Tuition and fees deduction (see page 32)
34
33a
2002
4
5
35
23Educator expenses (see page 29)
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 53

Page 54 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
21,367 00
4,700
16,667
3,000
13,667
1,751
- 0 -
1,751
3,486
5,237
6,000
763
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
3/15/03 Barber
763 00
6,000
Stanley Price 735-0002555
1,751 00
- 0 -
Itemized deductions (from Schedule A) or your standard deduction (see left margin)
Add lines 62 through 68. These are your total payments /H17075
Page 2Form 1040 (2002)
Amount from line 35 (adjusted gross income)36 36
Check if:37aTax and
Credits 37aAdd the number of boxes checked above and enter the total here /H17075
Single,
$4,700
If you are married filing separately and your spouse itemizes deductions, or
you were a dual-status alien, see page 34 and check here /H17075
b
37b
38 38
39Subtract line 38 from line 3639
40
If line 36 is $103,000 or less, multiply $3,000 by the total number of exemptions claimed on
line 6d. If line 36 is over $103,000, see the worksheet on page 35
40
41Taxable income. Subtract line 40 from line 39. If line 40 is more than line 39, enter -0-41
42 42
46
47
52
Education credits. Attach Form 8863
45
50
Other credits. Check applicable box(es):
49
54
55
Add lines 45 through 53. These are your total credits
49
Subtract line 54 from line 44. If line 54 is more than line 44, enter -0- /H17075
54
Self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
55
Other
Taxes
56
70
Social security and Medicare tax on tip income not reported to employer. Attach Form 4137
58Tax on qualified plans, including IRAs, and other tax-favored accounts. Attach Form 5329 if required
57
59
Add lines 55 through 60. This is your total tax /H17075
60 60
Federal income tax withheld from Forms W-2 and 109962 62
632002 estimated tax payments and amount applied from 2001 return63
Payments
64
67Amount paid with request for extension to file (see page 56)
66
65Excess social security and tier 1 RRTA tax withheld (see page 56)
67
69
Other payments from:68
71a71a
72 72
If line 69 is more than line 61, subtract line 61 from line 69. This is the amount you overpaid
73 73
Amount of line 70 you want refunded to you /H17075
Refund
74
Amount of line 70 you want applied to your 2003 estimated tax /H17075
Estimated tax penalty (see page 57)
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
74
You were 65 or older, Blind; Spouse was 65 or older, Blind.
a Form 3800
b Form 8801 c Specify
a Form 2439 b Form 4136
58
Household employment taxes. Attach Schedule H
59
68
Amount
You Owe
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
Tax (see page 36). Check if any tax is from:
Amount you owe. Subtract line 69 from line 61. For details on how to pay, see page 57 /H17075
b
Direct deposit?
See page 56
and fill in 71b,
71c, and 71d.
Routing number
Account number
c Checking Savings
a Form(s) 8814 Form 4972
b
d
/H17075
/H17075
69
48
45
Retirement savings contributions credit. Attach Form 8880
56
57
Advance earned income credit payments from Form(s) W-2
70
/H17075
Child tax credit (see page 39)
Credits from:
48
52
50
Additional child tax credit. Attach Form 8812
65
66
Head of
household,
$6,900
Married filing
jointly or
Qualifying
widow(er),
$7,850
Married
filing
separately,
$3,925
Standard
Deduction
for—
Joint return?
See page 21.
Daytime phone number
()
Earned income credit (EIC)
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Attach Schedule R
43
44
46
Alternative minimum tax (see page 37). Attach Form 6251
Add lines 42 and 43 /H17075
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Attach Form 2441
47
If you have a
qualifying
child, attach
Schedule EIC.
43
44
64
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2002)
● People who
checked any
box on line
37a or 37b or
who can be
claimed as a
dependent,
see page 34.
● All others:
Designee’s
name /H17075
Do you want to allow another person to discuss this return with the IRS (see page 58)?Third Party
Designee Phone
no. /H17075()
Yes. Complete the following. No
Personal identification
number (PIN) /H17075
53
Foreign tax credit. Attach Form 1116 if required
53
a Form 8396 b Form 8859
5151 Adoption credit. Attach Form 8839
61 61
Type:
c Form 8885
Page 54 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 55 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Stanley Price 000 00 0000
2 111Barber Shop
Stan’s Barber Shop
1001 Maple Ave.
Anytown, TX 70000
27,000
2,330
24,670
00
00
00
18
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE C-EZ
(Form 1040) Net Profit From Business
(Sole Proprietorship)
/H17075Partnerships, joint ventures, etc., must file Form 1065 or 1065-B.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 09A/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or 1041. /H17075See instructions on back.
Business name. If no separate business name, leave blank. D Employer ID number (EIN), if any
Business address (including suite or room no.). Address not required if same as on Form 1040, page 1.
C
E
Gross receipts. Caution. If this income was reported to you on Form W-2 and the “Statutory
employee” box on that form was checked, see Statutory Employees in the instructions for
Schedule C, line 1, on page C-3 and check here /H170751
22 Total expenses (see instructions). If more than $2,500, you must use Schedule C
3
3 Net profit. Subtract line 2 from line 1. If less than zero, you must use Schedule C. Enter on
Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2. (Statutory employees do not report this
amount on Schedule SE, line 2. Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.)
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) 2002For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Cat. No. 14374D
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code
You May Use
Schedule C-EZ
Instead of
Schedule C
Only If You:
And You:
● Use the cash method of accounting.
● Had only one business as a sole
proprietor.
● Had business expenses of $2,500 or
less. ● Are not required to file Form 4562,
Depreciation and Amortization, for
this business. See the instructions
for Schedule C, line 13, on page
C-4 to find out if you must file.
● Do not deduct expenses for
business use of your home.
● Do not have prior year unallowed
passive activity losses from this
business.
/H17075 /H17075
Name of proprietor Social security number (SSN)
General Information
A Principal business or profession, including product or service B Enter code from pages C-7, 8, & 9
/H17075
Figure Your Net Profit
Part I
Part II
● Did not have a net loss from your
business.
● Had no employees during the year.
1
● Did not have an inventory at any
time during the year.
Yes NoDo you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?6
Yes NoDo you have evidence to support your deduction?8a
Yes NoIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Yes NoWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?7
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2002, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:5
Business b Commuting c Other
4
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming car or truck expenses on line 2.Part III
a
b
(99)
When did you place your vehicle in service for business purposes? (month, day, year) /H17075 .//
2002
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 55

Page 56 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE SE
Self-Employment Tax(Form 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 17/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Name of person with self-employment income (as shown on Form 1040) Social security number of person
with self-employment income /H17075
Who Must File Schedule SE
You must file Schedule SE if:
● You had net earnings from self-employment from other than church employee income (line 4 of Short Schedule SE or line 4c of
Long Schedule SE) of $400 or more or
Exception. If your only self-employment income was from earnings as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian Science
practitioner and you filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval not to be taxed on those earnings, do not file Schedule SE. Instead,
write “Exempt–Form 4361” on Form 1040, line 56.
Section A—Short Schedule SE. Caution. Read above to see if you can use Short Schedule SE.
Net farm profit or (loss) from Schedule F , line 36, and farm partnerships, Schedule K-1 (Form
1065), line 15a
1
1
Net profit or (loss) from Schedule C, line 31; Schedule C-EZ, line 3; Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),
line 15a (other than farming); and Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 9. Ministers and members
of religious orders, see page SE-1 for amounts to report on this line. See page SE-2 for other
income to report
2
2
3Combine lines 1 and 23
Net earnings from self-employment. Multiply line 3 by 92.35% (.9235). If less than $400,
do not file this schedule; you do not owe self-employment tax /H17075
4
4
5 Self-employment tax. If the amount on line 4 is: 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule SE (Form 1040) 2002
● You had church employee income of $108.28 or more. Income from services you performed as a minister or a member of a
religious order is not church employee income. See page SE-1.
Cat. No. 11358Z
Deduction for one-half of self-employment tax. Multiply line 5 by
50% (.5). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 29
● $84,900 or less, multiply line 4 by 15.3% (.153). Enter the result here and on 
Form 1040, line 56.
● More than $84,900, multiply line 4 by 2.9% (.029). Then, add $10,527.60 to the
result. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 56.
May I Use Short Schedule SE or Must I Use Long Schedule SE?
Did You Receive Wages or Tips in 2002?
Was the total of your wages and tips subject to social security
or railroad retirement tax plus your net earnings from
self-employment more than $84,900?
Did you receive tips subject to social security or Medicare tax
that you did not report to your employer?
Are you using one of the optional methods to figure your net
earnings (see page SE-3)?
Are you a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian
Science practitioner who received IRS approval not to be taxed
on earnings from these sources, but you owe self-employment
tax on other earnings?
Did you receive church employee income reported on Form
W-2 of $108.28 or more?
You May Use Short Schedule SE Below You Must Use Long Schedule SE on the Back
/H17074 /H17074Yes
/H17074YesNo
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
No
No
Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074
/H17074 /H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Note. Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE and
use either “optional method” in Part II of Long Schedule SE. See page SE-3.
6
5
6
/H20854
(99)
2002
Stanley Price 000 00 0000
24,670
22,783
3,486
1,743
00
00
00
00
24,670 00
Page 56 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 57 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appeals and judicial review.If you disagree with us
about the amount of your tax liability or certain collection
11. actions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office to
review your case. You may also ask a court to review your
case.
Your Rights
Relief from certain penalties and interest.The IRS will
waive penalties when allowed by law if you can show youas a Taxpayer
acted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor-
rect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest thatThe first part of this chapter explains some of your most
is the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRSimportant rights as a taxpayer. The second part explains
employee.the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.
Examinations, Appeals,Declaration of
Collections, and RefundsTaxpayer Rights
Examinations (audits).We accept most taxpayers’ re-Protection of your rights.IRS employees will explain
turns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it forand protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout your
examination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest.contact with us.
The inquiry or examination may or may not result in more
tax. We may close your case without change; or, you mayPrivacy and confidentiality.The IRS will not disclose to
receive a refund.anyone the information you give us, except as authorized
The process of selecting a return for examination usu-by law. You have the right to know why we are asking you
ally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computerfor information, how we will use it, and what happens if you
programs to identify returns that may have incorrectdo not provide requested information.
amounts. These programs may be based on information
Professional and courteous service.If you believe thatreturns, such as Forms 1099 and W–2, on studies of past
an IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli-
fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that ance projects. Second, we use information from outside
employee’s supervisor. If the supervisor’s response is notsources that indicates that a return may have incorrect
satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for youramounts. These sources may include the media, public
area or the center where you filed your return. records, and individuals. If we determine that the informa-
tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a
Representation.You may either represent yourself or,return for examination.
with proper written authorization, have someone else rep-Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
resent you in your place. Your representative must be aRights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and
person allowed to practice before the IRS, such as anprocedures that we follow in examinations. The following
attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. Ifsections give an overview of how we conduct examina-
you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,tions.
then we must stop and reschedule the interview in most
By mail.We handle many examinations and inquiriescases.
by mail. We will send you a letter with either a request forYou can have someone accompany you at an interview.more information or a reason why we believe a change toYou may make sound recordings of any meetings with ouryour return may be needed. You can respond by mail orexamination or collection personnel, provided you tell us inyou can request a personal interview with an examiner. Ifwriting 10 days before the meeting. you mail us the requested information or provide an expla-
nation, we may or may not agree with you, and we willPayment of only the correct amount of tax.You are
explain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi-responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax due
tate to write to us about anything you do not understand.under the law—no more, no less. If you cannot pay all of
your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthlyBy interview.If we notify you that we will conduct yourinstallment payments. examination through a personal interview, or you request
such an interview, you have the right to ask that theHelp with unresolved tax problems.The Taxpayer Ad- examination take place at a reasonable time and place thatvocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess-is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examinerfully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayerproposes any changes to your return, he or she will explainAdvocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi-the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with thesecant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For morechanges, you can meet with the examiner’s supervisor.information, call toll free 1–877–777–4778
(1–800–829–4059 for TTY/TDD) or write to the TaxpayerRepeat examinations.If we examined your return for
Advocate at the IRS office that last contacted you. the same items in either of the 2 previous years and
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Page 57

Page 58 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact us If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you
as soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinue must file within 3 years from the date the return was
the examination. originally due to get that refund.
Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner’s pro-
posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Office
of IRS. Most differences can be settled without expensive
and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights are
12.explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appeal
Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don’t Agree,
and Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
How To Get MoreRights, and Claims for Refund.
If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagree
Informationwith its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.
This section describes the help the IRS and other federalDistrict Court where you live. If you take your case to court,
agencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi-the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if you
nesses.kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-
ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If the
court agrees with you on most issues in your case and
finds that the IRS’ position was largely unjustified, you may
Internal Revenue Servicebe able to recover some of your administrative and litiga-
tion costs. You will not be eligible to recover these costsThe following describes assistance provided by the IRS.
unless you tried to resolve your case administratively,You can order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-
including going through the appeals system, and you gavetions, and get more information from the IRS in several
us the information necessary to resolve the case.ways. By selecting the method that is best for you, you will
have quick and easy access to tax help. See Free taxCollections.Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro- services, later.cess, explains your rights and responsibilities regarding
payment of federal taxes. It describes: Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you have at-
tempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully, you
• What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what to
should contact your Taxpayer Advocate.do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you think
your bill is wrong. It also covers making installmentThe Taxpayer Advocate represents your interests and
payments, delaying collection action, and submittingconcerns within the IRS by protecting your rights and
an offer in compromise. resolving problems that have not been fixed through nor-
mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates cannot change• IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing athe tax law or make a technical tax decision, they can clearlien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, andup problems that resulted from previous contacts andrelease of property. ensure that your case is given a complete and impartial
review.Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail in
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
• Call the Taxpayer Advocate at 1–877–777–4778.Innocent spouse relief.Generally, both you and your
spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for paying• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office in
the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on youryour area.
joint return. However, if you qualify for innocent spouse• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a TTY/TDD user.relief, you may not have to pay the tax, interest, and
penalties related to your spouse (or former spouse). ForFor more information, see Publication 1546, The Tax-information on innocent spouse relief and two other wayspayer Advocate Service of the IRS.to get relief, see Publication 971, Innocent Spouse Relief,
and Form 8857,Request for Innocent Spouse Relief (AndSmall Business Tax Education Program.Small busi-Separation of Liability and Equitable Relief). ness owners and other self-employed individuals can learn
about business taxes through a unique partnership be-Refunds. You may file a claim for refund if you think you
tween the IRS and local organizations. Through work-paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim within
shops or in-depth tax courses, instructors provide training3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2
on starting a business, recordkeeping, preparing businessyears from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.
tax returns, self-employment tax issues, and employmentThe law generally provides for interest on your refund if it is
taxes.not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return or
claim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Some courses are offered free as a community service.
Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa- Courses given by an educational facility may include costs
tion on refunds. for materials and tuition. Other courses may have a nomi-
Page 58 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 59 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nal fee to offset administrative costs of sponsoring organi-• Get information on starting and operating a small
zations. business.
For more information about this program, call the IRS
Monday through Friday during regular business hours andYou can also reach us with your computer using File
ask for your Taxpayer Education Coordinator. Check yourTransfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
telephone book for the local number of the IRS office
closest to you or you can call 1–800–829–1040. TaxFax Service. Using the phone attached to
your fax machine, you can receive forms andYour Business Tax Kit.Your Business Tax Kit is an instructions by calling 703–368–9694. Followassortment of IRS forms and publications to help taxpay-the directions from the prompts. When you order forms,ers who operate their own businesses. To order the kit, seeenter the catalog number for the form you need. The itemsFree tax services, later. The kit consists of the followingyou request will be faxed to you.items.
For help with transmission problems, call the FedWorld
Forms: Help Desk at 703–487–4608.
• SS–4, Application for Employer Identification Num-
Phone. Many services are available by phone.ber
• 1040–ES, Estimated Tax for Individuals
• 9779, EFTPS Business Enrollment Form • Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call
1–800–829–3676 to order current and prior year
forms, instructions, and publications.Publications:
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax• 509, Tax Calendars for 2003
questions at 1–800–829–1040.• 583, Starting a Business and Keeping Records
• Solving problems. Take advantage of Everyday Tax• 594, The IRS Collection Process Solutions service by calling your local IRS office to
• 910, Guide to Free Tax Services set up an in-person appointment at your conve-
nience. Check your local directory assistance or• 1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 www.irs.gov for the numbers.(Received in a Trade or Business)
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/
TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–4059 to ask taxFree tax services.To find out what services are avail- questions or to order forms and publications.able, get Publication 910, Guide to Free Tax Services. It
contains a list of free tax publications and an index of tax• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to listen to
topics. It also describes other free tax information services,pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
including tax education and assistance programs and a list
of TeleTax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To
Personal computer. With your personal com- ensure that IRS representatives give accurate, courteous,puter and modem, you can access the IRS on theand professional answers, we use several methods toInternet at www.irs.gov. While visiting our webevaluate the quality of our telephone services. One methodsite, you can: is for a second IRS representative to sometimes listen in
on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers• See answers to frequently asked tax questions or
request help by e-mail. to complete a short survey at the end of the call.
• Download forms and publications or search for forms
and publications by topic or keyword. Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-
able on a walk-in basis.• Order IRS products on-line.
• View forms that may be filled in electronically, print• Products. You can walk in to many post offices,the completed form, and then save the form for re-libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,cordkeeping. instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins published in the lastbraries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county
few years. governments, credit unions, and office supply stores
have an extensive collection of products available to• Search regulations and the Internal Revenue Code.
print from a CD-ROM or photocopy from reproduci-• Receive our electronic newsletters on hot tax issuesble proofs. Also, some IRS offices and libraries haveand news. the Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal
Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-• Learn about the benefits of filing electronically (IRS
able for research purposes.e-file).
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 59

Page 60 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Services. You can walk in to your local IRS office to It is available in March. You can get a free copy by
ask tax questions or get help with a tax problem. calling 1–800–829–3676  or by visiting the website at
Now you can set up an appointment by calling yourwww.irs.gov/smallbiz.
local IRS office number and, at the prompt, leaving a
message requesting Everyday Tax Solutions help. AComments on IRS enforcement actions. The Small
representative will call you back within 2 businessBusiness and Agriculture Regulatory Enforcement
days to schedule an in-person appointment at yourOmbudsman and 10 Regional Fairness Boards were es-
convenience. tablished to receive comments from small business about
federal agency enforcement actions. The Ombudsman will
annually evaluate the enforcement activities of eachMail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-agency and rate its responsiveness to small business. Iftions, and publications to the Distribution Centeryou wish to comment on the enforcement actions of thenearest to you and receive a response within 10
IRS, you can:workdays after your request is received. Find the address
that applies to your part of the country. • Call 1–888–REG–FAIR (1–888–734–3247) ,
• Western part of U.S.: • Send an e-mail to ombudsman@sba.gov , or
Western Area Distribution Center • Download the appraisal form at www.sba.gov/Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001 ombudsman .
• Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Small Business AdministrationBloomington, IL 61702–8903
• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign addresses: The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers trainingEastern Area Distribution Center and educational programs, counseling services, financialP.O. Box 85074 programs, and contract assistance for small business own-Richmond, VA 23261–5074 ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a variety
of business topics. The following briefly describes assis-
tance provided by the SBA.CD-ROM for tax products. You can order IRS
Publication 1796, Federal Tax Products on Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs).CD-ROM, and obtain:
SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv-
ices to current and prospective small business owners who
cannot afford the services of a private consultant. Help is
• Current tax forms, instructions, and publications.
available when beginning, improving, or expanding a small• Prior-year tax forms and instructions. business.
• Popular tax forms that may be filled in electronically,Business Information Centers (BICs).BICs offer aprinted out for submission, and saved for record-small business reference library, management videokeeping. tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business.
BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals who• Internal Revenue Bulletins.
are in business or are interested in starting a business can
use BICs as often as they wish at no charge.The CD-ROM can be purchased from National Techni-
cal Information Service (NTIS) by calling Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet at http:// SCORE provides small business counseling and trainingwww.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release is available into current and prospective small business owners. SCOREearly January and the final release is available in lateis made up of current and former business people whoFebruary. offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,
manage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offersCD-ROM for small businesses. IRS Publication a variety of small business workshops.3207, Small Business Resource Guide, is a must
for every small business owner or any taxpayer Personal computer. With your personal com-
about to start a business. This handy, interactive CD con-puter and modem, you can access the SBA on
tains all the business tax forms, instructions and publica-the Internet at www.sba.gov. While visiting the
tions needed to successfully manage a business. InSBA web site, you can find a variety of information of
addition, the CD provides an abundance of other helpfulinterest to small business owners.
information, such as how to prepare a business plan,
finding financing for your business, and much more. The Phone. Call the SBA Answer Desk at 1–800–
design of the CD makes finding information easy and quickUASK-SBA (1–800–827–5722) for general in-
and incorporates file formats and browsers that can be run formation about programs available to assist
on virtually any desktop or laptop computer. small business owners.
Page 60 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 61 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Business Phone. Call the GPO at 1–202–512–1800. This
Development Center or Business Information is not a toll-free call.
Center to request assistance with your small
business. To find the location nearest you, access the SBA
on the Internet or call the SBA Answer Desk. Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.
Other Federal Agencies Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing OfficeOther federal agencies also publish publications and pam-P.O. Box 371954phlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954able from the Superintendant of Documents at the
Government Printing Office. You can get information and
order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
Personal computer. With your personal com-
puter and modem, you can access the GPO on
the Internet at www.access.gpo.gov.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 61

Page 62 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Electric vehicle.............3 1 Qualified real propertyA
business debt............2 4Empowerment zoneAccounting method:
Rent .....................3 5employment..............2 0Accrual................ 14, 30
Restricted property..........2 4Energy ...................2 1Cash .................. 14, 30
Retail space...............2 6Enhanced oil recovery........2 0Change in.................1 7
Self-employment tax..........9General business...........2 0Combination...............1 5
Sole proprietor..............3How to claim...............2 1Special...................1 7
Statutory employee...........3Indian employment..........2 0Accounting periods............1 3 Tax home .................3 1Investment................2 1Accrual method of accounting....1 4 Tax year..................1 3Liberty zone businessAdjusted basis of property......1 9 Trade discount.......... 26, 28employee ...............2 1Alcohol fuels credit............2 0 Travel expenses............3 7Low-income housing.........2 1Alternative minimum tax........2 1 Depreciation:Orphan drug...............2 1Appeal rights................5 8 Deduction.................3 2Reforestation..............2 1Assistance (See Tax help) Listed property.............3 2Rehabilitation..............2 1Audits......................5 7 Recapture.................2 5Renewable electricity
Disabled access credit.........2 0production...............2 1
Disposition of property:Research .................2 1B
Business property...........1 8Taxes paid on certainBad debt ...................3 0 Installment sale.......... 18, 20employee tips............2 0Barter income................2 2 Like-kind exchange.... 18, 20, 25Welfare-to-work............2 1Basis of property.............1 9 Nontaxable exchange........1 8Work opportunity............2 1Business: Sale of a business...........1 9Tax kit....................5 9 Dividend income..............2 3Business expenses............3 0 D Donation of inventory..........2 7Business income.............2 1 Damages as income...........2 5 Drawing account..............2 8
Debt:
B a d......................3 0C ECanceled .................2 3Calendar tax year defined.......1 3 e-file........................7Qualified real propertyCanceled debt............ 23, 24 Electric vehicle credit..........3 1business................2 4Capital gain or loss............1 9 Electronic filing................7Debts:Car expenses................3 1 Employee benefit programs.....3 3Refund offset against.........7Cash discount............ 26, 28 Employees’ pay..............3 3Deductions:Cash method of accounting.....1 4 Employer identification numberTravel expenses............3 7Change, accounting method.....1 8 (EIN)......................6Definitions:Claim for refund..............5 8 Employment taxes:Accounting method..........1 3Clean-fuel vehicle credit........3 1 About ....................1 1Accounting period...........1 3
Collection of tax..............5 8 Deduction for..............3 6Bartering..................2 2
Combination method of Empowerment zoneBasis ....................1 9
accounting................1 5 employment credit...........2 0Business bad debt..........3 0
Comments on publication........3 Cash discount........... 26, 28 Energy credit................2 1
Condemned property..........2 0 Dispositions of property.......1 8 Enhanced oil recovery credit.....2 0
Consignments ...............2 5 Drawing account............2 8 Entertainment expenses........3 7
Construction allowances........2 6 Entertainment expenses......3 7 Escrow, payments placed in.....2 6
Fair market value...........1 9Contributions to selected Estimated tax.................9
Fringe benefit..............3 3community development Examinations (audits)..........5 7corporations, credit for.......2 0 Local transportation Excise taxes:expenses................3 1Cost of goods sold............2 7 About ....................1 1Necessary expense.........3 0Credit: Deduction for..............3 7Net operating loss...........3 9Alcohol fuels...............2 0 Expenses ...................3 0Nonbusiness bad debt.......3 1Clean-fuel vehicle...........3 1
Ordinary expense...........3 0Contributions to selected
FPrincipal place of business....3 8community development
Fair market value defined.......1 9corporations.............2 0 Qualified long-term real
Disabled access............2 0 property.................2 6 Filing business taxes...........6
Page 62

Page 63 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fiscal tax year defined.........1 3 Mileage rate for vehicles........3 1H
Form 4797 ..................2 5 More information (See Tax help)Health insurance, deduction
Form: for self-employed...........3 4
1040 ......................7 Help (See Tax help) N
1040–ES ..................9 Help from Small Business Net operating losses...........3 9
1040–V ................7 ,  4 3 Administration..............6 0 Net profit or loss..............3 91099–B ..................2 2 Home, business use of.........3 8 New York Liberty Zone:1099–MISC ............ 11, 22 Business employee credit.....2 11128 .....................1 3 Nonbusiness bad debt.........3 1I2210 ......................9 Nondeductible insuranceIdentification numbers..........62290 .....................1 1 premiums .................3 4Income:3115 .....................1 8 Nonemployee compensation....2 2Barter....................2 23468 .....................2 1 Nontaxable exchanges.........1 8Bonus ....................2 33800 .....................2 1 Not-for-profit activities..........4 0Cancelled lease payments....2 34562 .....................3 3 Dividend..................2 34684 .....................2 0 How to account for..........2 6 O4797 .................. 19, 20 Other types................2 4 Ordinary gain or loss..........1 94868 ......................8 Paid to a third party....... 23, 26 Orphan drug credit............2 15884 .....................2 1 Prepaid rent...............2 36251 .....................2 1 Other deductible expenses......3 9Rental................. 22, 236252 .....................2 0 Other nondeductible expenses . . . 39Income tax:6478 .....................2 0 About .....................76765 .....................2 1 PDeduction for..............3 67 2 0......................1 1 How to pay.................9 Parking fees.................3 28300 .....................1 2 Underpayment penalty........9 Pay, different kinds of..........3 38582–CR .................2 1 Income tax return, who must file . . . 7Paying:8586 .....................2 1 Independent contractor.........1 1 Business taxes..............68594 .....................1 9 Income tax.................9Indian employment credit.......2 08820 .....................2 1 Penalty:Individual taxpayer identification8824 .................. 18, 20 Failure to file informationnumber (ITIN)...............68826 .....................2 0 returns..................1 2Information returns............1 18829 .....................3 9 Failure to furnish correctInnocent spouse relief.........5 88830 .....................2 0 payee statements.........1 2Installment sales..............1 88835 .....................2 1 Underpayment of tax..........9Insurance:8844 .....................2 0 Pension plans................3 5Expense ..................3 38845 .....................2 0 Personal property tax..........3 6Proceeds .................2 68846 .....................2 0 Prepaid expense:Interest:8847 .....................2 0 Extends useful life...........3 4Expense ..................3 48857 .....................5 8 Rent .....................3 6Income ...................2 38861 .....................2 1 Professional fees.............3 5Inventories..................1 68884 .....................2 1
Promissory notes.............2 4Investment credit.............2 18886 ......................5
Publications (See Tax help)IRS mission..................39 8 2......................2 4
Schedule C.................7
Schedule C–EZ .............7 QKS S – 4 .....................6 Qualified real propertyKickbacks................ 25, 39S S – 5 .....................6 business debt..............2 4
W – 2.....................1 1
LW – 7......................6 RLegal fees..................3 5W – 9......................6 Real estate rents.............2 2Like-kind exchanges........ 18, 25Free tax services.............5 9 Real estate taxes.............3 7Local transportation expenses . . . 31Fringe benefits...............3 3 Recovery of deductions........2 5Lodging ....................3 7Fuel taxes..................3 7 Reforestation credit...........2 1Long-term capital gain or loss....1 9 Refund:Lost income.................2 4 Offset against debts..........7G Low-income housing credit......2 1 Refund, claim for.............5 8General business credit........2 0
Rehabilitation credit...........2 1Gross profit:
MAccuracy..................3 0 Related persons:
Additions to................3 0 M eals......................3 7 Special rule................1 5
Page 63

Page 64 of 64 of Publication 334 9:09 - 16-DEC-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Unreasonable rent..........3 5 S mall Business Administration . . . 60 Real estate................3 7
Sales ....................3 7Renewable electricity Social security coverage .........9
Self-employment..........9 ,  3 6production credit............2 1 Social security number (SSN).....6
Taxpayer Advocate............5 8Rent expense................3 5 Sole proprietor, defined.........3
Taxpayer rights..............5 7Rental income...............2 2 Standard mileage rate.........3 1
Tolls.......................3 2Repayment of income..........1 4 Statutory employee.............3
Trade discount............ 26, 28Reportable transactions..........5 Suggestions for publication.......3
Transportation expenses.......3 1Research credit..............2 1
Travel expenses..............3 7Restricted property............2 4 T
Truck expenses..............3 1Retirement plans.............3 5 Tax help....................5 8
TTY/TDD information..........5 8Tax home ................ 31, 37
S Tax preparation fees...........3 5
USalaries....................3 3 Tax refund:
Underpayment of tax penalty.....9Sale of a business............1 9 Offset against debts..........7
Uniform capitalization rules......1 7Sales of assets...............1 8 Tax return:
How to file..................7Sales tax...................3 7
Who must file...............7Sample returns...............4 0 W
Tax shelter disclosure state......4Schedule C ..................7 W ages .....................3 3
Tax year....................1 3Schedule C–EZ ...............7 W elfare-to-work credit.........2 1
Taxes:Section 179 deduction.........3 2 W ork opportunity credit.........2 1
Deduction for..............3 6Self-employed health
Employment ............ 11, 36insurance deduction.........3 4 YExcise................. 11, 37Self-employment tax: Your business tax kit..........5 9Fuel .....................3 7About .....................9 Income .................7 ,  3 6 ■Deduction for..............3 6 Paid on certain employeeTax rate..................1 0 tips....................2 0Time limit for posting income....9 Personal property...........3 6Short-term capital gain or loss . . . 19
Page 64