Userid: SD_T81KB schema tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/XML Fileid: ...ubs and Instruct\2011 Cycle Year\P 525\11P525 - 01-01-12 - EPIC.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047D
What's New .................... . 1Department
of the Reminders ..................... . 2Treasury Taxable and
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue Employee Compensation .......... . 3Nontaxable Service Miscellaneous Compensation ....... . 3
Fringe Benefits ................ . 4
Retirement Plan Contributions ...... . 9Income
Stock Options ................ . 11
Restricted Property ............. . 13
Special Rules for CertainFor use in preparing Employees .................. . 14
Clergy ..................... . 14
Members of Religious Orders ...... . 142011 Returns
Foreign Employer .............. . 14
Military ..................... . 15
Volunteers .................. . 15
Business and Investment Income .... . 15
Rents From Personal Property ..... . 15
Royalties ................... . 16
Partnership Income ............ . 16
S Corporation Income ........... . 16
Sickness and Injury Benefits ........ . 17
Disability Pensions ............. . 17
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts ................ . 17
Workers' Compensation ......... . 18
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits ................. . 18
Miscellaneous Income ............ . 19
Bartering ................... . 19
Canceled Debts ............... . 19
Host or Hostess ............... . 21
Life Insurance Proceeds ......... . 21
Recoveries .................. . 22
Survivor Benefits .............. . 29
Unemployment Benefits ......... . 29
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits ......... . 30
Other Income ................ . 31
Repayments ................... . 36
How To Get Tax Help ............. . 37
Index ......................... . 39
What's New
Future developments. The IRS has created
a page on IRS.gov for more information about
Publication 525, at www.irs.gov/pub525. Infor-
mation about any future developments affecting
Publication 525 (such as legislation enacted af-
ter we release it) will be posted on that page.
Homeowners' assistance available. If you
are a homeowner who has received or benefitedGet forms and other information
from payments made under the Housing Fi-faster and easier by: nance Agency's (HFA's) Hardest Hit Fund, the
Emergency Homeowners' Loan Program
Internet IRS.gov (EHLP), or substantially similar state programs
(SSSPs), you can exclude the payments from
Jan 01, 2012

Page 2 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gross income under the general welfare exclu- met. See Nonqualified deferred compensation income for you, you must include the amount in
plans under Employee Compensation, later. your income when the third party receives it.sion. See Hardest Hit Fund and Emergency
Homeowners' Loan Program, later, and Publica- Health Savings Account (HSA). You can Example. You and your employer agreetion 530, Tax Information for Homeowners, for fund your HSA with a one-time direct transfer that part of your salary is to be paid directly tomore information. from your individual retirement plan, health reim- your former spouse. You must include that
bursement account, or health flexible spending amount in your income when your former
account and exclude the amount of the transfer spouse receives it.
from income. However, you must include the
Reminders amount transferred in your income, as well as Prepaid income. In most cases, prepaid in-pay a 10% additional tax, if you do not remain an come, such as compensation for future services,Roth IRAs. Half of any income that results eligible individual for at least 12 months after the is included in your income in the year you re-from a rollover or conversion to a Roth IRA from month of the transfer. See Accident or Health ceive it. However, if you use an accrual methodanother retirement plan in 2010 is included in Plan under Fringe Benefits, later. of accounting, you can defer prepaid incomeincome in 2011, and the other half in 2012, you receive for services to be performed beforeQualified joint venture. A qualified joint ven-unless you elected to include all of it in 2010. the end of the next tax year. In this case, youture conducted by you and your spouse may not include the payment in your income as you earnbe treated as a partnership if you file a jointTerrorist attacks. You can exclude from in- it by performing the services.return for the tax year. See Partnership Incomecome certain disaster assistance, disability, and
under Business and Investment Income, later.death payments received as a result of a terror-
Comments and suggestions. We welcomeist or military action. For more information, see Photographs of missing children. The Inter- your comments about this publication and yourPublication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Ter- nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the suggestions for future editions.rorist Attacks. National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- You can write to us at the following address:
dren. Photographs of missing children selectedGulf oil spill. You are required to include in Internal Revenue Serviceby the Center may appear in this publication onyour gross income payments you received for Individual and Specialty Forms andpages that otherwise would be blank. You canlost wages, lost business income, or lost profits.  Publications Branchhelp bring these children home by looking at theSee Gulf oil spill under Other Income, later. SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Iphotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526Astronauts. You also can exclude death pay- (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. Washington, DC 20224ments for astronauts dying in the line of duty
after 2002.
We respond to many letters by telephone.Qualified settlement income. If you are a Introduction Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-qualified taxpayer, you can contribute all or part clude your daytime phone number, including theYou can receive income in the form of money,of your qualified settlement income, up to area code, in your correspondence.property, or services. This publication discusses$100,000, to an eligible retirement plan, includ- You can email us at taxforms@irs.gov .many kinds of income and explains whethering an IRA. Contributions to eligible retirement Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis-plans, other than a Roth IRA or a designated ject line. You can also send us comments fromcussions on employee wages and fringe bene-Roth contribution, reduce the qualified settle- www.irs.gov/formspubs/. Select ªComment onfits, and income from bartering, partnerships, Sment income that you must include in income. Tax Forms and Publicationsº under ªInformationcorporations, and royalties. It also includes infor-See Exxon Valdez settlement income  under about.ºmation on disability pensions, life insurance pro-Other Income, later. Although we cannot respond individually toceeds, and welfare and other public assistance each comment received, we do appreciate yourForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or benefits. Check the index for the location of a feedback and will consider your comments asresident alien, you must report income from specific subject. we revise our tax products.sources outside the United States (foreign in- In most cases, an amount included in your
come) on your tax return unless it is exempt by income is taxable unless it is specifically ex- Ordering forms and publications. Visit
U.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside empted by law. Income that is taxable must be www.irs.gov/formspubs/ to download forms and
or outside the United States and whether or not reported on your return and is subject to tax. publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the
Income that is nontaxable may have to beyou receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- address below and receive a response within 10
shown on your tax return but is not taxable. days after your request is received.ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This
applies to earned income (such as wages and Internal Revenue Servicetips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- 1201 N. Mitsubishi MotorwayConstructively received income. You areest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, Bloomington, IL 61705-6613generally taxed on income that is available toand royalties). you, regardless of whether it is actually in your
 If you reside outside the United States, you possession. Tax questions. If you have a tax question,may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign A valid check that you received or that was check the information available on IRS.gov orsource earned income. For details, see Publica- made available to you before the end of the tax call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxtion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi- year is considered income constructively re- questions sent to either of the above addresses.dent Aliens Abroad. ceived in that year, even if you do not cash the
check or deposit it to your account until the nextDisaster mitigation payments. You can ex- Useful Itemsyear. For example, if the postal service tries to You may want to see:clude from income grants you use to mitigate deliver a check to you on the last day of the tax(reduce the severity of) potential damage from year but you are not at home to receive it, you Publicationfuture natural disasters that are paid to you must include the amount in your income for thatthrough state and local governments. For more tax year. If the check was mailed so that it could ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Businessinformation, see Disaster mitigation payments not possibly reach you until after the end of the ❏ 523 Selling Your Homeunder Welfare and Other Public Assistance tax year, and you otherwise could not get theBenefits, later. funds before the end of the year, you include the ❏ 527 Residential Rental Property
amount in your income for the next tax year.Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. ❏ 541 Partnerships
In most cases, all amounts deferred under a Assignment of income. Income received ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofnonqualified deferred compensation plan for all by an agent for you is income you constructively Assetstax years are included in gross income for the received in the year the agent received it. If you
current year, unless certain requirements are agree by contract that a third party is to receive ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
Page 2 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 3 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, and Bankruptcy. If you filed for bankruptcy under promises to pay you a bonus or award at some
Administrators Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code, you must future time, it is not taxable until you receive it or
allocate your wages and withheld income tax. it is made available to you.❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income Your W-2 will show your total wages and with- Employee achievement award. If you re-❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalent held income tax for the year. On your tax return, ceive tangible personal property (other thanRailroad Retirement Benefits you report the wages and withheld income tax cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) asfor the period before you filed for bankruptcy.❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education an award for length of service or safety achieve-Your bankruptcy estate reports the wages and ment, you generally can exclude its value from❏ 4681 Canceled Debts, Foreclosures, withheld income tax for the period after you filed your income. However, the amount you can ex-Repossessions, and for bankruptcy. If you receive other information clude is limited to your employer's cost andAbandonments returns (such as Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardsDistributions, or 1099-INT, Interest Income) that that are not qualified plan awards) for all suchForm (and Instructions) report gross income to you, rather than to the awards you receive during the year. Your em-bankruptcy estate, you must allocate that in-❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return ployer can tell you whether your award is acome. qualified plan award. Your employer must make❏ 1040A U.S. Individual Income Tax Return The only exception is for purposes of figuring the award as part of a meaningful presentation,your self-employment tax, if you are❏ 1040EZ Income Tax Return for Single under conditions and circumstances that do notself-employed. For that purpose, you must takeand Joint Filers With No create a significant likelihood of it being dis-into account all your self-employment income forDependents guised pay.the year from services performed both before
However, the exclusion does not apply to the❏ 1040NR U.S. Nonresident Alien Income and after the beginning of the case.
following awards.Tax Return You must file a statement with your income
tax return stating that you filed a Chapter 11 • A length-of-service award if you received it❏ 1099-R Distributions From Pensions, bankruptcy case. The statement must show the for less than 5 years of service or if youAnnuities, Retirement or allocation and describe the method used to received another length-of-service awardProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, make the allocation. For a sample of this state- during the year or the previous 4 years. Insurance Contracts, etc. ment and other information, see Notice 2006-83, • A safety achievement award if you are a❏ W-2 Wage and Tax Statement 2006-40 I.R.B. 596, available at www.irs.gov/irb/ manager, administrator, clerical employee,2006-40_IRB/ar12.html. or other professional employee or if moreSee How To Get Tax Help, near the end of this
than 10% of eligible employees previouslypublication, for information about getting these Miscellaneous received safety achievement awards dur-publications. Compensation ing the year. 
This section discusses many types of employee
Example. Ben Green received three em-compensation. The subjects are arranged in al-
Employee ployee achievement awards during the year: aphabetical order.
nonqualified plan award of a watch valued at
Advance commissions and other earnings.Compensation $250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereo
If you receive advance commissions or other valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued at
In most cases, you must include in gross income amounts for services to be performed in the $500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-
everything you receive in payment for personal future and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you fied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each
services. In addition to wages, salaries, commis- must include these amounts in your income in award by itself would be excluded from income.
sions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms of the year you receive them. However, because the $1,750 total value of the
compensation such as fringe benefits and stock If you repay unearned commissions or other awards is more than $1,600, Ben must include
options. amounts in the same year you receive them, $150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income.
   You should receive a Form W-2 from your reduce the amount included in your income by
employer showing the pay you received for your the repayment. If you repay them in a later tax Differential wage payments. This is any pay-
services. Include your pay on line 7 of Form year, you can deduct the repayment as an item- ment made by an employer to an individual for
1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040), any period during which the individual is, for a
1040EZ, even if you do not receive a Form W-2. Itemized Deductions, or you may be able to take period of more than 30 days, an active duty
If you performed services, other than as an a credit for that year. See Repayments, later. member of the uniformed services and repre-
independent contractor, and your employer did sents all or a portion of the wages the individualAllowances and reimbursements.   If younot withhold social security and Medicare taxes would have received from the employer for thatreceive travel, transportation, or other businessfrom your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncol- period. These payments are treated as wagesexpense allowances or reimbursements fromlected Social Security and Medicare Tax on and are subject to income tax withholding, butyour employer, see Publication 463, Travel, En-Wages, with your Form 1040. These wages not FICA or FUTA taxes. The payments aretertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you aremust be included on line 7 of Form 1040. See reported as wages on Form W-2.reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-Form 8919 for more information.
tion 521, Moving Expenses. Government cost-of-living allowances.
Childcare providers. If you provide childcare, Cost-of-living allowances generally are includedBack pay awards. Include in income amountseither in the child's home or in your home or in your income. However, cost-of-living al-you are awarded in a settlement or judgment forother place of business, the pay you receive lowances are not included in your income if youback pay. These include payments made to youmust be included in your income. If you are not were a federal civilian employee or a federalfor damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,an employee, you are probably self-employed court employee who was stationed in Alaska,and unpaid health insurance premiums. Theyand must include payments for your services on Hawaii, or outside the United States. Beginningshould be reported to you by your employer onSchedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From in 2010, these federal employees started beingForm W-2.Business, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net transitioned from a nontaxable cost-of-living ad-
Profit From Business. You generally are not an justment to a taxable locality-based comparabil-Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awardsemployee unless you are subject to the will and ity payment.you receive for outstanding work are included incontrol of the person who employs you as to your income and should be shown on your Form Allowances and differentials that increasewhat you are to do and how you are to do it. W-2. These include prizes such as vacation trips your basic pay as an incentive for taking a less
Babysitting. If you babysit for relatives or for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award you desirable post of duty are part of your compen-
neighborhood children, whether on a regular receive is goods or services, you must include sation and must be included in income. For
basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare the fair market value of the goods or services in example, your compensation includes Foreign
providers apply to you. your income. However, if your employer merely Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropical
Publication 525 (2011) Page 3

Page 4 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
differentials. For more information, see Publica- repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay- not to compete) is treated as the performance of
tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees ment to the second agency. You can reduce services for purposes of these rules.
Stationed Abroad. gross wages by the amount you repaid in the See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in this
same tax year in which you received it. Attach to discussion, for information on how to determine
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. your tax return a copy of the receipt or statement the amount to include in income.
Your employer will report to you the total amount given to you by the agency you repaid to explain
of deferrals for the year under a nonqualified Recipient of fringe benefit. You are the re-the difference between the wages on your return
deferred compensation plan. This amount is cipient of a fringe benefit if you perform theand the wages on your Forms W-2.
shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. This services for which the fringe benefit is provided.Outplacement services. If you choose toamount is not included in your income. You are considered to be the recipient even if itaccept a reduced amount of severance pay soHowever, if at any time during the tax year, is given to another person, such as a member ofthat you can receive outplacement servicesthe plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is your family. An example is a car your employer(such as training in rÂesumÂe writing and interviewnot operated under those requirements, all gives to your spouse for services you perform.techniques), you must include the unreducedamounts deferred under the plan for the tax year The car is considered to have been provided toamount of the severance pay in income.and all preceding tax years are included in your you and not to your spouse.
However, you can deduct the value of theseincome for the current year. This amount is in- You do not have to be an employee of the
outplacement services (up to the difference be-cluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, box provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. If
tween the severance pay included in income1. It is also shown on Form W-2, box 12, using you are a partner, director, or independent con-
and the amount actually received) as a miscella-code Z. tractor, you also can be the recipient of a fringe
neous deduction (subject to the benefit.
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income (AGI) limit) onNonqualified deferred compensation plans
Schedule A (Form 1040).of nonqualified entities. In most cases, any Provider of benefit. Your employer or an-
compensation deferred under a nonqualified de- other person for whom you perform services is
Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employerferred compensation plan of a nonqualified en- the provider of a fringe benefit regardless of
while you are sick or injured is part of your salarytity is included in gross income when there is no whether that person actually provides the fringe
or wages. In addition, you must include in yoursubstantial risk of forfeiture of the rights to such benefit to you. The provider can be a client or
income sick pay benefits received from any ofcompensation. For this purpose, a nonqualified customer of an independent contractor.
the following payers.entity is:
Accounting period. You must use the same• A welfare fund.1. A foreign corporation unless substantially accounting period your employer uses to report
all of its income is: your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-• A state sickness or disability fund.
ployer has the option to report taxable noncash• An association of employers or employ-a. Effectively connected with the conduct fringe benefits by using either of the followingees.of a trade or business in the United rules.States, or • An insurance company, if your employer • The general rule: benefits are reported forpaid for the plan.b. Subject to a comprehensive foreign in- a full calendar year (January 1±Decembercome tax. 31).However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-
dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you • The special accounting period rule: bene-2. A partnership unless substantially all of its receive under the policy are not taxable. For fits provided during the last 2 months ofincome is allocated to persons other than: more information, see Other Sickness and Injury the calendar year (or any shorter period)Benefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits ,a. Foreign persons for whom the income are treated as paid during the followinglater.is not subject to a comprehensive for- calendar year. For example, each year
eign income tax, and your employer reports the value of bene-Social security and Medicare taxes paid by fits provided during the last 2 months ofb. Tax-exempt organizations. employer. If you and your employer have an the prior year and the first 10 months ofagreement that your employer pays your social the current year.security and Medicare taxes without deducting
Note received for services. If your employer them from your gross wages, you must report Your employer does not have to use the same
gives you a secured note as payment for your the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages accounting period for each fringe benefit, but
services, you must include the fair market value on your tax return. The payment is also treated must use the same period for all employees who
(usually the discount value) of the note in your as wages for figuring your social security and receive a particular benefit.
income for the year you receive it. When you Medicare taxes and your social security and You must use the same accounting periodlater receive payments on the note, a propor- Medicare benefits. However, these payments that you use to report the benefit to claim antionate part of each payment is the recovery of are not treated as social security and Medicare employee business deduction (for use of a car,the fair market value that you previously in- wages if you are a household worker or a farm for example).cluded in your income. Do not include that part worker.
again in your income. Include the rest of the Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax-payment in your income in the year of payment. Stock appreciation rights. Do not include a able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otherIf your employer gives you a nonnegotiable stock appreciation right granted by your em- compensation) of Form W-2. The total value ofunsecured note as payment for your services, ployer in income until you exercise (use) the your fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14.payments on the note that are credited toward right. When you use the right, you are entitled to The value of your fringe benefits may be addedthe principal amount of the note are compensa- a cash payment equal to the fair market value of to your other compensation on one Form W-2, ortion income when you receive them. the corporation's stock on the date of use minus you may receive a separate Form W-2 showingthe fair market value on the date the right was just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 withSeverance pay. You must include in income granted. You include the cash payment in in- a notation in box 14.amounts you receive as severance pay and any come in the year you use the right.payment for the cancellation of your employ-
ment contract.
Fringe Benefits Accident or Health Plan
Accrued leave payment. If you are a fed-
eral employee and receive a lump-sum payment Fringe benefits received in connection with the In most cases, the value of accident or health
for accrued annual leave when you retire or performance of your services are included in plan coverage provided to you by your employer
resign, this amount will be included as wages on your income as compensation unless you pay is not included in your income. Benefits you
your Form W-2. fair market value for them or they are specifically receive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-
If you resign from one agency and are reem- excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform- plained, later, under Sickness and Injury Bene-
ployed by another agency, you may have to ance of services (for example, under a covenant fits.
Page 4 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 5 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For information on the items covered in this Contributions by an S corporation to a 2% Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you a
section, other than Long-term care coverage , shareholder-employee's HSA for services ren- turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value at
see Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts dered are treated as guaranteed payments and Christmas or other holidays, do not include the
and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. are includible in the shareholder-employee's value of the gift in your income. However, if your
gross income. The shareholder-employee can employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or a
deduct the contribution made to the share-Long-term care coverage. Contributions by similar item that you can easily exchange for
holder-employee's HSA.your employer to provide coverage for long-term cash, you include the value of that gift as extra
care services generally are not included in your salary or wages regardless of the amount in-Qualified HSA funding distribution. Youincome. However, contributions made through a volved.can make a one-time distribution from your indi-flexible spending or similar arrangement (such vidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA andas a cafeteria plan) must be included in your you generally will not include any of the distribu-income. This amount will be reported as wages Dependent Care Benefitstion in your income. See Publication 590, Indi-in box 1 of your Form W-2. vidual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), for the If your employer provides dependent care bene-requirements for these qualified HSA fundingArcher MSA contributions. Contributions by fits under a qualified plan, you may be able todistributions.your employer to your Archer MSA generally are exclude these benefits from your income. De-
Failure to maintain eligibility. If your HSAnot included in your income. Their total will be pendent care benefits include:
received qualified HSA distributions from areported in box 12 of Form W-2, with code R.
• Amounts your employer pays directly tohealth FSA or HRA (discussed earlier) or a qual-You must report this amount on Form 8853,
either you or your care provider for theified HSA funding distribution, you must be anArcher MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance
care of your qualifying person while youeligible individual for HSA purposes for the pe-Contracts. File the form with your return.
work, andriod beginning with the month in which the quali-
fied distribution was made and ending on theHealth flexible spending arrangement • The fair market value of care in a daycarelast day of the 12th month following that month.(health FSA). If your employer provides a facility provided or sponsored by your em-If you fail to be an eligible individual during thishealth FSA that qualifies as an accident or ployer.period, other than because of death or disability,health plan, the amount of your salary reduction,
you must include the distribution in your incomeand reimbursements of your medical care ex- The amount you can exclude is limited to thefor the tax year in which you become ineligible.penses, in most cases, are not included in your lesser of:This income is also subject to an additional 10%income.
tax. • The total amount of dependent care bene-Qualified HSA distribution. A health FSA fits you received during the year,can make a qualified HSA distribution. This dis-
tribution is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee • The total amount of qualified expensesAdoption Assistanceby your employer. In most cases, the distribution you incurred during the year,
is not included in your income and is not deducti- You may be able to exclude from your income • Your earned income,ble. See Publication 969 for the requirements for amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
these qualified HSA distributions. • Your spouse's earned income, orployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-
nection with your adoption of an eligible child. • $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). See Instructions for Form 8839, Qualified Adop- rately).If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies tion Expenses, for more information.
as an accident or health plan, coverage and Your employer must show the total amount ofAdoption benefits are reported by your em-reimbursements of your medical care expenses dependent care benefits provided to you duringployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. Theygenerally are not included in your income. also are included as social security and Medi- the year under a qualified plan in box 10 of your
Qualified HSA distribution. An HRA can care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are Form W-2. Your employer also will include any
make a qualified HSA distribution. This distribu- not included as wages in box 1. To determine dependent care benefits over $5,000 in your
tion is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee by the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.
your employer. In most cases, the distribution is complete Part III of Form 8839. File the form with  To claim the exclusion, you must completenot included in your income and is not deducti- your return. Part III of Form 2441, Child and Dependent Careble. See Publication 969 for the requirements for
Expenses. See the Instructions for Form 2441these qualified HSA distributions.
for more information.Athletic Facilities
Health savings accounts (HSA). If you are
If your employer provides you with the free oran eligible individual, you and any other person, Educational Assistancelow-cost use of an employer-operated gym orincluding your employer or a family member,
other athletic club on your employer's premises,can make contributions to your HSA. Contribu- You can exclude from your income up to $5,250the value is not included in your compensation.tions, other than employer contributions, are de- of qualified employer-provided educational as-The gym must be used primarily by employees,ductible on your return whether or not you sistance. For more information, see Publicationtheir spouses, and their dependent children.itemize deductions. Contributions made by your 970.employer are not included in your income. Distri- If your employer pays for a fitness program
butions from your HSA that are used to pay provided to you at an off-site resort hotel or
qualified medical expenses are not included in athletic club, the value of the program is in- Employee Discountsyour income. Distributions not used for qualified cluded in your compensation.
medical expenses are included in your income. If your employer sells you property or services at
See Publication 969 for the requirements of an a discount, you may be able to exclude the
HSA. De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits amount of the discount from your income. TheContributions by a partnership to a bona fide exclusion applies to discounts on property orpartner's HSA are not contributions by an em- If your employer provides you with a product or services offered to customers in the ordinaryployer. The contributions are treated as a distri- service and the cost of it is so small that it would course of the line of business in which you work.bution of money and are not included in the be unreasonable for the employer to account for However, it does not apply to discounts on realpartner's gross income. Contributions by a part- it, the value is not included in your income. In property or property commonly held for invest-nership to a partner's HSA for services rendered most cases, the value of benefits such as dis- ment (such as stocks or bonds).are treated as guaranteed payments that are counts at company cafeterias, cab fares home
The exclusion is limited to the price chargedincludible in the partner's gross income. In both when working overtime, and company picnics
nonemployee customers multiplied by the fol-situations, the partner can deduct the contribu- are not included in your income. Also see Em-
tion made to the partner's HSA. ployee Discounts, later. lowing percentage.
Publication 525 (2011) Page 5

Page 6 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• For a discount on property, your em- Accidental death benefits. Insurance that Worksheet 1. Figuring theployer's gross profit percentage (gross provides accidental or other death benefits but Cost of Group-Term Lifeprofit divided by gross sales) on all prop- does not provide general death benefits (travel Insurance To Include inerty sold during the employer's previous insurance, for example) is not group-term life
Incometax year. (Ask your employer for this per- insurance.
Keep for Your Records
centage.) Former employer. If your former employer
provided more than $50,000 of group-term life• For a discount on services, 20%.
1. Enter the total amount ofinsurance coverage during the year, the amount
your insurance coverageincluded in your income is reported as wages inFinancial Counseling Fees from your employer(s) ... . 1.box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately
in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show theFinancial counseling fees paid for you by your 2. Limit on exclusion foramount of uncollected social security and Medi-employer are included in your income and must employer-providedcare taxes on the excess coverage, with codesbe reported as part of wages. If the fees are for group-term life insuranceM and N. You must pay these taxes with yourtax or investment counseling, they can be de- coverage ............ . 2. 50,000income tax return. Include them on line 60, Formducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel- 1040, and enter ªUTº and the amount of thelaneous deduction (subject to the 2%-of-AGI 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3.taxes on the dotted line next to line 60. For morelimit). information, see the Instructions for Form 1040.   Qualified retirement planning services paid 4. Divide line 3 by $1,000.
for you by your employer may be excluded from Figure to the nearest tenth 4.Two or more employers. Your exclusion for
your income. For more information, see Retire- employer-provided group-term life insurance
ment Planning Services, later. 5. Go to Table 1. Using yourcoverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of
age on the last day of thecoverage, whether the insurance is provided by
tax year, find your agea single employer or multiple employers. If two
group in the left column,Group-Term Life Insurance or more employers provide insurance coverage
and enter the cost from thethat totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-In most cases, the cost of up to $50,000 of column on the right for yourported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not begroup-term life insurance coverage provided to age group ........... . 5.correct. You must figure how much to include inyou by your employer (or former employer) is not your income. Reduce the amount you figure byincluded in your income. However, you must 6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .. . 6.any amount reported with code C in box 12 ofinclude in income the cost of employer-provided your Forms W-2, add the result to the wages 7. Enter the number of fullinsurance that is more than the cost of $50,000 reported in box 1, and report the total on your months of coverage at thisof coverage reduced by any amount you pay return. cost ............... . 7.toward the purchase of the insurance.
Figuring the taxable cost.  Use the followingFor exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost
8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 .. . 8.worksheet to figure the amount to include in yourexcluded, and Entire cost taxed, later.
income.If your employer provided more than $50,000
9. Enter theIf you pay any part of the cost of the insur-of coverage, the amount included in your in-
premiums youance, your entire payment reduces, dollar forcome is reported as part of your wages in box 1
paid per month 9.dollar, the amount you otherwise would includeof your Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately in
in your income. However, you cannot reduce thebox 12 with code C.
10. Enter the numberamount to include in your income by:Group-term life insurance. This insurance is of months you
• Payments for coverage in a different taxterm life insurance protection (insurance for a paid the
year,fixed period of time) that: premiums ... . 10.
• Payments for coverage through a cafeteria• Provides a general death benefit, 11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . 11.plan, unless the payments are after-tax• Is provided to a group of employees, contributions, or 12. Subtract line 11 from line 8.• Is provided under a policy carried by the • Payments for coverage not taxed to you Include this amount inemployer, and because of the exceptions discussed later your income as wages .. . 12.
under Entire cost excluded.• Provides an amount of insurance to each
employee based on a formula that pre-
vents individual selection.
Table 1. Cost of $1,000 of
Group-Term Life Insurance for OnePermanent benefits. If your group-term life
Monthinsurance policy includes permanent benefits,
such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you
Age Costmust include in your income, as wages, the cost
Under 25 ............ . $ .05of the permanent benefits minus the amount you
25 through 29 ........ .  .06pay for them. Your employer should be able to
tell you the amount to include in your income.
30 through 34 ........ . .08
35 through 39 ........ . .09
40 through 44 ........ . .10
45 through 49 ........ . .15
50 through 54 ........ . .23
55 through 59 ........ . .43
60 through 64 ........ . .66
65 through 69 ........ . 1.27
70 and older ......... . 2.06
Page 6 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 7 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are 51 years old and work for a. You retired before January 2, 1984, and behalf of, the institution or center for use as a
employers A and B. Both employers provide were covered by the plan when you re- home. The lodging must be located on or near a
group-term life insurance coverage for you for tired, or campus of the educational institution or aca-
the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with demic health center.b. You reached age 55 before January 2,employer A and $45,000 with employer B. You 1984, and were employed by the em- Adequate rent. The amount of rent you paypay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em- ployer or its predecessor in 1983. for the year for qualified campus lodging is con-ployer B group plan. You figure the amount to sidered adequate if it is at least equal to theinclude in your income as follows. lesser of:Entire cost taxed. You are taxed on the entire
• 5% of the appraised value of the lodging,cost of group-term life insurance if either of the
Worksheet 1. Figuring the orfollowing circumstances apply.
Cost of Group-Term Life • The average of rentals paid by individuals• The insurance is provided by your em-Insurance To Include in (other than employees or students) forployer through a qualified employees'IncomeÐIllustrated comparable lodging held for rent by thetrust, such as a pension trust or a qualifiedKeep for Your Records
 educational institution.annuity plan.
If the amount you pay is less than the lesser of• You are a key employee and your em-1. Enter the total amount of your these amounts, you must include the differenceployer's plan discriminates in favor of keyinsurance coverage from your in your income.employees.employer(s) .......... . 1. 80,000
The lodging must be appraised by an inde-2. Limit on exclusion for
employer-provided pendent appraiser and the appraisal must beMeals and Lodging
group-term life insurance reviewed on an annual basis.
coverage ............ . 2. 50,000 You do not include in your income the value of
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 30,000 Example. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes-meals and lodging provided to you and your
4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. sor for State University, rents a home from thefamily by your employer at no charge if the
Figure to the nearest tenth 4. 30.0 university that is qualified campus lodging. Thefollowing conditions are met.
5. Go to Table 1. Using your house is appraised at $200,000. The average
1. The meals are:age on the last day of the tax rent paid for comparable university lodging by
year, find your age group in persons other than employees or students isa. Furnished on the business premises ofthe left column, and enter the $14,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent ofyour employer, andcost from the column on the $11,000. Carl does not include in his income any
right for your age group .. . 5. .23 b. Furnished for the convenience of your rental value because the rent he pays equals at
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ... . 6. 6.90 employer. least 5% of the appraised value of the house
7. Enter the number of full (5% ×  $200,000 = $10,000). If Carl paid annual
months of coverage at this 2. The lodging is: rent of only $8,000, he would have to includecost. ............... . 7. 12 $2,000 in his income ($10,000 − $8,000).
8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 ... . 8. 82.80 a. Furnished on the business premises of
9. Enter the premiums your employer,
you paid per month 9. 4.15 Moving Expense Reimbursementsb. Furnished for the convenience of your10. Enter the number of employer, andmonths you paid In most cases, if your employer pays for your
the premiums ... . 10. 12 moving expenses (either directly or indirectly)c. A condition of your employment. (You
11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. .. . 11. 49.80 and the expenses would have been deductible ifmust accept it in order to be able to
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. you paid them yourself, the value is not includedproperly perform your duties.)
Include this amount in your in your income. See Publication 521 for more
income as wages ...... . 12. 33.00  You also do not include in your income the information.
value of meals or meal money that qualifies as a
de minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini-The total amount to include in income for the No-Additional-Cost Servicesmal) Benefits, earlier.cost of excess group-term life insurance is $33.
Neither employer provided over $50,000 insur- Faculty lodging. If you are an employee of an The value of services you receive from yourance coverage, so the wages shown on your educational institution or an academic health employer for free, at cost, or for a reduced priceForms W-2 do not include any part of that $33. center and you are provided with lodging that is not included in your income if your employer:You must add it to the wages shown on your does not meet the three conditions given earlier, • Offers the same service for sale to cus-Forms W-2 and include the total on your return. you still may not have to include the value of the tomers in the ordinary course of the line oflodging in income. However, the lodging must business in which you work, andEntire cost excluded. You are not taxed on be qualified campus lodging, and you must pay
the cost of group-term life insurance if any of the an adequate rent. • Does not have a substantial additional
following circumstances apply. cost (including any sales income given up)Academic health center. This is an organi- to provide you with the service (regardless1. You are permanently and totally disabled zation that meets the following conditions. of what you paid for the service).and have ended your employment. • Its principal purpose or function is to pro-
2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol- vide medical or hospital care or medical In most cases, no-additional-cost services are
icy for the entire period the insurance is in education or research. excess capacity services, such as airline, bus,
force during the tax year. or train tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone serv-• It receives payments for graduate medical ices.3. A charitable organization to which contri- education under the Social Security Act.
butions are deductible is the only benefi- Example. You are employed as a flight at-• One of its principal purposes or functionsciary of the policy for the entire period the tendant for a company that owns both an airlineis to provide and teach basic and clinicalinsurance is in force during the tax year. and a hotel chain. Your employer allows you tomedical science and research using its(You are not entitled to a deduction for a take personal flights (if there is an unoccupiedown faculty.charitable contribution for naming a chari- seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if theretable organization as the beneficiary of Qualified campus lodging. Qualified cam- is an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. Theyour policy.) pus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your value of the personal flight is not included in your
4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and: spouse, or one of your dependents by, or on income. However, the value of the hotel room is
Publication 525 (2011) Page 7

Page 8 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
included in your income because you do not business of transporting persons for compensa- value of the fringe benefit is more than the sum
work in the hotel business. tion. of:
1. The amount, if any, you paid for the bene-Qualified parking. This is parking provided to
fit, plusan employee at or near the employer's place ofRetirement Planning Services
business. It also includes parking provided on or 2. The amount, if any, specifically excludedIf your employer has a qualified retirement plan, near a location from which the employee com- from your income by law.qualified retirement planning services provided mutes to work by mass transit, in a commuter
to you (and your spouse) by your employer are If you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit,highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in-
not included in your income. Qualified services no amount is included in your income.clude parking at or near the employee's home.
include retirement planning advice, information Fair market value. The fair market value ofabout your employer's retirement plan, and in- Qualified bicycle commuting. This is reim- a fringe benefit is determined by all the facts andformation about how the plan may fit into your bursement based on the number of qualified circumstances. It is the amount you would haveoverall individual retirement income plan. You bicycle commuting months for the year. A quali- to pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit.cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation, fied bicycle commuting month is any month you This is determined without regard to:accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro- use the bicycle regularly for a substantial portion
vided by your employer. Also, see Financial • Your perceived value of the benefit, orof the travel between your home and place of
Counseling Fees, earlier. employment and you do not receive any of the • The amount your employer paid for theother qualified transportation fringe benefits. benefit.The reimbursement can be for expenses you
Transportation incurred during the year for the purchase of a Employer-provided vehicles. If your em-bicycle and bicycle improvements, repair, and ployer provides a car (or other highway motorIf your employer provides you with a qualified storage.transportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car is
from your income, up to certain limits. A qualified usually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.
transportation fringe benefit is: Under the general valuation rules, the valueTuition Reduction of an employer-provided vehicle is the amount• Transportation in a commuter highway ve-
you would have to pay a third party to lease theYou can exclude a qualified tuition reductionhicle (such as a van) between your home
same or a similar vehicle on the same or compa-from your income. This is the amount of a reduc-and work place,
rable terms in the same geographic area wheretion in tuition:
• A transit pass, you use the vehicle. An example of a compara-• For education (below graduate level) fur- ble lease term is the amount of time the vehicle• Qualified parking, or nished by an educational institution to an is available for your use, such as a 1-year pe-employee, former employee who retired or• Qualified bicycle commuting reimburse- riod. The value cannot be determined by multi-became disabled, or his or her spouse andment. plying a cents-per-mile rate times the number ofdependent children. miles driven unless you prove the vehicle couldCash reimbursement by your employer for these
• For education furnished to a graduate stu- have been leased on a cents-per-mile basis.expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-
dent at an educational institution if therangement is also excludable. However, cash Flights on employer-provided aircraft.graduate student is engaged in teachingreimbursement for a transit pass is excludable Under the general valuation rules, if your flightor research activities for that institution.only if a voucher or similar item that can be on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri-
exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily • Representing payment for teaching, re- marily personal and you control the use of the
available for direct distribution to you. search, or other services if you receive the aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount it
amount under the National Health Service would cost to charter the flight from a third party.Exclusion limit. The exclusion for commuter Corps Scholarship Program or the Armed If there is more than one employee on thevehicle transportation and transit pass fringe Forces Health Professions Scholarship flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must bebenefits cannot be more than $230 a month. and Financial Assistance program. divided among those employees. The divisionThe exclusion for the qualified parking fringe must be based on all the facts, including whichFor more information, see Publication 970.benefit cannot be more than $230 a month. employee or employees control the use of theThe exclusion for qualified bicycle commut- aircraft.Working Condition Benefitsing in a calendar year is $20 multiplied by the
number of qualified bicycle commuting months If your employer provides you with a product or Special valuation rules. You generally canthat year. service and the cost of it would have been allow- use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefitIf the benefits have a value that is more than able as a business or depreciation deduction if only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-these limits, the excess must be included in your you paid for it yourself, the cost is not included in ployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannotincome. You are not entitled to these exclusions your income. use a different special rule to value that benefit.if the reimbursements are made under a com-
You always can use the general valuation rulepensation reduction agreement. Example. You work as an engineer and discussed earlier, based on facts and circum-
your employer provides you with a subscription stances, even if your employer uses a specialCommuter highway vehicle. This is a high-
to an engineering trade magazine. The cost of rule.way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not
the subscription is not included in your incomeincluding the driver). At least 80% of the vehi- If you and your employer use a special valua-because the cost would have been allowable tocle's mileage must reasonably be expected to tion rule, you must include in your income theyou as a business deduction if you had paid forbe: amount your employer determines under thethe subscription yourself. special rule minus the sum of:• For transporting employees between their
homes and work place, and 1. Any amount you repaid your employer,
Valuation of Fringe Benefits plus• On trips during which employees occupy
at least half of the vehicle's adult seating 2. Any amount specifically excluded from in-If a fringe benefit is included in your income, thecapacity (not including the driver). come by law.amount included is generally its value deter-
mined under the general valuation rule or under The special valuation rules are the following.Transit pass. This is any pass, token, fare- the special valuation rules. For an exception,
card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person • The automobile lease rule.see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier.
to ride mass transit (whether public or private) • The vehicle cents-per-mile rule.General valuation rule. You must include infree or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter
your income the amount by which the fair market • The commuting rule.highway vehicle operated by a person in the
Page 8 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 9 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified automatic contribution arrange-• The unsafe conditions commuting rule. 1. $3,000,
ments. Under a qualified automatic contribu-• The employer-operated eating-facility rule. 2. $15,000, reduced by the sum of:tion arrangement, your employer can treat you
as having elected to have a part of your compen- a. The additional pre-tax elective deferralsFor more information on these rules, see Pub- sation contributed to a section 401(k) plan. You made in earlier years because of thislication 15-B, Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe are to receive written notice of your rights and rule, plusBenefits. obligations under the qualified automatic contri-
 For information on the non-commercial flight b. The aggregate amount of designatedbution arrangement. The notice must explain:
and commercial flight valuation rules, see sec- Roth contributions permitted for prior
• Your rights to elect not to have electivetions 1.61-21(g) and 1.61-21(h) of the regula- tax years because of this rule, or
contributions made, or to have contribu-tions.
tions made at a different percentage, and 3. $5,000 times the number of your years of
service for the organization, minus the total• How contributions made will be invested inRetirement Plan
elective deferrals made by your employerthe absence of any investment decision byContributions on your behalf for earlier years.you.
Your employer's contributions to a qualified re- If you qualify for the 15-year rule, your elec-
You must be given a reasonable period oftirement plan for you are not included in income tive deferrals under this limit can be as high as
time after receipt of the notice and before theat the time contributed. (Your employer can tell $19,500 for 2011.
first elective contribution is made to make anyou whether your retirement plan is qualified.) For more information, see Publication 571.
election with respect to the contributions.However, the cost of life insurance coverage
Limit for deferral under section 501(c)(18)included in the plan may have to be included. Overall limit on deferrals. For 2011, in most plans. If you are a participant in a sectionSee Group-Term Life Insurance , earlier, under cases, you should not have deferred more than 501(c)(18) plan (a trust created before June 25,Fringe Benefits. a total of $16,500 of contributions to the plans 1959, funded only by employee contributions),If your employer pays into a nonqualified listed in (1) through (3), earlier. The specific plan you should have deferred no more than theplan for you, you generally must include the limits for the plans listed in (4) through (7), ear- lesser of $7,000 or 25% of your compensation.contributions in your income as wages for the lier, are discussed later. Amounts deferred Amounts you defer under a section 501(c)(18)tax year in which the contributions are made. under specific plan limits are part of the overall plan count toward the overall limit ($16,500 inHowever, if your interest in the plan is not trans- limit on deferrals. 2011) and may affect the amount you can deferferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei- Your employer or plan administrator should under other elective deferral plans.ture (you have a good chance of losing it) at the apply the proper annual limit when figuring yourtime of the contribution, you do not have to Limit for deferrals under section 457 plans.plan contributions. However, you are responsi-include the value of your interest in your income If you are a participant in a section 457 plan (able for monitoring the total you defer to ensureuntil it is transferable or is no longer subject to a deferred compensation plan for employees ofthat the deferrals are not more than the overallsubstantial risk of forfeiture. state or local governments or tax-exempt orga-limit.
nizations), you should have deferred no moreFor information on distributions from Catch-up contributions. You may be allowed than the lesser of your includible compensationretirement plans, see Publication 575 catch-up contributions (additional elective defer- or $16,500. However, if you are within 3 years of(or Publication 721, Tax Guide to U.S.
TIP rals) if you are age 50 or older by the end of your normal retirement age, you may be allowed anCivil Service Retirement Benefits, if you are a tax year. For more information about catch-up increased limit if the plan allows it. See In-federal employee or retiree). contributions to 403(b) plans, see chapter 6 of creased limit, later.
Publication 571, Tax Sheltered Annuity Plans. Includible compensation. This is the payFor more information about additional elec- you received for the year from the employer whoElective Deferrals tive deferrals to: maintained the section 457 plan. In most cases,
If you are covered by certain kinds of retirement • SEPs (SARSEPs), see Salary Reduction it includes all the following payments. 
plans, you can choose to have part of your Simplified Employee Pension in Publica-
1. Wages and salaries.compensation contributed by your employer to a tion 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-
retirement fund, rather than have it paid to you. ness. 2. Fees for professional services.The amount you set aside (called an elective
• SIMPLE plans, see How Much Can Be 3. The value of any employer-provided quali-deferral) is treated as an employer contribution
Contributed on Your Behalf? in chapter 3 fied transportation fringe benefit (definedto a qualified plan. An elective deferral, other
of Publication 590. under Transportation, earlier) that is notthan a designated Roth contribution (discussed
included in your income.later), is not included in wages subject to income • Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferrals
tax at the time contributed. However, it is in- under section 457 plans, later. 4. Other amounts received (cash or noncash)cluded in wages subject to social security and for personal services you performed, in-Medicare taxes. cluding, but not limited to, the followingLimit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans. IfElective deferrals include elective contribu- items.you are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, youtions to the following retirement plans. generally should not have deferred more than a. Commissions and tips.$11,500 in 2011.  Amounts you defer under a1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section
SIMPLE plan count toward the overall limit b. Fringe benefits.401(k) plans).
($16,500 for 2011) and may affect the amount c. Bonuses.you can defer under other elective deferral2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ-
plans.ees. 5. Employer contributions (elective deferrals)
to:3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen- Limit for tax-sheltered annuities. If you are a
sion plans (SARSEP). participant in a tax-sheltered annuity plan a. The section 457 plan.(403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals for
4. Savings incentive match plans for employ- 2011 generally is $16,500. However, if you have b. Qualified cash or deferred arrange-
ees (SIMPLE plans). at least 15 years of service with a public school ments (section 401(k) plans) that are
system, a hospital, a home health service not included in your income.5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans). agency, a health and welfare service agency, a c. A salary reduction simplified employeechurch, or a convention or association of6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re- pension (SARSEP).churches (or associated organization), the limitporting by employer, later.)
on elective deferrals is increased by the least of d. A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b)
7. Section 457 plans. the following amounts. plan).
Publication 525 (2011) Page 9

Page 10 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
e. A savings incentive match plan for em- with code ªHº in box 12. You may deduct the amended return on Form 1040X,
ployees (SIMPLE plan). amount deferred subject to the limits that apply. Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-
Include your deduction in the total on Form turn. If you did not receive the distributionf. A section 125 cafeteria plan. 1040, line 36. Enter the amount and by April 15, 2011, you also must add it to
ª501(c)(18)(D)º on the dotted line next to line 36. your wages on your 2011 tax return.Instead of using the amounts listed earlier to
determine your includible compensation, your Designated Roth contributions.  These • If the distribution was for the income
employer can use any of the following amounts. contributions are elective deferrals but are in- earned on an excess deferral, your Form
cluded in your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. 1099-R should have the code ª8º in box 7.• Your wages as defined for income tax Designated Roth contributions to a section Add the income amount to your wages onwithholding purposes. 401(k) plan are reported using code AA in box your 2011 income tax return, regardless of
• Your wages as reported in box 1 of Form 12, or, for section 403(b) plans, code BB in box when the excess deferral was made.
W-2. 12.
Report a loss on a corrective distribution of an
• Your wages that are subject to social se- excess deferral in the year the excess amountExcess deferrals. If your deferrals exceed thecurity withholding (including elective defer- (reduced by the loss) is distributed to you. In-limit, you must notify your plan by the date re-rals). clude the loss as a negative amount on Formquired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex-
cess amount will be distributed to you. If you 1040, line 21 and identify it as ªLoss on ExcessIncreased limit. During any, or all, of the participate in more than one plan, you can have Deferral Distribution.ºlast 3 years ending before you reach normal the excess paid out of any of the plans thatretirement age under the plan, your plan may permit these distributions. You must notify each Even though a corrective distribution ofprovide that your limit is the lesser of: plan by the date required by that plan of the excess deferrals is reported on Form
amount to be paid from that particular plan. The 1099-R, it is not otherwise treated as a
TIP1. Twice the annual limit ($33,000 for 2011),
plan then must pay you the amount of the ex- distribution from the plan. It cannot be rolledor
cess, along with any income earned on that over into another plan, and it is not subject to the
2. The basic annual limit plus the amount of amount, by April 15 of the following year. additional tax on early distributions.
the basic limit not used in prior years (only You must include the excess deferral in your
allowed if not using age 50 or over income for the year of the deferral unless you
catch-up contributions). have an excess deferral of a designated Roth Excess Contributions
contribution. File Form 1040 to add the excess
Catch-up contributions. You generally If you are a highly compensated employee, thedeferral amount to your wages on line 7. Do not
can have additional elective deferrals made to total of your elective deferrals and other contri-use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to report ex-
your governmental section 457 plan if: cess deferral amounts. butions made for you for any year under a sec-
tion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as a• You reached age 50 by the end of the Excess not distributed. If you do not take percentage of pay, no more than 125% of theyear, and out the excess amount, you cannot include it in average deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligiblethe cost of the contract even though you in-• No other elective deferrals can be made non-highly compensated employees.cluded it in your income. Therefore, you arefor you to the plan for the year because of  If the total contributed to the plan is moretaxed twice on the excess deferral left in thelimits or restrictions. than the amount allowed under the ADP test, theplanÐonce when you contribute it, and again
If you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of your excess contributions must be either distributedwhen you receive it as a distribution.
includible compensation or $16,500, plus to you or recharacterized as after-tax employeeExcess distributed to you. If you take out$5,500. However, if you are within 3 years of contributions by treating them as distributed tothe excess after the year of the deferral and youretirement age and your plan provides the in- you and then contributed by you to the plan. Youreceive the corrective distribution by April 15 ofcreased limit, discussed earlier, that limit may be must include the excess contributions in yourthe following year, do not include it in incomehigher. income as wages on Form 1040, line 7. Youagain in the year you receive it. If you receive it cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ tolater, you must include it in income in both theDesignated Roth contributions. Employers report excess contribution amounts.year of the deferral and the year you receive it.with section 401(k) and section 403(b) plans can If you receive a corrective distribution of ex-Any income on the excess deferral taken out iscreate qualified Roth contribution programs so cess contributions (and allocable income), it istaxable in the tax year in which you take it out. Ifthat you may elect to have part or all of your included in your income in the year of the distri-you take out part of the excess deferral and theelective deferrals to the plan designated as af-
bution. The allocable income is the amount ofincome on it, allocate the distribution proportion-ter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Roth
gain or loss through the end of the plan year forately between the excess deferral and the in-contributions are treated as elective deferrals,
which the contribution was made that is alloca-come.except that they are included in income. Your
ble to the excess contributions. You should re-You should receive a Form 1099-R for theretirement plan must maintain separate ac-
ceive a Form 1099-R for the year the excessyear in which the excess deferral is distributed tocounts and recordkeeping for the designated
contributions are distributed to you. Add the dis-you. Use the following rules to report a correc-Roth contributions.
tribution to your wages for that year.tive distribution shown on Form 1099-R forQualified distributions from a Roth plan are
2011.not included in income. In most cases, a distribu- Even though a corrective distribution of
tion made before the end of the 5-tax-year pe- excess contributions is reported on• If the distribution was for a 2011 excessriod beginning with the first tax year for which Form 1099-R, it is not otherwisedeferral, your Form 1099-R should have
TIPyou made a designated Roth contribution to the treated as a distribution from the plan. It cannotthe code ª8º in box 7. Add the excessplan is not a qualified distribution. be rolled over into another plan, and it is notdeferral amount to your wages on your
subject to the additional tax on early distribu-2011 tax return.Reporting by employer. Your employer gen- tions.• If the distribution was for a 2011 excesserally should not include elective deferrals in
deferral to a designated Roth account,your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. Instead, your
your Form 1099-R should have code ªBº inemployer should mark the Retirement plan Excess Annual Additionsbox 7. Do not add this amount to yourcheckbox in box 13 and show the total amount
wages on your 2011 return.deferred in box 12. The amount contributed in 2011 to a defined
contribution plan is generally limited to theSection 501(c)(18)(D) contributions. • If the distribution was for a 2010 excess
lesser of 100% of your compensation orWages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2 should deferral, your Form 1099-R should have
$49,000. Under certain circumstances, contribu-not have been reduced for contributions you the code ªPº in box 7. If you did not add
tions that exceed these limits (excess annualmade to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirement plan. the excess deferral amount to your wages
additions) may be corrected by a distribution ofThe amount you contributed should be identified on your 2010 tax return, you must file an
Page 10 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 11 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your elective deferrals or a return of your af- capital. For example, if during the exercise pe- non-arm's-length transaction (for example, a
riod the fair market value of stock subject to an gift), the option is not treated as exercised orter-tax contributions and earnings from these
option is greater than the option's exercise price, closed at that time. You must include in yourcontributions.
a profit may be realized by exercising the option income, as compensation, any money or prop-A corrective payment of excess annual addi-
and immediately selling the stock at its higher erty received. When the transferee exercisestions consisting of elective deferrals or earnings
value. The option privilege for an option to sell is the option, you must include in your income, asfrom your after-tax contributions is fully taxable
the opportunity to benefit during the exercise compensation, the excess of the fair marketin the year paid. A corrective payment consisting
period from a decrease in the value of the prop- value of the stock acquired by the transfereeof your after-tax contributions is not taxable. erty subject to the option. over the sum of the exercise price paid and anyIf you received a corrective payment of ex- amount you included in income at the time youcess annual additions, you should receive a If you or a member of your family is an transferred the option. At the time of the exer-separate Form 1099-R for the year of the pay- officer, director, or more-than-10% cise, the transferee recognizes no income andment with the code ªEº in box 7. Report the total owner of an expatriated corporation, has a basis in the stock acquired equal to the fair
CAUTION
!payment shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R on line you may owe an excise tax on the value of market value of the stock.16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Form 1040A. nonstatutory options and other stock-based Any transfer of this kind of option to a relatedReport the taxable amount shown in box 2a of compensation from that corporation. For more person is treated as a non-arm's-length transac-Form 1099-R on line 16b of Form 1040 or line information on the excise tax, see Internal Reve- tion. See Regulations section 1.83-7 for the defi-12b of Form 1040A. nue Code section 4985. nition of a related person.
Even though a corrective distribution of Recourse note in satisfaction of the exer-Option with readily determinable value. Ifexcess annual additions is reported on cise price of an option. If you are an em-you receive a nonstatutory stock option that hasForm 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIP ployee, and you issue a recourse note to youra readily determinable fair market value at thetreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot employer in satisfaction of the exercise price oftime it is granted to you, the option is treated likebe rolled over into another plan, and it is not an option to acquire your employer's stock, andother property received as compensation. Seesubject to the additional tax on early distribu- your employer and you subsequently agree toRestricted Property, later, for rules on how muchtions. reduce the stated principal amount of the note,income to include and when to include it. How-
you generally recognize compensation incomeever, the rule described in that discussion for
at the time and in the amount of the reduction.choosing to include the value of property in yourStock Options
income for the year of the transfer does not
If you receive an option to buy or sell stock or apply to a nonstatutory option. Tax form. If you receive compensation from
other property as payment for your services, you employer-provided nonstatutory stock options, itOption without readily determinable value.may have income when you receive the option is reported in box 1 of Form W-2. It also isIf the fair market value of the option is not readily(the grant), when you exercise the option (use it reported in box 12 using code ªV.ºdeterminable at the time it is granted to youto buy or sell the stock or other property), or  If you are a nonemployee spouse and you(even if it is determined later), you do not havewhen you sell or otherwise dispose of the option exercise nonstatutory stock options you re-income until you exercise or transfer the option. or property acquired through exercise of the ceived incident to a divorce, the income is re-
option. The timing, type, and amount of income ported to you on Form 1099-MISC,Exercise or transfer of option. When youinclusion depend on whether you receive a non- Miscellaneous Income, in box 3.exercise a nonstatutory stock option, thestatutory stock option or a statutory stock option. amount to include in your income depends onYour employer can tell you which kind of option Sale of the stock. There are no special in-whether the option had a readily determinableyou hold. come rules for the sale of stock acquired throughvalue.
the exercise of a nonstatutory stock option. Re-Option with readily determinable value. port the sale as explained in the Instructions forWhen you exercise a nonstatutory stock optionNonstatutory Stock Options Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains andthat had a readily determinable value at the time Losses, for the year of the sale. You may receivethe option was granted, you do not have toGrant of option. If you are granted a nonstat- a Form 1099-B, Proceeds from Broker and Bar-include any amount in income.utory stock option, you may have income when ter Sale Transactions, reporting the sales pro-
you receive the option. The amount of income to ceeds.Option without readily determinable value.
include and the time to include it depend on When you exercise a nonstatutory stock option Your basis in the property you acquire under
whether the fair market value of the option can that did not have a readily determinable value at the option is the amount you pay for it plus any
be readily determined. The fair market value of the time the option was granted, the restricted amount you included in income upon grant or
an option can be readily determined if it is ac- property rules apply to the property received. exercise of the option.
tively traded on an established market. The amount to include in your income is the Your holding period begins as of the date you
difference between the amount you pay for theThe fair market value of an option that is not acquired the option, if it had a readily determina-
property and its fair market value when it be-traded on an established market can be readily ble value, or as of the date you exercised or
comes substantially vested. If it is not substan-determined only if all of the following conditions transferred the option, if it had no readily deter-
tially vested at the time you exercise thisexist. minable value.
nonstatutory stock option (so that you may have
• You can transfer the option. to give the stock back), you do not have to
include any amount in income. You include the Statutory Stock Options• You can exercise the option immediately
difference in income when the option becomesin full.
There are two kinds of statutory stock options.substantially vested. For more information on
• The option or the property subject to the restricted property, see Restricted Property , • Incentive stock options (ISOs), andoption is not subject to any condition or later.
restriction (other than a condition to se- • Options granted under employee stockTransfer in arm's-length transaction. Ifcure payment of the purchase price) that purchase plans.you transfer a nonstatutory stock option withouthas a significant effect on the fair market a readily determinable value in an arm's-lengthvalue of the option. For either kind of option, you must be antransaction to an unrelated person, you must employee of the company granting the option, or• The fair market value of the option privi- include in your income the money or other prop- a related company, at all times during the periodlege can be readily determined. erty you received for the transfer, as if you had beginning on the date the option is granted andexercised the option.The option privilege for an option to buy is the ending 3 months before the date you exercise
opportunity to benefit during the option's exer- the option (for an incentive stock option, 1 yearTransfer in non-arm's-length transaction.
cise period from any increase in the value of before if you are disabled). Also, the option mustIf you transfer a nonstatutory stock option with-
property subject to the option without risking any be nontransferable except at death.out a readily determinable value in a
Publication 525 (2011) Page 11

Page 12 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
 If you do not meet the employment require- • You satisfy the conditions described under granted under an employee stock purchase
Option granted at a discount, under Em-ments, or you receive a transferable option, your plan, and you satisfy the holding period require-
ployee stock purchase plan, later.option is a nonstatutory stock option. ment, determine your ordinary income as fol-
lows.Report your ordinary income as wages on FormGrant of option. If you receive a statutory Your basis is equal to the option price at the1040, line 7, for the year of the sale. stock option, do not include any amount in your time you exercised your option and acquired the
Holding period requirement. You satisfyincome when the option is granted. stock. The timing and amount of pay period
the holding period requirement if you do not sell deductions do not affect your basis.
the stock until the end of the later of the 1-yearExercise of option. If you exercise a statutory Your holding period for the property you ac-period after the stock was transferred to you orstock option, do not include any amount in in- quire when you exercise an option begins on thethe 2-year period after the option was granted.come when you exercise the option. day after you exercise the option.However, you are considered to satisfy the hold-
Alternative minimum tax (AMT). For the ing period requirement if you sold the stock to Example. XYZ Company has an employeeAMT, you must treat stock acquired through the comply with conflict-of-interest requirements. stock purchase plan. The option price is theexercise of an ISO as if no special treatment lower of the stock price at the time the option isIncentive stock options (ISOs). If you sellapplied. This means that, when your rights in the granted or at the time the option is exercised.stock acquired by exercising an ISO, you needstock are transferable or no longer subject to a The value of the stock when the option wasto determine if you satisfied the holding periodsubstantial risk of forfeiture, you must include as
granted was $25. XYZ deducts $5 from A's payrequirement.an adjustment in figuring alternative minimum
every week for 48 weeks (total = $240 ($5 ×  48)).taxable income the amount by which the fair Holding period requirement satisfied. If The value of the stock when the option is exer-market value of the stock exceeds the option you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO and cised is $20. A receives 12 shares of XYZ stockprice. Enter this adjustment on line 14 of Form satisfy the holding period requirement, your gain ($240 ÷  $20). A's holding period for all 12 shares6251, Alternative Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. or loss from the sale is capital gain or loss. begins the day after the option is exercised,Increase your AMT basis in any stock you ac- Report the sale as explained in the Instructions even though the money used to purchase thequire by exercising the ISO by the amount of the for Schedule D (Form 1040). The basis of your shares was deducted from A's pay on 48 sepa-adjustment. However, no adjustment is required stock is the amount you paid for the stock. rate days. A's basis in each share is $20.if you dispose of the stock in the same year you Holding period requirement not satisfied.exercise the option. Option granted at a discount. If, at theIf you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO,See Restricted Property, later, for more infor- time the option was granted, the option price perdo not satisfy the holding period requirement,mation. share was less than 100% (but not less thanand have a gain from the sale, the gain is ordi- 85%) of the fair market value of the share, andYour AMT basis in stock acquired nary income up to the amount by which the you dispose of the share after meeting the hold-through an ISO is likely to differ from stock's fair market value when you exercised the ing period requirement, or you die while owningyour regular tax basis. Therefore, keep option exceeded the option price. Any excess
RECORDS the share, you must include in your income asadequate records for both the AMT and regular gain is capital gain. If you have a loss from the compensation, the lesser of:tax so that you can figure your adjusted gain or sale, it is a capital loss and you do not have any
loss. ordinary income. • The excess of the fair market value of the
Report the ordinary income as wages on line share at the time the option was granted
7, Form 1040. Report the capital gain or loss asExample. Your employer, M Company, over the option price, or
explained in the Instructions for Schedule Dgranted you an incentive stock option on April 7, • The excess of the fair market value of the(Form 1040). In determining capital gain or loss,2009, to buy 100 shares of M Company at $9 a share at the time of the disposition oryour basis is the amount you paid when youshare, its fair market value at the time. You death over the amount paid for the shareexercised the option plus the amount reportedexercised the option on January 6, 2010, when under the option.as wages.the stock was selling on the open market for $14
a share. On January 26, 2011, when the stock For this purpose, if the option price was not fixed
Example. Your employer, X Corporation,was selling on the open market for $16 a share, or determinable at the time the option was
granted you an ISO on March 12, 2009, to buyyour rights to the stock first became transfera- granted, the option price is figured as if the
100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 able. You include $700 ($1,600 value when your option had been exercised at the time it was
share, its fair market value at the time. Yourights first became transferable minus $900 op- granted.
exercised the option on January 6, 2010, whention price) as an adjustment on Form 6251, line Any excess gain is capital gain. If you have athe stock was selling on the open market for $1214. loss from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you doa share. On January 26, 2011, you sold the
If you exercise an ISO during 2011, not have any ordinary income.stock for $15 a share. Although you held the
you should receive Form 3921, Exer- stock for more than a year, less than 2 years had
cise of an Incentive Stock Option Example. Your employer, Y Corporation,
TIPpassed from the time you were granted the op-
Under Section 422(b), or a statement, from the granted you an option under its employee stocktion. In 2011, you must report the difference
corporation for each transfer made during 2011. purchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of Ybetween the option price ($10) and the value of
The corporation must send or provide you with Corporation for $20 a share at a time when thethe stock when you exercised the option ($12)
the form by January 31, 2012. Keep this infor- stock had a value of $22 a share. Eighteenas wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain,
mation for your records. months later, when the value of the stock wasfigured as follows:
$23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14Sale of the stock. You have taxable income
months after that you sold your stock for $30 aSelling price ($15 ×  100 shares) .... . $ 1,500or a deductible loss when you sell the stock that
share. In the year of sale, you must report asPurchase price ($10 ×  100 shares) .. . −1,000you bought by exercising the option. Your in-
Gain ...................... . $ 500 wages the difference between the option pricecome or loss is the difference between the
Amount reported as wages ($20) and the value at the time the option wasamount you paid for the stock (the option price)
[($12 ×  100 shares) − $1,000] ..... . − 200 granted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8 perand the amount you receive when you sell it.
share) is capital gain, figured as follows:You generally treat this amount as capital gain Amount reported as capital gain $ 300
or loss and report it as explained in the Instruc-
Selling price ($30 ×  100 shares) ... . $ 3,000tions for Schedule D (Form 1040) for the year of Employee stock purchase plan. If you sold Purchase price (option price) the sale. stock acquired by exercising an option granted ($20 ×  100 shares) ............ . −2,000However, you may have ordinary income for under an employee stock purchase plan, you Gain ..................... . $ 1,000the year that you sell or otherwise dispose of the need to determine if you satisfied the holding Amount reported as wagesstock in either of the following situations. period requirement. [($22 ×  100 shares) − $2,000] .... . − 200
• You do not satisfy the holding period re- Holding period requirement satisfied. If Amount reported as capital gain $ 800quirement. you sold stock acquired by exercising an option
Page 12 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 13 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Holding period requirement not satisfied. you do not include any amount in your income in How to make the choice. You make the
If you do not satisfy the holding period require- choice by filing a written statement with the Inter-the year you buy it. At the end of the 5-year
ment, your ordinary income is the amount by nal Revenue Service Center where you file yourperiod, the fair market value of the stock is $200
which the stock's fair market value when you return. You must file this statement no later thana share. You must include $19,000 in your in-
exercised the option exceeded the option price. 30 days after the date the property was trans-come [100 shares ×  ($200 fair market value −
This ordinary income is not limited to your gain ferred. Mail your statement to the address listed$10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor-
from the sale of the stock. Increase your basis in for your state under ªAre not including a check orporation on your 100 shares of stock are taxable
the stock by the amount of this ordinary income. money order...º given in Where Do You File  into you as additional compensation during theThe difference between your increased basis the Instructions for Form 1040 and the Instruc-period the stock can be forfeited.and the selling price of the stock is a capital gain tions for Form 1040A. Where to file information
or loss. also can be found by clicking on your state atSubstantially vested. Property is substan- www.irs.gov/file/content/0,,id=105690,00.html .tially vested when:Example.   The facts are the same as in the A copy of the statement must be attached to
previous example, except that you sold the • It is transferable, or your tax return for the year the property was
stock only 6 months after you exercised the transferred. You also must give a copy of this• It is not subject to a substantial risk ofoption. You did not satisfy the holding period statement to the person for whom you per-forfeiture. (You do not have a goodrequirement, so you must report $300 as wages formed the services and, if someone other thanchance of losing it.)and $700 as capital gain, figured as follows: you received the property, to that person.
You must sign the statement and indicate onTransferable property. Property is trans-Selling price ($30 ×  100 shares) ... . $3,000 it that you are making the choice under sectionferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge yourPurchase price (option price) 83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state-interest in the property to any person (other than($20 ×  100 shares) ............ . −2,000 ment must contain all of the following informa-Gain ..................... . $1,000 the transferor), and if the person receiving your
tion.Amount reported as wages interest in the property is not required to give up
[($23 ×  100 shares) − $2,000] .... . − 300 the property, or its value, if the substantial risk of • Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-
forfeiture occurs. cation number.Amount reported as capital gain
 [$3,000 ± ($2,000 + $300)] $700 Substantial risk of forfeiture. A substan- • A description of each property for which
tial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in the you are making the choice.
If you sold stock in 2011 that you ac- property transferred depend on performing (or • The date or dates on which the propertyquired by exercising an option granted not performing) substantial services, or on a was transferred and the tax year for whichat a discount under an employee stock
TIP condition related to the transfer, and the possi- you are making the choice.purchase plan, you should receive Form 3922, bility of forfeiture is substantial if the condition is
Transfer of Stock Acquired Through an Em- • The nature of any restrictions on the prop-not satisfied.ployee Stock Purchase Plan Under Section erty.
423(c), from the corporation. The corporation Example. The Spin Corporation transfers to • The fair market value at the time of trans-must send or provide you with the form by Janu- you as compensation for services 100 shares of fer (ignoring restrictions except those thatary 31, 2012. Keep this information for your its corporate stock for $100 a share. Under the will never lapse) of each property forrecords. terms of the transfer, you must resell the stock to which you are making the choice.
the corporation at $100 a share if you leave your
• Any amount that you paid for the property.job for any reason within 3 years from the date ofRestricted Property
transfer. You must perform substantial services • A statement that you have provided copiesIn most cases, if you receive property for your over a period of time and you must resell the to the appropriate persons.services, you must include its fair market value stock to the corporation at $100 a share (regard- Dividends received on restricted stock.in your income in the year you receive the prop- less of its value) if you do not perform the serv- Dividends you receive on restricted stock areerty. However, if you receive stock or other prop- ices, so your rights to the stock are subject to a treated as compensation and not as dividenderty that has certain restrictions that affect its substantial risk of forfeiture. income. Your employer should include thesevalue, you do not include the value of the prop-
payments on your Form W-2. If they also areerty in your income until it has been substantially Choosing to include in income for year of reported on a Form 1099-DIV, you should listvested. (You can choose to include the value of transfer. You can choose to include the value them on Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040),the property in your income in the year it is of restricted property at the time of transfer (mi- Interest and Ordinary Dividends, with a state-transferred to you, as discussed later, rather nus any amount you paid for the property) in ment that you have included them as wages. Dothan the year it is substantially vested.) your income for the year it is transferred. If you not include them in the total dividends received.Until the property becomes substantially make this choice, the substantial vesting rules Stock you chose to include in your in-vested, it is owned by the person who makes the do not apply and, generally, any later apprecia- come. Dividends you receive on restrictedtransfer to you, usually your employer. However, tion in value is not included in your compensa- stock you chose to include in your income in theany income from the property, or the right to use tion when the property becomes substantially year transferred are treated the same as anythe property, is included in your income as addi- vested. Your basis for figuring gain or loss when other dividends. You should receive a Formtional compensation in the year you receive the you sell the property is the amount you paid for it 1099-DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-income or have the right to use the property. plus the amount you included in income as com- clude the dividends in your wages on your re-When the property becomes substantially pensation. turn. Report them as dividends.vested, you must include its fair market value,
If you make this choice, you cannotminus any amount you paid for it, in your income
Sale of property not substantially vested.revoke it without the consent of thefor that year. Your holding period for this prop-
These rules apply to the sale or other dispositionInternal Revenue Service. Consent willerty begins when the property becomes sub-
CAUTION
!
of property that you did not choose to include inbe given only if you were under a mistake of factstantially vested.
your income in the year transferred and that isas to the underlying transaction.
not substantially vested.Example. Your employer, the RST Corpo- If you forfeit the property after you have in-
If you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-ration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 a cluded its value in income, your loss is the
erty in an arm's-length transaction, include inshare. At the time of the sale the fair market amount you paid for the property minus any
your income as compensation for the year ofvalue of the stock is $100 a share. Under the amount you realized on the forfeiture.
sale the amount realized minus the amount youterms of the sale, the stock is under a substantial
You cannot make this choice for a non- paid for the property. If you exchange the prop-risk of forfeiture (you have a good chance of
statutory stock option. erty in an arm's-length transaction for otherlosing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is not
CAUTION
!
property that is not substantially vested, treat thesubstantially vested when it is transferred, so
Publication 525 (2011) Page 13

Page 14 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
new property as if it were substituted for the amount paid to the organization. See Publica- • They are part of the duties that you must
exchanged property. tion 526, Charitable Contributions. Also, see exercise for, or on behalf of, the religious
Members of Religious Orders, later. order as its agent.The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-
tory stock option to a related person is not con- If you are an employee of a third party, thePension. A pension or retirement pay for asidered an arm's-length transaction. See services you perform for the third party will notmember of the clergy usually is treated as anyRegulations section 1.83-7 for the definition of a be considered directed or required of you by theother pension or annuity. It must be reported onrelated person. order. Amounts you receive for these serviceslines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12aIf you sell the property in a transaction that is are included in your income, even if you haveand 12b of Form 1040A.not at arm's length, include in your income as taken a vow of poverty.
compensation for the year of sale the total of any
money you received and the fair market value of Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of aHousingany substantially vested property you received religious order and has taken a vow of poverty.
on the sale. In addition, you will have to report He renounces all claims to his earnings andSpecial rules for housing apply to members of
income when the original property becomes turns over his earnings to the order.the clergy. Under these rules, you do not include
substantially vested, as if you still held it. Report Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructedin your income the rental value of a home (in-
as compensation its fair market value minus the by the superiors of the order to get a job with acluding utilities) or a designated housing allow-
total of the amount you paid for the property and private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-ance provided to you as part of your pay.
the amount included in your income from the ployee of the school, and, at his request, theHowever, the exclusion cannot be more than the
earlier sale. school made the salary payments directly to thereasonable pay for your service. If you pay for
order.the utilities, you can exclude any allowance des-
Example. In 2008, you paid your employer ignated for utility cost, up to your actual cost. Because Mark is an employee of the school,$50 for a share of stock that had a fair market The home or allowance must be provided as he is performing services for the school rathervalue of $100 and was subject to forfeiture until compensation for your services as an ordained, than as an agent of the order. The wages Mark2011. In 2010, you sold the stock to your spouse licensed, or commissioned minister. However, earns working for the school are included in hisfor $10 in a transaction not at arm's length. You you must include the rental value of the home or income.had compensation of $10 from this transaction. the housing allowance as earnings from
In 2011, when the stock had a fair market value self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040), Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member of aof $120, it became substantially vested. For Self-Employment Tax, if you are subject to the religious order who, as a condition of member-2011, you must report additional compensation self-employment tax. For more information, see ship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience.of $60, figured as follows: Publication 517, Social Security and Other Infor- All claims to his earnings are renounced. Gene
mation for Members of the Clergy and Religious received permission from the order to establishFair market value of stock at time Workers. a private practice as a psychologist and coun-of substantial vesting ....... . $120 sels members of religious orders as well asMinus: Amount paid for stock .. . $50 nonmembers. Although the order reviewsMembers of Religious OrdersMinus: Compensation previously Gene's budget annually, Gene controls not onlyincluded in income from sale to the details of his practice but also the means byIf you are a member of a religious order who hasspouse ................. . 10 −60 which his work as a psychologist is accom-taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earningsAdditional income $60
plished.that you renounce and turn over to the order
depends on whether your services are per- Gene's private practice as a psychologist
Inherited property not substantially vested. formed for the order. does not make him an agent of the religious
If you inherit property not substantially vested at order. The psychological services provided by
Services performed for the order. If you arethe time of the decedent's death, any income Gene are not the type of services that are pro-
performing the services as an agent of the orderyou receive from the property is considered in- vided by the order. The income Gene earns as a
in the exercise of duties required by the order,come in respect of a decedent and is taxed psychologist is earned in his individual capacity.
do not include in your income the amountsaccording to the rules for restricted property Gene must include in his income the earnings
turned over to the order.received for services. For information about in- from his private practice.
come in respect of a decedent, see Publication If your order directs you to perform services
559. for another agency of the supervising church or Foreign Employer
an associated institution, you are considered to
be performing the services as an agent of the Special rules apply if you work for a foreign
order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an employer.
order that you turn over to the order are notSpecial Rules for 
included in your income. U.S. citizen. If you are a U.S. citizen who
works in the United States for a foreign govern-Certain Employees
Example. You are a member of a church ment, an international organization, a foreign
order and have taken a vow of poverty. You embassy, or any foreign employer, you mustThis part of the publication deals with special
renounce any claims to your earnings and turn include your salary in your income.rules for people in certain types of employment:
over to the order any salaries or wages youmembers of the clergy, members of religious Social security and Medicare taxes. Youearn. You are a registered nurse, so your orderorders, people working for foreign employers, are exempt from social security and Medicareassigns you to work in a hospital that is anmilitary personnel, and volunteers. employee taxes if you are employed in theassociated institution of the church. However, United States by an international organization oryou remain under the general direction and con-Clergy a foreign government. However, you must paytrol of the order. You are considered to be an self-employment tax on your earnings from serv-agent of the order and any wages you earn atIf you are a member of the clergy, you must ices performed in the United States, eventhe hospital that you turn over to your order areinclude in your income offerings and fees you though you are not self-employed. This rule alsonot included in your income.receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals, applies if you are an employee of a qualifyingmasses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-Services performed outside the order. Ifoffering is made to the religious institution, it is ernment.you are directed to work outside the order, yournot taxable to you.
services are not an exercise of duties requiredIf you are a member of a religious organiza- Employees of international organizations orby the order unless they meet both of the follow-tion and you give your outside earnings to the foreign governments. Your compensationing requirements.organization, you still must include the earnings for official services to an international organiza-
in your income. However, you may be entitled to • They are the kind of services that are ordi- tion is exempt from federal income tax if you are
a charitable contribution deduction for the narily the duties of members of the order. not a citizen of the United States or you are a
Page 14 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 15 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you are 180 days or more, the QRD is treated as wages laundry and clothing maintenance, enter-
a citizen of the United States). and is reportable on Form W-2. tainment and recreation, transportation,
Your compensation for official services to a and other miscellaneous expenses.
Veterans' benefits. Do not include in your in-foreign government is exempt from federal in- • Leave allowances.come any veterans' benefits paid under any law,come tax if all of the following are true.
regulation, or administrative practice adminis- • Readjustment allowances or termination• You are not a citizen of the United States tered by the Department of Veterans Affairs payments. These are considered receivedor you are a citizen of the Philippines (VA). The following amounts paid to veterans or by you when credited to your account.(whether or not you are a citizen of the their families are not taxable.
United States).
• Education, training, and subsistence al- Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps• Your work is like the work done by em- lowances. volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustmentployees of the United States in foreign allowance during his period of service, to be paid• Disability compensation and pension pay-countries. to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofments for disabilities paid either to veter-
duty. Although the allowance is not available to• The foreign government gives an equal ans or their families.
him until the end of his service, Gary must in-exemption to employees of the United
• Grants for homes designed for wheelchair clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it isStates in its country.
living. credited to his account.
Waiver of alien status. If you are an alien • Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who
who works for a foreign government or interna- Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). Iflost their sight or the use of their limbs.
tional organization and you file a waiver under you are a VISTA volunteer, you must include
• Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-section 247(b) of the Immigration and National- meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your
dends paid either to veterans or their ben-ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salary income as wages.
eficiaries, including the proceeds of ayou receive after the date you file the waiver is
veteran's endowment policy paid beforenot exempt under this rule. However, it may be National Senior Service Corps programs.death.exempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi- Do not include in your income amounts you
cation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more receive for supportive services or reimburse-• Interest on insurance dividends left on de-
information about treaties. ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-posit with the VA.
lowing programs.Nonwage income. This exemption applies • Benefits under a dependent-care assis-
only to employees' wages, salaries, and fees. • Retired Senior Volunteer Programtance program.
Pensions and other income do not qualify for this (RSVP).• The death gratuity paid to a survivor of aexemption. • Foster Grandparent Program.member of the Armed Forces who died
Employment abroad. For information on the after September 10, 2001. • Senior Companion Program. tax treatment of income earned abroad, see • Payments made under the compensatedPublication 54. work therapy program. Service Corps of Retired Executives
(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-• Any bonus payment by a state or politicalMilitary ive services or reimbursements forsubdivision because of service in a com-
out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do notPayments you receive as a member of a military bat zone.
include these amounts in gross income.service generally are taxed as wages except for
retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. Note. If, in a previous year, you received a
Volunteer tax counseling. Do not include inAllowances generally are not taxed. For more bonus payment by a state or political subdivision
your income any reimbursements you receiveinformation on the tax treatment of military al- because of service in a combat zone that you
for transportation, meals, and other expenseslowances and benefits, see Publication 3, included in your income, you can file a claim for
you have in training for, or actually providing,Armed Forces' Tax Guide. refund of the taxes on that income. Use Form
volunteer federal income tax counseling for the1040X to file the claim. File a separate form forDifferential wage payments. Any payments elderly (TCE).each tax year involved. In most cases, you mustmade to you by an employer during the time you file your claim within 3 years after the date you You can deduct as a charitable contributionare performing service in the uniformed services filed your original return or within 2 years after your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses inare treated as compensation. These wages are the date you paid the tax, whichever is later. See taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-subject to income tax withholding and are re- the Instructions for Form 1040X for information tance (VITA) program.ported on Form W-2. See the discussion under on filing that form.Miscellaneous Compensation, earlier.
Military retirement pay. If your retirement Volunteers
pay is based on age or length of service, it is Business and 
The tax treatment of amounts you receive as ataxable and must be included in your income as
volunteer is covered in the following discus-a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or Investment Income
sions.on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not
include in your income the amount of any reduc- This section provides information on the treat-Peace Corps. Living allowances you receivetion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a ment of income from certain rents and royalties,as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leadersurvivor annuity for your spouse or children and from interests in partnerships and S corpo-for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,under the Retired Serviceman's Family Protec- rations.and clothing are exempt from tax.tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan. Income from sales at auctions, includ-For a more detailed discussion of survivor Taxable allowances. The following al- ing online auctions, may be businessannuities, see Publication 575. lowances must be included in your income and income. For more information, see
CAUTION
!reported as wages.Disability. If you are retired on disability, Publication 334.
see Military and Government Disability Pen- • Allowances paid to your spouse and minor
sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. children while you are a volunteer leader Rents From Personaltraining in the United States.Qualified reservist distribution (QRD). If Property
you received a QRD of all or part of the balance • Living allowances designated by the Di-
If you rent out personal property, such as equip-in your health flexible spending account be- rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-
ment or vehicles, how you report your incomecause you are a reservist and you have been pensation. These are allowances for
and expenses is in most cases determined by:ordered or called to active duty for a period of personal items such as domestic help,
Publication 525 (2011) Page 15

Page 16 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi- gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore, Partner's return. You generally must report
ness, and see Publication 544. partnership items on your individual return the
same way as they are reported on the partner-• Whether or not the rental activity is con- Sale of property interest. If you sell your ship return. That is, if the partnership had aducted for profit. complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, capital gain, you report your share as explainedthe amount you receive is considered paymentIn most cases, if your primary purpose is income in the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).for the sale of section 1231 property, not royaltyor profit and you are involved in the rental activ- You report your share of partnership ordinaryincome. Under certain circumstances, the saleity with continuity and regularity, your rental ac- income on Schedule E (Form 1040).is subject to capital gain or loss treatment astivity is a business. See Publication 535, explained in the Instructions for Schedule D In most cases, Schedule K-1 (FormBusiness Expenses, for details on deducting (Form 1040). For more information on selling 1065) will tell you where to report eachexpenses for both business and not-for-profit section 1231 property, see chapter 3 of Publica- item of income on your individual re-
TIPactivities. tion 544. turn.
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, Qualified joint venture. If you and yourReporting business income and expenses. or a net profit interest in a mineral property for spouse each materially participate as the onlyIf you are in the business of renting personal the life of the property, you have made a lease or members of a jointly owned and operated busi-property, report your income and expenses on a sublease, and any cash you receive for the ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year,Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The assignment of other interests in the property is you can make a joint election to be treated as aform instructions have information on how to ordinary income subject to a depletion allow- qualified joint venture instead of a partnership.complete them. ance. To make this election, you must divide all items
Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at-Part of future production sold. If you ownnot in the business of renting personal property, tributable to the business between you and yourmineral property but sell part of the future pro-report your rental income on Form 1040, line 21. spouse in accordance with your respective inter-duction, in most cases you treat the money youList the type and amount of the income on the ests in the venture. Each of you must file areceive from the buyer at the time of the sale asdotted line next to line 21. separate Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Forma loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your
1040).income or take depletion based on it.Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you When production begins, you include all therent personal property for profit, include your proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc- S Corporation Incomerental expenses in the total amount you enter on tion expenses, and deduct depletion from thatForm 1040, line 36. Also, enter the amount and In most cases, an S corporation does not pay taxamount to arrive at your taxable income from theªPPRº on the dotted line next to line 36. on its income. Instead, the income, losses, de-property.If you do not rent personal property for profit, ductions, and credits of the corporation areyour deductions are limited and you cannot re- passed through to the shareholders based onPartnership Incomeport a loss to offset other income. See Activity each shareholder's pro rata  share. You mustnot for profit under Other Income, later. report your share of these items on your return.A partnership generally is not a taxable entity.
In most cases, the items passed through to youThe income, gains, losses, deductions, andRoyalties will increase or decrease the basis of your Scredits of a partnership are passed through to
corporation stock as appropriate.the partners based on each partner's distributiveRoyalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, share of these items. For more information, seeand mineral properties are taxable as ordinary S corporation return. An S corporation mustPublication 541.income. file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Tax
 In most cases you report royalties in Part I of Partner's distributive share. Your distribu- Return for an S Corporation. This shows the
Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income tive share of partnership income, gains, losses, results of the corporation's operations for its tax
and Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil, deductions, or credits generally is based on the year and the items of income, losses, deduc-
gas, or mineral interest or are in business as a partnership agreement. You must report your tions, or credits that affect the shareholders'
self-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., report distributive share of these items on your return individual income tax returns.
your income and expenses on Schedule C or whether or not they actually are distributed to Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). You shouldSchedule C-EZ (Form 1040). you. However, your distributive share of the receive from the S corporation in which you arepartnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba- a shareholder a copy of Schedule K-1 (FormCopyrights and patents. Royalties from sis of your partnership interest at the end of the 1120S), showing your share of income, losses,copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, partnership year in which the losses took place. deductions, and credits, of the S corporation forand similar property, or from patents on inven-
Partnership agreement. The partnership the tax year. Keep Schedule K-1 for your rec-tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use
agreement usually covers the distribution of ords. Do not attach it to your Form 1040.your work over a specified period of time. Royal-
profits, losses, and other items. However, if theties generally are based on the number of units
Shareholder's return. Your distributive shareagreement does not state how a specific item ofsold, such as the number of books, tickets to a
of the items of income, losses, deductions, orgain or loss will be shared, or the allocationperformance, or machines sold.
credits of the S corporation must be shown sep-stated in the agreement does not have substan-
arately on your Form 1040. The character ofOil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income from tial economic effect, your distributive share is
these items generally is the same as if you hadoil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount figured according to your interest in the partner-
realized or incurred them personally.you receive when natural resources are ex- ship.
tracted from your property. The royalties are In most cases, Schedule K-1 (FormPartnership return. Although a partnershipbased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and 1120S) will tell you where to reportgenerally pays no tax, it must file an informationare paid to you by a person or company who each item of income on your individualreturn on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership
TIPleases the property from you. return.Income. This shows the result of the partner-
Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco- ship's operations for its tax year and the items Distributions. In most cases, S corporationnomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas that must be passed through to the partners. distributions are a nontaxable return of your ba-wells, you can recover your investment through Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). You should re- sis in the corporation stock. However, in certainthe depletion allowance. For information on this ceive from each partnership in which you are a cases, part of the distributions may be taxablesubject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535. member a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), as a dividend, or as a long-term or short-term
Coal and iron ore. Under certain circum- Partner's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, capital gain, or as both. The corporation's distri-
stances, you can treat amounts you receive etc., showing your share of income, deductions, butions may be in the form of cash or property.
from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay- credits, and tax preference items of the partner-
ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather ship for the tax year. Keep Schedule K-1 for your More information.   For more information, see
than as royalty income. For information about records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040. the Instructions for Form 1120S.
Page 16 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 17 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa- disability benefits you would have been entitled
bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for to receive. You can claim a refund of any taxSickness and accrued annual leave is a salary payment. The paid on the excludable amount (subject to the
payment is not a disability payment. Include it in statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-Injury Benefits your income in the tax year you receive it. turn on Form 1040X for each previous year
during the retroactive period. You must includeIn most cases, you must report as income any
with each Form 1040X a copy of the official VAamount you receive for personal injury or sick- Military and Government Determination letter granting the retroactiveness through an accident or health plan that is Disability Pensions benefit. The letter must show the amount with-paid for by your employer. If both you and your held and the effective date of the benefit.employer pay for the plan, only the amount you Certain military and government disability pen- If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-receive that is due to your employer's payments sions are not taxable. ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-is reported as income. However, certain pay-
ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severancements may not be taxable to you. For informa- Service-connected disability. You may be benefit from your income. However, you mustable to exclude from income amounts you re-tion on nontaxable payments, see Military and include in your income any lump-sum readjust-ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowanceGovernment Disability Pensions  and Other ment or other nondisability severance paymentfor personal injury or sickness resulting fromSickness and Injury Benefits, later in this discus- you received on release from active duty, even ifactive service in one of the following govern-sion. you are later given a retroactive disability ratingment services.Do not report as income any amounts by the VA.
• The armed forces of any country.paid to reimburse you for medical ex- Special statute of limitations. In mostpenses you incurred after the plan was
TIP • The National Oceanic and Atmospheric cases, under the statute of limitations a claim forestablished. Administration. credit or refund must be filed within 3 years fromCost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of the time a return was filed. However, if you• The Public Health Service.an accident or health plan, do not include any receive a retroactive service-connected disabil-
amounts you receive from the plan for personal • The Foreign Service. ity rating determination, the statute of limitations
injury or sickness as income on your tax return. is extended by a 1-year period beginning on the
If your plan reimbursed you for medical ex- Conditions for exclusion. Do not include date of the determination. This 1-year extended
penses you deducted in an earlier year, you may the disability payments in your income if any of period applies to claims for credit or refund filed
have to include some, or all, of the reimburse- the following conditions apply. after June 17, 2008, and does not apply to any
ment in your income. See Recoveries under tax year that began more than 5 years before the1. You were entitled to receive a disabilityMiscellaneous Income, later. date of the determination.payment before September 25, 1975.
Cafeteria plans. In most cases, if you are cov- Example. You retired in 2005 and receive a2. You were a member of a listed govern-
ered by an accident or health insurance plan pension based on your years of service. Onment service or its reserve component, or
August 3, 2011, you receive a determination ofthrough a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the were under a binding written commitment
service-connected disability retroactive to 2005.insurance premiums was not included in your to become a member, on September 24,
Generally, you could claim a refund for the taxesincome, you are not considered to have paid the 1975.
paid on your pension for 2008, 2009, and 2010.premiums and you must include any benefits 3. You receive the disability payments for a However, under the special limitation period,you receive in your income. If the amount of the combat-related injury. This is a personal you can also file a claim for 2007 as long as youpremiums was included in your income, you are injury or sickness that: file the claim by August 3, 2012. You cannot fileconsidered to have paid the premiums and any
a claim for 2005 and 2006 because those taxbenefits you receive are not taxable. a. Results directly from armed conflict, years began more than 5 years before the deter-
b. Takes place while you are engaged in mination.Disability Pensions extra-hazardous service,
Terrorist attack or military action. Do notIf you retired on disability, you must include in c. Takes place under conditions simulat- include in your income disability payments youincome any disability pension you receive under ing war, including training exercises receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter-a plan that is paid for by your employer. You such as maneuvers, or rorist or military action.must report your taxable disability payments as d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war. A terrorist action is one that is directedwages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A
against the United States or any of its alliesuntil you reach minimum retirement age. Mini- 4. You would be entitled to receive disability (including a multinational force in which themum retirement age generally is the age at compensation from the Department of Vet- United States is participating). A military actionwhich you can first receive a pension or annuity erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica- is one that involves the armed forces of theif you are not disabled. tion for it. Your exclusion under this United States and is a result of actual or
condition is equal to the amount you wouldYou may be entitled to a tax credit if threatened violence or aggression against the
be entitled to receive from the VA.you were permanently and totally dis- United States or any of its allies, but does not
abled when you retired. For informa- include training exercises.
TIP
tion on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit for Pension based on years of service. If you
the Elderly or the Disabled. receive a disability pension based on years of Long-Term Care
service, in most cases you must include it in yourBeginning on the day after you reach mini- Insurance Contractsincome. However, if the pension qualifies for themum retirement age, payments you receive are
exclusion for a service-connected disability (dis-taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the In most cases, long-term care insurance con-cussed earlier), do not include in income the partpayments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or tracts are treated as accident and health insur-of your pension that you would have received ifon lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For more ance contracts. Amounts you receive from themthe pension had been based on a percentage ofinformation on pensions and annuities, see Pub- (other than policyholder dividends or premiumdisability. You must include the rest of your pen-lication 575. refunds) are excludable in most cases from in-sion in your income. come as amounts received for personal injury or
sickness. To claim an exclusion for paymentsRetirement and profit-sharing plans. If you Retroactive VA determination. If you retire
made on a per diem  or other periodic basisreceive payments from a retirement or from the armed services based on years of serv-
under a long-term care insurance contract, youprofit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa- ice and are later given a retroactive serv-
must file Form 8853 with your return.bility retirement, do not treat the payments as a ice-connected disability rating by the VA, your
disability pension. The payments must be re- retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex- A long-term care insurance contract is an
ported as a pension or annuity. cluded from income up to the amount of VA insurance contract that only provides coverage
Publication 525 (2011) Page 17

Page 18 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for qualified long-term care services. The con- See Section C of Form 8853 and its instructions • You are a qualified beneficiary as the re-
tract must: for more information. sult of an involuntary termination that oc-
curred during the period beginning on• Be guaranteed renewable, September 1, 2008, and ending on MayWorkers' Compensation• Not provide for a cash surrender value or 31, 2010, or you had a reduction of hours
other money that can be paid, assigned, during that period, which was followed byAmounts you receive as workers' compensation
pledged, or borrowed, a termination of your employment that oc-for an occupational sickness or injury are fully
curred after March 1, 2010, and beforeexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers'• Provide that refunds, other than refunds June 1, 2010,compensation act or a statute in the nature of aon the death of the insured or complete workers' compensation act. The exemption alsosurrender or cancellation of the contract, • You are eligible for COBRA continuationapplies to your survivors. The exemption, how-and dividends under the contract may be health coverage related to the qualifyingever, does not apply to retirement plan benefitsused only to reduce future premiums or event occurring during the period begin-you receive based on your age, length of serv-increase future benefits, and ning on September 1, 2008, andice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you
• In most cases, not pay or reimburse ex- • You elect the coverage.retired because of an occupational sickness or
penses incurred for services or items that injury.
would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex- A qualified beneficiary is generally any individ-If part of your workers' compensationcept where Medicare is a secondary payer ual who is covered under a group health plan onreduces your social security oror the contract makes per diem or other the day before the involuntary termination. Thisequivalent railroad retirement benefits
CAUTION
!periodic payments without regard to ex- includes the covered employee, the employee'sreceived, that part is considered social securitypenses. spouse, and the employee's dependent.(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and The premium assistance (the 65% reductionmay be taxable. For a discussion of the taxability of the premium) applies to the first period ofQualified long-term care services. Qualified of these benefits, see Other Income under Mis- coverage beginning after February 16, 2009.long-term care services are: cellaneous Income, later. The reduction applies until the earliest of:• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera- Return to work. If you return to work after
• The first date the assistance eligible indi-peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili- qualifying for workers' compensation, salary
vidual becomes eligible for other grouptative services, and maintenance and payments you receive for performing light duties
health plan coverage or Medicare cover-personal care services, and are taxable as wages.
age,• Required by a chronically ill individual and Disability pension. If your disability pension • The date that is 15 months after the firstprovided pursuant to a plan of care pre- is paid under a statute that provides benefits day of the first month for which the re-scribed by a licensed health care practi- only to employees with service-connected disa- duced premium applies to the individual,tioner. bilities, part of it may be workers' compensation. orThat part is exempt from tax. The rest of your
• The date the individual ceases to be eligi-Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill in- pension, based on years of service, is taxable as
ble for COBRA continuation coverage.dividual is one who has been certified by a pension or annuity income. If you die, the part of
licensed health care practitioner within the previ- your survivors' benefit that is a continuation of
The premium assistance is not included inous 12 months as one of the following. the workers' compensation is exempt from tax.
your gross income. However, if your modified• An individual who, for at least 90 days, is adjusted gross income (AGI) is more thanOther Sicknessunable to perform at least two activities of $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly) butdaily living without substantial assistance and Injury Benefits not more than $145,000 ($290,000 if marrieddue to a loss of functional capacity. Activi- filing jointly), your income tax for the tax year isIn addition to disability pensions and annuities,ties of daily living are eating, toileting, increased by a percentage of the premium as-you may receive other payments for sickness ortransferring, bathing, dressing, and conti- sistance. Your modified AGI is your AGI on Formnence. injury. 1040, line 38 or Form 1040NR, line 37 plus any
• An individual who requires substantial su- foreign earned income exclusion, foreign hous-Railroad sick pay. Payments you receive aspervision to be protected from threats to ing exclusion, foreign housing deduction, andsick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-health and safety due to severe cognitive exclusion of income for bona fide residents ofsurance Act are taxable and you must includeimpairment. American Samoa and Puerto Rico. The percent-them in your income. However, do not include
age that increases your tax is determined bythem in your income if they are for an on-the-job
dividing the excess modified AGI (amount overLimit on exclusion. The exclusion for pay- injury.
$125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly)) byments made on a per diem  or other periodic
$20,000 ($40,000 if married filing jointly). If yourBlack lung benefit payments. These pay-basis under a long-term care insurance contract
modified AGI is more than $145,000 ($290,000ments are similar to workers' compensation andis subject to a limit. The limit applies to the total
if married filing jointly), your income tax for theare not taxable in most cases.of these payments and any accelerated death
tax year is increased by the premium assis-benefits made on a per diem or other periodic
tance. Include the increase in your income taxCOBRA premium assistance. The Consoli-basis under a life insurance contract because
on Form 1040, line 60 or Form 1040NR, line 59.dated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act ofthe insured is chronically ill. (For more informa-
On the dotted line next to that line, enter the1985 (COBRA) provides that if you were cov-tion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In-
amount of the tax and identify it as ªCOBRA.ºered under a group health plan and you wouldsurance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous
lose coverage because of a qualifying event, You may elect to permanently waive the rightIncome, later.)
you should be allowed an opportunity to elect to the premium assistance. You will not receiveUnder this limit, the excludable amount for
COBRA continuation health coverage under the the premium assistance and you will not have toany period is figured by subtracting any reim-
plan. If there was no available election, your include the assistance in your income tax if yourbursement received (through insurance or oth-
employer or the plan was subject to an excise modified AGI is more than $125,000 ($250,000erwise) for the cost of qualified long-term care
tax. You can be required to pay the full premium if married filing jointly). To make this election,services during the period from the larger of the
for the COBRA continuation coverage. give a signed and dated notification (include afollowing amounts.
reference to ªpermanent waiverº) to the personIf you are an assistance eligible individual,• The cost of qualified long-term care serv- to whom premiums are payable.you pay 35% of the premium otherwise payableices during the period. for this coverage and are treated as having paid For more information see Notice 2009-27
the full premium. You are an assistance eligible available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-16_irb/ar09.• The dollar amount for the period ($300 per
individual if: html.day for any period in 2011).
Page 18 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 19 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Federal Employees' Compensation Act If you receive an ªadvance reimbursementº purchase goods or services offered by other
(FECA). Payments received under this Act for or ªloanº for future medical expenses from your members of the barter club. The club subtracts
personal injury or sickness, including payments employer without regard to whether you suffered credit units from your account when you receive
to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable. a personal injury or sickness or incurred medical goods or services from other members. You
However, you are taxed on amounts you receive expenses, that amount is included in your in- must include in your income the value of the
under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45 come, whether or not you incur uninsured medi- credit units that are added to your account, even
days while a claim is being decided. Report this cal expenses during the year. though you may not actually receive goods or
income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or services from other members until a later taxReimbursements received under your em-
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sick year.ployer's plan for expenses incurred before the
leave while a claim is being processed is taxable plan was established are included in income.
and must be included in your income as wages. Example 4. You own a small apartment Amounts you receive under a reimburse-
building. In return for 6 months rent-free use ofment plan that provides for the payment of un-If part of the payments you receive an apartment, an artist gives you a work of artused reimbursement amounts in cash or otherunder FECA reduces your social se- she created. You must report as rental incomebenefits are included in your income. However,curity or equivalent railroad retirement
CAUTION
! on Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market valuea qualified HSA distribution from a health flexiblebenefits received, that part is considered social of the artwork, and the artist must report asspending account or health reimbursement ac-security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene- income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formcount can be made to a health savings account.fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of the 1040) the fair rental value of the apartment.For details, see Publication 969.taxability of these benefits, see  Other Income
under Miscellaneous Income, later. Form 1099-B from barter exchange. If you
exchanged property or services through a barterYou can deduct the amount you spend to buy
exchange, Form 1099-B, or a similar statementback sick leave for an earlier year to be eligible Miscellaneous Income from the barter exchange should be sent to youfor nontaxable FECA benefits for that period. It is
by February 15, 2012. It should show the valuea miscellaneous deduction subject to the This section discusses various types of income. of cash, property, services, credits, or scrip you2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If You may have taxable income from certain received from exchanges during 2011. The IRSyou buy back sick leave in the same year you transactions even if no money changes hands. also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B.used it, the amount reduces your taxable sick For example, you may have taxable income ifleave pay. Do not deduct it separately. you lend money at a below-market interest rate Backup withholding. In most cases the in-
or have a debt you owe canceled.Qualified Indian health care benefit. For come you receive from bartering is not subject to
benefits and coverage provided after March 23, regular income tax withholding. However,
2010, the value of any qualified Indian health backup withholding will apply in certain circum-Bartering
care benefit is not taxable. These benefits in- stances to ensure that income tax is collected on
clude any health service or benefits provided by Bartering is an exchange of property or services. this income.
the Indian Health Service, amounts to reimburse You must include in your income, at the time Under backup withholding, the barter ex-
medical care expenses provided by an Indian received, the fair market value of property or change must withhold, as income tax, 28% of
tribe, coverage under accident or health insur- services you receive in bartering. If you ex- the income if:
ance, and any other medical care provided by an change services with another person and you • You do not give the barter exchange yourIndian tribe. both have agreed ahead of time on the value of taxpayer identification number (generally athe services, that value will be accepted as fairOther compensation. Many other amounts social security number or an employermarket value unless the value can be shown toyou receive as compensation for sickness or identification number), orbe otherwise.injury are not taxable. These include the follow-  Generally, you report this income on Sched- • The IRS notifies the barter exchange thating amounts. ule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). However, you gave it an incorrect identification num-
• Compensatory damages you receive for if the barter involves an exchange of something ber. 
physical injury or physical sickness, other than services, such as in Example 4, later, If you join a barter exchange, you must certifywhether paid in a lump sum or in periodic you may have to use another form or schedule under penalties of perjury that your taxpayerpayments. See Court awards and dam- instead. identification number is correct and that you areages under Other Income, later. not subject to backup withholding. If you do notExample 1. You are a self-employed attor-• Benefits you receive under an accident or make this certification, backup withholding mayney who performs legal services for a client, ahealth insurance policy on which either begin immediately. The barter exchange willsmall corporation. The corporation gives youyou paid the premiums or your employer give you a Form W-9, Request for Taxpayershares of its stock as payment for your services.paid the premiums but you had to include Identification Number and Certification, or a sim-You must include the fair market value of thethem in your income. ilar form, for you to make this certification. Theshares in your income on Schedule C or Sched- barter exchange will withhold tax only up to the• Disability benefits you receive for loss of ule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receive amount of any cash paid to you or deposited inincome or earning capacity as a result of them. your account and any scrip or credit issued toinjuries under a no-fault car insurance pol- you (and converted to cash).Example 2. You are a self-employed ac-icy. 
countant. You and a house painter are members• Compensation you receive for permanent If tax is withheld from your barter in-of a barter club. Members get in touch with eachloss or loss of use of a part or function of come, the barter exchange will reportother directly and bargain for the value of theyour body, or for your permanent disfig- the amount of tax withheld on Form
TIPservices to be performed. In return for account-urement. This compensation must be 1099-B, or similar statement.ing services you provided, the house painterbased only on the injury and not on the painted your home. You must report as yourperiod of your absence from work. These income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form Canceled Debtsbenefits are not taxable even if your em- 1040) the fair market value of the house paintingployer pays for the accident and health In most cases, if a debt you owe is canceled orservices you received. The house painter mustplan that provides these benefits. forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, youinclude in income the fair market value of the
must include the canceled amount in your in-accounting services you provided.
Reimbursement for medical care. A reim- come. You have no income from the canceled
bursement for medical care generally is not tax- Example 3. You are self-employed and a debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt
able. However, it may reduce your medical member of a barter club. The club uses credit includes any indebtedness for which you are
expense deduction. If you receive reimburse- units as a means of exchange. It adds credit liable or which attaches to property you hold.
ment for an expense you deducted in an earlier units to your account for goods or services you If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the
year, see Recoveries, later. provide to members, which you can use to canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is a
Publication 525 (2011) Page 19

Page 20 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business debt, report the amount on Schedule C If you are a stockholder in a corporation and • Educational.
or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on Schedule you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora- • Fostering national or international amateurF (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, if tion, you generally do not realize income. This is sports competition (but only if none of thethe debt is farm debt and you are a farmer). because the canceled debt is considered as a organization's activities involve providingYou may be able to elect to recognize a contribution to the capital of the corporation athletic facilities or equipment).canceled business debt in income over a equal to the amount of debt principal that you
5-tax-year period if the income is realized in a canceled. • Literary.
reacquisition in 2009 or 2010. For information on • Preventing cruelty to children or animals.Repayment of canceled debt. If you includedthis election, see Revenue Procedure 2009-37
a canceled amount in your income and later payavailable at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-36_IRB/ar07. • Religious.
the debt, you may be able to file a claim forhtml. • Scientific.refund for the year the amount was included in
Form 1099-C. If a Federal Government income. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if • Testing for public safety.
agency, financial institution, or credit union the statute of limitations for filing a claim is still
cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 or open. The statute of limitations generally does Exception. You do have income if your stu-
more, you may receive a Form 1099-C, Cancel- not end until 3 years after the due date of your dent loan was made by an educational institu-
lation of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt original return. tion and is canceled because of services you
is shown in box 2. performed for the institution or other organiza-
tion that provided the funds.Interest included in canceled debt. If any Exceptionsinterest is forgiven and included in the amount of Education loan repayment assistance.
canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interest Education loan repayments made to you by theThere are several exceptions to the inclusion of
also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not you National Health Service Corps Loan Repaymentcanceled debt in income. These are explained
must include the interest portion of the canceled Program (NHSC Loan Repayment Program), anext.
debt in your income depends on whether the state education loan repayment program eligible
interest would be deductible if you paid it. See for funds under the Public Health Service Act, orStudent loans. Certain student loans contain
Deductible debt under Exceptions, later. any other state loan repayment or loan forgive-a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to
If the interest would not be deductible (such ness program that is intended to provide for theattend the qualified educational institution will be
as interest on a personal loan), include in your increased availability of health services in un-canceled if you work for a certain period of time
income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. If derserved or health professional shortage areasin certain professions for any of a broad class of
the interest would be deductible (such as on a are not taxable.employers.
business loan), include in your income the net You do not have income if your student loan The provision relating to the ªotheramount of the canceled debt (the amount shown is canceled after you agreed to this provision state loan repayment or loan forgive-in box 2 less the interest amount shown in box and then performed the services required. To ness programº was added to this exclu-
TIP3). qualify, the loan must have been made by: sion for amounts received in tax years beginning
after December 31, 2008. If you included theseDiscounted mortgage loan. If your financial 1. The Federal Government, a state or local
amounts in income in 2009 or 2010, you shouldinstitution offers a discount for the early payment government, or an instrumentality, agency,
file an amended tax return to exclude this in-of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis- or subdivision thereof,
come. See Form 1040X and its instructions forcount is canceled debt. You must include the 2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation details on filing.canceled amount in your income. that has assumed control of a state, Deductible debt. You do not have incomecounty, or municipal hospital, and whoseMortgage relief upon sale or other disposi- from the cancellation of a debt if your payment ofemployees are considered public employ-tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgage the debt would be deductible. This exceptionees under state law, or(recourse debt), and you are relieved of the applies only if you use the cash method of ac-
mortgage when you dispose of the property, you 3. An educational institution: counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of
may realize gain or loss up to the fair market Publication 334.
a. Under an agreement with an entity de-value of the property. To the extent the mort-
scribed in (1) or (2) that provided thegage discharge exceeds the fair market value of Price reduced after purchase. In mostfunds to the institution to make the loan,the property, it is income from discharge of in- cases, if the seller reduces the amount of debtordebtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion you owe for property you purchased, you do not
under Excluded debt, later. Report any income have income from the reduction. The reductionb. As part of a program of the institutionfrom discharge of indebtedness on nonbusiness of the debt is treated as a purchase price adjust-designed to encourage students todebt that does not qualify for exclusion as other ment and reduces your basis in the property.serve in occupations or areas with un-income on Form 1040, line 21. met needs and under which the serv-
Excluded debt. Do not include a canceledices provided are for or under theYou may be able to exclude part of the
debt in your gross income in the following situa-direction of a governmental unit or amortgage relief on your principal resi-
tions.tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-dence. See Excluded debt, later.
TIP
tion (defined later). • The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case If you are not personally liable for a mort-
under Title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Pub-gage (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved A loan to refinance a qualified student loan lication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. of the mortgage when you dispose of the prop- also will qualify if it was made by an educationalerty (such as through foreclosure), that relief is • The debt is canceled when you are insol-institution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-included in the amount you realize. You may vent. However, you cannot exclude anyzation under its program designed as describedhave a taxable gain if the amount you realize amount of canceled debt that is more thanin (3)(b) earlier.exceeds your adjusted basis in the property. the amount by which you are insolvent.An educational institution is an organizationReport any gain on nonbusiness property as a See Publication 908.with a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu-capital gain. larly enrolled body of students in attendance at • The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-See Publication 4681 for more information. the place where the educational activities are celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3carried on. of Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide. Stockholder debt. If you are a stockholder in A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor-a corporation and the corporation cancels or • The debt is qualified real property busi-poration, community chest, fund, or foundationforgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publicationorganized and operated exclusively for one orconstructive distribution that is generally divi- 334.more of the following purposes.dend income to you. For more information, see
• The cancellation is intended as a gift.Publication 542, Corporations. • Charitable.
Page 20 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 21 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The debt is qualified principal residence person's death. If the benefit payable at death is If your spouse died before October 23, 1986,
indebtedness, discussed next. not specified, you include in your income the and you chose to receive only the interest from
benefit payments that are more than the present your insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interest
Qualified principal residence indebted- value of the payments at the time of death. exclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply.
ness (QPRI). This is a mortgage secured by If you later decide to receive the proceeds fromProceeds received in installments. If you re-your principal residence that you took out to buy, the policy in installments, you can take the inter-ceive life insurance proceeds in installments,build, or substantially improve your principal res- est exclusion from the time you begin to receiveyou can exclude part of each installment fromidence. QPRI cannot be more than the cost of the installments.your income.your principal residence plus improvements. To determine the excluded part, divide the Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren-You must reduce the basis of your principal amount held by the insurance company (gener- der a life insurance policy for cash, you mustresidence by the amount excluded from gross ally the total lump sum payable at the death of include in income any proceeds that are moreincome. To claim the exclusion, you must file the insured person) by the number of install- than the cost of the life insurance policy. In mostForm 982, Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to ments to be paid. Include anything over this cases, your cost (or investment in the contract)Discharge of Indebtedness, with your tax return. excluded part in your income as interest. is the total of premiums that you paid for the life
Principal residence. Your principal resi- insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,
dence is the home where you ordinarily live most Example. The face amount of the policy is rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were
of the time. You can have only one principal $75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re- not included in your income.
residence at any one time. ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each. You should receive a Form 1099-R showing
The excluded part of each installment is $625 the total proceeds and the taxable part. ReportAmount eligible for exclusion. The maxi- ($75,000 ÷  120), or $7,500 for an entire year. these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Formmum amount you can treat as QPRI is $2 million The rest of each payment, $375 a month (or 1040 or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.($1 million if married filing separately). You can- $4,500 for an entire year), is interest income tonot exclude debt canceled because of services For information on when the proceedsyou.performed for the lender or on account of any are excluded from income, see Accel-
other factor not directly related to a decline in the Installments for life. If, as the beneficiary erated Death Benefits, later.
TIP
value of your residence or to your financial con- under an insurance contract, you are entitled to Split-dollar life insurance. In most cases, adition. receive the proceeds in installments for the rest split-dollar life insurance arrangement is an ar-of your life without a refund or period-certainLimitation. If only part of a loan is QPRI, the rangement between an owner and a non-ownerguarantee, you figure the excluded part of eachexclusion applies only to the extent the canceled of a life insurance contract under which eitherinstallment by dividing the amount held by theamount is more than the amount of the loan party to the arrangement pays all or part of theinsurance company by your life expectancy. Ifimmediately before the cancellation that is not premiums, and one of the parties paying thethere is a refund or period-certain guarantee, theQPRI. premiums is entitled to recover all or part ofamount held by the insurance company for this those premiums from the proceeds of the con-purpose is reduced by the actuarial value of theExample. Your principal residence is se- tract. There are two mutually exclusive regimesguarantee.cured by a debt of $1 million, of which $800,000 to tax split-dollar life insurance arrangements.
is QPRI. Your residence is sold for $700,000 Surviving spouse. If your spouse died
1. Under the economic benefit regime, theand $300,000 of debt is canceled. Only before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-
owner of the life insurance contract is$100,000 of the canceled debt may be excluded ceeds paid to you because of the death of your
treated as providing current life insurancefrom income (the $300,000 that was discharged spouse are received in installments, you can
protection and other taxable economicminus the $200,000 of nonqualified debt). exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-
benefits to the non-owner of the contract.cluded in the installments. If you remarry, you
can continue to take the exclusion.Host or Hostess 2. Under the loan regime, the non-owner of
the life insurance contract is treated asEmployer-owned life insurance contract. IfIf you host a party or event at which sales are loaning premium payments to the owner ofyou are the policyholder of an employer-ownedmade, any gift or gratuity you receive for giving the contract.life insurance contract, you must include in in-the event is a payment for helping a direct seller come any life insurance proceeds received that Only one of these regimes applies to any onemake sales. You must report this item as income are more than the premiums and any other policy. For more information, see sectionsat its fair market value. amounts you paid on the policy. You are subject 1.61-22 and 1.7872-15 of the regulations.Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub- to this rule if you have a trade or business, youject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment own a life insurance contract on the life of yourexpenses. These expenses are deductible as employee, and you (or a related person) are a Endowment Contract Proceedsmiscellaneous itemized deductions subject to beneficiary under the contract.the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), However, you may exclude the full amount of An endowment contract is a policy under whichbut only up to the amount of income you receive the life insurance proceeds if the following apply. you are paid a specified amount of money on afor giving the party. certain date unless you die before that date, inFor more information about the 50% limit for 1. Before the policy is issued, you provide which case, the money is paid to your desig-meal and entertainment expenses, see 50% written notice about the insurance to the nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid inLimit in Publication 463. employee and the employee provides writ- a lump-sum to you at maturity are taxable only if
ten consent to be insured. the proceeds are more than the cost of theLife Insurance Proceeds policy. To determine your cost, subtract any2. Either:
amount that you previously received under theLife insurance proceeds paid to you because of a. The employee was your employee contract and excluded from your income fromthe death of the insured person are not taxable within the 12-month period before the total premiums (or other consideration) paidunless the policy was turned over to you for a death, or, at the time the contract was for the contract. Include the part of the lump-sumprice. This is true even if the proceeds were paid issued, was a director or highly com- payment that is more than your cost in yourunder an accident or health insurance policy or pensated employee, or income.an endowment contract. However, interest in- Endowment proceeds that you choose tocome received as a result of life insurance pro- b. The amount is paid to the family or des- receive in installments instead of a lump-sumceeds may be taxable. ignated beneficiary of the employee. payment at the maturity of the policy are taxed
Proceeds not received in installments. If as an annuity. This is explained in Publication
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or Interest option on insurance. If an insurance 575. For this treatment to apply, you must
other than at regular intervals, include in your company pays you interest only on proceeds choose to receive the proceeds in installments
income only the benefits that are more than the from life insurance left on deposit, the interest before receiving any part of the lump sum. This
amount payable to you at the time of the insured you are paid is taxable. election must be made within 60 days after the
Publication 525 (2011) Page 21

Page 22 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax benefit rule. You must include a recovery In 2009, if you claimed $500 ($1,000 if marriedlump-sum payment first becomes payable to
filing jointly) as part of your standard deductionin your income in the year you receive it up to theyou.
and you receive a real property tax refund inamount by which the deduction or credit you
2011 for 2009, you would include in income onlytook for the recovered amount reduced your tax
Accelerated Death Benefits that part of the refund that reduced your realin the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-
property tax below $500 ($1,000 if married filingcrease to an amount carried over to the currentCertain amounts paid as accelerated death ben- jointly).year that resulted from the deduction or credit isefits under a life insurance contract or viatical considered to have reduced your tax in the ear- Net disaster loss. For 2009, you could claimsettlement before the insured's death are ex- lier year. a net disaster loss as part of your itemized de-cluded from income if the insured is terminally or
ductions or your standard deduction. If youchronically ill. Federal income tax refund. Refunds of fed- claimed the loss as part of your itemized deduc-eral income taxes are not included in your in- tions, the recovery of the loss is subject to theViatical settlement. This is the sale or assign- come because they are never allowed as a rules for Itemized Deduction Recoveries , dis-ment of any part of the death benefit under a life deduction from income. cussed later.insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-
If you claimed them as part of your standardvider. A viatical settlement provider is a person State tax refund. If you received a state or deduction, any recovery of the net disaster losswho regularly engages in the business of buying local income tax refund (or credit or offset) in is included in income. For information on netor taking assignment of life insurance contracts 2011, you generally must include it in income if disaster losses, see Disaster Area Losses  inon the lives of insured individuals who are termi- you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, andnally or chronically ill and who meets the require- payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov- Thefts.ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal ernment Payments, to you by January 31, 2012.
Revenue Code. The IRS also will receive a copy of the Form Motor vehicle tax. You may have been able
1099-G. If you file Form 1040, use the work- to deduct as part of your itemized deductions orExclusion for terminal illness. Accelerated your standard deduction, state or local sales orsheet in the 2011 Form 1040 instructions for linedeath benefits are fully excludable if the insured excise taxes for certain new motor vehicles pur-10 to figure the amount (if any) to include in youris a terminally ill individual. This is a person who chased after February 16, 2009, and before Jan-income. See Itemized Deduction Recoveries ,has been certified by a physician as having an uary 1, 2010. If you claimed them as part of yourlater, for when you must use Worksheet 2, laterillness or physical condition that can reasonably itemized deductions, they are subject to thein this publication.be expected to result in death within 24 months rules for Itemized Deduction Recoveries , dis-If you could choose to deduct for a tax yearfrom the date of the certification. cussed later.either:
 If you claimed them as part of your standardExclusion for chronic illness. If the insured • State and local income taxes, or deduction and receive a refund in 2011 for motoris a chronically ill individual who is not terminally vehicle taxes you deducted in 2009, they are• State and local general sales taxes, thenill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis subject to the rules for Non-Itemized Deductionof costs incurred for qualified long-term care the maximum refund that you may have to in- Recoveries, discussed later.services are fully excludable. Accelerated death clude in income is limited to the excess of the tax
benefits paid on a per diem  or other periodic Mortgage interest refund. If you received ayou chose to deduct for that year over the tax
basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit refund or credit in 2011 of mortgage interest paidyou did not choose to deduct for that year.
applies to the total of the accelerated death in an earlier year, the amount should be shownExample 1. For 2010 you can choose anbenefits and any periodic payments received in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interest$11,000 state income tax deduction or afrom long-term care insurance contracts. For Statement. Do not subtract the refund amount
$10,000 state general sales tax deduction. Youinformation on the limit and the definitions of from the interest you paid in 2011. You may
choose to deduct the state income tax. In 2011chronically ill individual, qualified long-term care have to include it in your income under the rules
you receive a $2,500 state income tax refund.services, and long-term care insurance con- explained in the following discussions.
The maximum refund that you may have to in-tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con- Interest on recovery. Interest on any of theclude in income is $1,000, since you could havetracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits , amounts you recover must be reported as inter-deducted $10,000 in state general sales tax.earlier. est income in the year received. For example,
Example 2. For 2010 you can choose an report any interest you received on state or localException. The exclusion does not apply to $11,500 state general sales tax deduction income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a orany amount paid to a person (other than the based on actual expenses or an $11,200 state Form 1040NR, line 9a.insured) who has an insurable interest in the life income tax deduction. You choose to deduct theof the insured because the insured: Recovery and expense in same year. If thegeneral sales tax deduction. In 2011 you return refund or other recovery and the expense occuran item you had purchased and receive a $500• Is a director, officer, or employee of the in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-sales tax refund. In 2011 you also receive aperson, or duction or credit and is not reported as income.$1,500 state income tax refund. The maximum• Has a financial interest in the person's refund that you may have to include in income is Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receivebusiness. $500, since it is less than the excess of the tax a refund or other recovery that is for amounts
deducted ($11,500) over the tax you did not you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must
Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler- choose to deduct ($11,200 − $1,500 = $9,700). allocate, on a pro rata  basis, the recovered
ated death benefits made on a per diem or other Since you did not choose to deduct the state amount between the years in which you paid it.
periodic basis, you must file Form 8853 with income tax, you do not include the state income This allocation is necessary to determine the
your return. You do not have to file Form 8853 to tax refund in income. amount of recovery from any earlier years and to
exclude accelerated death benefits paid on the determine the amount, if any, of your allowable
Real property tax. For 2009, you could claimbasis of actual expenses incurred. deduction for this item for the current year.
your real property tax as part of your itemized
deductions or your standard deduction. If you Example. You paid 2010 estimated stateRecoveries
claimed them as part of your itemized deduc- income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments.
tions, they are subject to the rules for ItemizedA recovery is a return of an amount you de- You made your fourth payment in January 2011.
Deduction Recoveries, discussed later.ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The You had no state income tax withheld during
most common recoveries are refunds, reim- If you claimed them as part of your standard 2010. In 2011, you received a $400 tax refund
bursements, and rebates of itemized deduc- deduction, the deduction was limited to the based on your 2010 state income tax return. You
tions. You also may have recoveries of lesser of: claimed itemized deductions each year on
non-itemized deductions (such as payments on Schedule A (Form 1040).• The amount allowable as a deduction ifpreviously deducted bad debts) and recoveries You must allocate the $400 refund betweenyou itemized your deductions, orof items for which you previously claimed a tax 2010 and 2011, the years in which you paid the
credit. • $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly). tax on which the refund is based. You paid 75%
Page 22 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 23 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
($3,000 ÷  $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2010, the worksheet in the 2011 Form 1040 instruc- you will have to recompute your tax for the
tions for line 10 to figure the amount (if any) to earlier year to determine if the recovery must beso 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for
include in your income. included in your income. If inclusion of the recov-amounts you paid in 2010 and is a recovery
You cannot use the Form 1040 worksheet ery does not change your total tax, you do notitem. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item,
and must use this discussion if you are a nonres- include the recovery in income. However, if youryou will include $300 on Form 1040, line 10, for
ident alien (discussed later) or any of the follow- total tax increases by any amount, you must2011, and attach a copy of your computation
ing statements are true. include the recovery in your income up to theshowing why that amount is less than the
amount of the deduction that reduced your tax inamount shown on the Form 1099-G you re- 1. You received a refund in 2011 that is for a the earlier year.ceived from the state. tax year other than 2010.The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is for
2. You received a refund other than an in- Total recovery included in income. If youyour January 2011 estimated tax payment.
come tax refund, such as a general sales recover any itemized deduction that you claimedWhen you figure your deduction for state and
tax or real property tax refund, in 2011 of in an earlier year, you generally must include thelocal income taxes paid during 2011, you will
an amount deducted or credit claimed in full amount of the recovery in your income in thereduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Your
an earlier year. year you receive it. This rule applies if, for thededuction for state and local income taxes paid
earlier year, all of the following statements areduring 2011 will include the January net amount 3. The amount on your 2010 Form 1040, line
true.of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimated 42 was more than the amount on your
state income taxes paid in 2011 for 2011, and 2010 Form 1040, line 41. 1. Your itemized deductions exceeded theany state income tax withheld during 2011. standard deduction by at least the amount4. You had taxable income on your 2010
of the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-Form 1040, line 43, but no tax on yourJoint state or local income tax return. If you Form 1040, line 44, because of the 0% tax tions did not exceed the standard deduc-filed a joint state or local income tax return in an rate on net capital gain and qualified divi- tion by at least the amount of the recovery,earlier year and you are not filing a joint Form dends in certain situations. See Capital see Standard deduction limit, later.)1040 with the same person for 2011, any refund gains, later. 2. You had taxable income. (If you had noof a deduction claimed on that state or local
5. Your 2010 state and local income tax re- taxable income, see Negative taxable in-income tax return must be allocated to the per-
fund is more than your 2010 state and lo- come, later.)son that paid the expense. If both persons paid a
cal income tax deduction minus theportion of the expense, allocate the refund 3. Your deduction for the item recoveredamount you could have deducted as yourbased on your individual portion. For example, if equals or exceeds the amount recovered.2010 state and local general sales taxes.you paid 25% of the expense, then you would (If your deduction was less than theuse 25% of the refund to figure if you must 6. You made your last payment of 2010 esti- amount recovered, see Recovery limited toinclude any portion of the refund in your income. mated state or local income tax in 2011. deduction, later.)
Nevada, Washington, and California do- 7. You owed alternative minimum tax in 4. Your itemized deductions were not subjectmestic partners. Registered domestic part- 2010. to the limit on itemized deductions. (If yourners (RDPs) who are domiciled in Nevada, deductions were limited, see Itemized de-8. You could not use the full amount of cred-Washington, or California and for individuals in ductions limited, later.)its you were entitled to in 2010 becauseCalifornia who, for state law purposes, are mar- the total credits were more than the 5. You had no unused tax credits. (If you hadried to an individual of the same sex, generally amount shown on your 2010 Form 1040, unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred-must follow state community property laws and line 46. its, later.)report half the combined community income of
the individual and his or her RDP (or California 9. You could be claimed as a dependent by 6. You were not subject to alternative mini-
same-sex spouse). RDPs, and individuals in someone else in 2010. mum tax. (If you were subject to alternative
California who are married to an individual of the minimum tax, see Subject to alternative10. You received a refund because of asame sex, are not married for federal tax pur- minimum tax, later.)jointly-filed state or local income tax return,poses. They can use only the single filing status, but you are not filing a joint 2011 Form If any of the earlier statements is not true,or if they qualify, the head of household filing 1040 with the same person. see Total recovery not included in income, later.status. If one of the RDPs files an amended
return to report half of the community income, State tax refund. In addition to the previousIf you also recovered an amount de-the other RDP must report the other half. See six items, you must include in your income theducted as a non-itemized deduction,Publication 555, Community Property. full amount of a refund of state or local incomefigure the amount of that recovery to
CAUTION
!
tax or general sales tax if the excess of the taxinclude in your income and add it to your ad-
Deductions not itemized. If you did not item- you deducted over the tax you did not deduct isjusted gross income before applying the rules
ize deductions for the year for which you re- more than the refund of the tax deducted.explained here. See Non-Itemized Deduction
ceived the recovery of an expense that was If the refund is more than the excess, seeRecoveries, later.
deductible only if you itemized, do not include Total recovery not included in income, later.Nonresident aliens. If you are a nonresidentany of the recovery amount in your income. alien and file Form 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, you Where to report. Enter your state or local
cannot claim the standard deduction. If you re- income tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, andExample. You claimed the standard deduc- cover an itemized deduction that you claimed in the total of all other recoveries as other incometion on your 2010 federal income tax return. In an earlier year, you generally must include the on Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form2011 you received a refund of your 2010 state full amount of the recovery in your income in the 1040A or Form 1040EZ.income tax. Do not report any of the refund as year you receive it. However, if you had no If you file Form 1040NR, enter your state orincome because you did not itemize deductions taxable income in that earlier year (see Negative local income tax refund on line 11 and the totalfor 2010. taxable income , later), you should complete of all other recoveries on line 21. If you file FormWorksheet 2 to determine the amount you must 1040NR-EZ, enter your state or local income taxinclude in income. If any other statement under refund on line 4.Itemized Deduction Recoveries Total recovery included in income  is not true,
see the discussion referenced in the statementThe following discussion explains how to deter- Example. For 2010, you filed a joint returnto determine the amount to include in income.mine the amount to include in your income from on Form 1040. Your taxable income was
a recovery of an amount deducted in an earlier $60,000 and you were not entitled to any taxCapital gains. If you determined your tax in
year as an itemized deduction. However, you credits. Your standard deduction was $11,400,the earlier year by using the Schedule D Tax
generally do not need to use this discussion if and you had itemized deductions of $13,000. InWorksheet, or the Qualified Dividends and Capi-
you file Form 1040 and the recovery is for state 2011, you received the following recoveries fortal Gain Tax Worksheet, and you receive a re-
or local income taxes paid in 2010. Instead, use amounts deducted on your 2010 return:fund in 2011 of a deduction claimed in that year,
Publication 525 (2011) Page 23

Page 24 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Medical expenses ............. . $200 • Your recoveries, or $500 reimbursement that must be included in
State and local income tax refund ... . 400 your income for 2011 is $200 Ðthe amount ac-• The amount by which your itemized de-Refund of mortgage interest ....... . 325 tually deducted.ductions exceeded the standard deduc-Total recoveries ............... . $925
tion. Itemized deductions limited. You were sub-None of the recoveries were more than the
ject to the limit on itemized deductions in thedeductions taken for 2010. The difference be- Standard deduction for earlier years. To
earlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI)tween the state and local income tax you de- determine if amounts recovered in 2011 must beducted and your local general sales tax was was more than a base amount. This amountincluded in your income, you must know themore than $400. was:standard deduction for your filing status for theYour total recoveries are less than the year the deduction was claimed. If you filed • For 2009, $166,800 ($83,400 if marriedamount by which your itemized deductions ex- Form 1040, the standard deduction tables for filing separately).ceeded the standard deduction ($13,000 − 2010, 2009, and 2008 are shown in Tables 2, 3,$11,400 = $1,600), so you must include your • For 2008, $159,950 ($79,975 if marriedand 4. If you need the standard deductiontotal recoveries in your income for 2011. Report filing separately).amounts for years before 2008, see the copy ofthe state and local income tax refund of $400 on your return for that year. If you filed Form For 2010, there was no limit on itemized deduc-Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, you could not claim the tions. If the limit applied in 2009 or 2008, yourrecoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21. standard deduction.    itemized deductions were reduced by the
Total recovery not included in income. If smaller of the following amounts.
one or more of the six statements listed in the Example. You filed a joint return on Form • 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-preceding discussion  is not true, you may be 1040 for 2010 with taxable income of $45,000. ceeded the base amount.able to exclude at least part of the recovery from Your itemized deductions were $12,050. The
your income. See the discussion referenced in standard deduction that you could have claimed • 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc-
the statement. You may be able to use Work- was $11,400. In 2011, you recovered $2,100 of tions other than medical and dental ex-
sheet 2 , later, to determine the part of your your 2010 itemized deductions. None of the re- penses, investment interest expense,
recovery to include in your income. You also can coveries were more than the actual deductions nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,
use Worksheet 2 to determine the part of a state for 2010. Include $650 of the recoveries in your and gambling losses.tax refund  (discussed earlier) to include in in- 2011 income. This is the smaller of your recov- In 2008 and 2009, your itemized deductionscome. eries ($2,100) or the amount by which your item- were reduced by 1/3 of the smaller amount.ized deductions were more than the standardAllocating the included part. If you are not
deduction ($12,050 − $11,400 = $650). If the amount you recovered was deducted inrequired to include all of your recoveries in your
a year in which your itemized deductions wereincome, and you have both a state income tax If you could claim an additional stan- limited, you must include it in income up to therefund and other itemized deduction recoveries, dard deduction for certain taxes or a difference between the amount of itemized de-you must allocate the taxable recoveries be- net disaster loss, increase your stan-
TIP ductions actually allowed that year and thetween the state income tax refund you report on dard deduction for that year.Form 1040, line 10 (Form 1040NR, line 11), and amount you would have been allowed (the
the amount you report as other income on Form greater of your itemized deductions or your stan-Negative taxable income. If your taxable in-1040, line 21 (Form 1040NR, line 21). If you do dard deduction) if you had figured your deduc-come for the prior year ( Worksheet 2, line 10)not use Worksheet 2 , make the allocation as tions using only the net amount of the recoverywas a negative amount, the recovery you mustfollows. item.include in income is reduced by that amount. To determine the part of the recovery you1. Divide your state income tax refund by the You have a negative taxable income for 2010 if must include in income, follow the two stepstotal of all your itemized deduction recov- your: below.eries. • Form 1040, line 42 was more than line 41,
1. Figure the greater of:2. Multiply the amount of taxable recoveries • Form 1040NR, line 40 was more than lineby the percentage in (1). This is the 39, or a. The standard deduction for the earlieramount you report as a state income tax year, orrefund. • Form 1040NR-EZ, line 13 was more than
line 12. b. The amount of itemized deductions you3. Subtract the result in (2) above from the would have been allowed for the earlieramount of taxable recoveries. This is the
year (after taking into account the limitamount you report as other income. Example. The facts are the same as in the
on itemized deductions) if you had fig-previous example except line 42 was $200 more
ured them using only the net amount ofthan line 41 on your 2010 Form 1040 giving youExample. In 2011 you recovered $2,500 of the recovery item. The net amount isa negative taxable income of $200. You mustyour 2010 itemized deductions claimed on the amount you actually paid reducedinclude $450 in your 2011 income, rather thanSchedule A (Form 1040), but the recoveries you by the recovery amount.$650.must include in your 2011 income are only
Note. If you were required to itemize your$1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500 was
Recovery limited to deduction. You do not deductions in the earlier year, use step 1(b)due to your state income tax refund. Your state
include in your income any amount of your re- and not step 1(a).income tax was more than your state general
covery that is more than the amount you de-sales tax by $600. The amount you report as a 2. Subtract the amount in step 1 from theducted in the earlier year. The amount youstate tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, is $300 amount of itemized deductions actually al-include in your income is limited to the smaller[($500 ÷  $2,500) ×  $1,500]. The balance of the lowed in the earlier year after applying theof:taxable recoveries, $1,200, is reported as other limit on itemized deductions.income on Form 1040, line 21. • The amount deducted, or The result of step 2 is the amount of the recov-Standard deduction limit. You generally are • The amount recovered. ery to include in your income for the year youallowed to claim the standard deduction if you do receive the recovery. If your taxable income fornot itemize your deductions. Only your itemized the earlier year was a negative amount, reduceExample. During 2010, you paid $1,700 fordeductions that are more than your standard your recovery by the negative amount.medical expenses. From this amount you sub-deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-
If you had unused tax credits in the earliertracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjustedless you are required to itemize your deduc-
year, see Unused tax credits, later.gross income. Your actual medical expense de-tions). If your total deductions on the earlier year
duction was $200. In 2011, you received a $500 For more information on this computation,return were not more than your income for that
reimbursement from your medical insurance for see Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is inyear, include in your income this year the lesser
your 2010 expenses. The only amount of the Cumulative Bulletin 1993-2.of:
Page 24 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 25 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions Keep for Your Records
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in income on your
2011 tax return, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If you recovered amounts from more than one year, such as a state income
tax refund from 2010 and a casualty loss reimbursement from 2009, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use
information from your tax return for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year (year of the
deduction). If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to zero, see Unused tax credits
and Subject to alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your recovery was for an itemized deduction that
was limited, you should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit1 ........................................... . 1.
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements 
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)2 ...................................... . 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 ........................................................... . 3.
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year. For 2010, 
Form 1040, Schedule A, line 29
Form 1040NR, Schedule A, line 17
Form 1040NR-EZ, line 11 ................................... . 4.
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you 
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2) ..................... . 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4 ................................... . 6.
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. (If you filed Form 1040, the standard
deduction amounts for 2010, 2009, and 2008 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and
4. If you filed Form 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, enter -0-.) .............. . 7.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here. 
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable ...................................... . 8.
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8 .............................................. . 9.
10. Taxable income for prior year3 (2010 Form 1040, line 43; 2010 Form
1040NR, line 41; 2010 Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14) ................. . 10.
11. Amount to include in income for 2011:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result 
(but not less than zero).4 .................................................. . 11.
If line 11 equals line 3Ð
Enter the amount from line 1 on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11; Form 1040NR-EZ, line 4.
Enter the amount from line 2 on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero Ð
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11;
 Form 1040NR-EZ, line 4.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the
percentage ........................................... . A.
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A. 
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11 .................. . B.
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11. 
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21 .................. . C.
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. Do not enter more than the excess of your state and local income tax deduction over your
state and local general sales taxes you could have deducted.
2 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. If you deducted state and local general sales taxes and received a refund of those taxes,
include the amount on line 2, but do not enter more than the excess of your sales tax deduction over your state and local income tax you could have
deducted.
3 If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. See Negative taxable
income. Taxable income will have to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Publication 536, Net Operating Losses for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.
4 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Publication 525 (2011) Page 25

Page 26 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2. 2010 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1946, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1946, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1946  M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1946  M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,700
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 11,400
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 8,400
2.  Additional amount 2. $300* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1946, or you are
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if 3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $950
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.Were Born Before January 2, 1946, or Were Blind*
6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. status.
• Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,700You Born before
January 2, 1946 M Blind M • Married filing jointly Ð$11,400
Your spouse, if claiming Born before • Head of householdÐ$8,400spouse's exemption January 2, 1946  M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.
Total number of boxes you checked ____ a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
January 1, 1946, and not blind, stop here. ThisTHEN your 
is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on toIF your AND the number on standard deduction
line 7b.filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . .
b. If born before January 2, 1946, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $  7,100 $1,400 ($1,100 if married) by the number in the2 8,500 box above.
Married filing joint return or 1 12,500 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.
Qualifying widow(er) with 2 13,600 deduction for 2010.
dependent child 3 14,700
4 15,800 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,800 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must2 7,900
include in your income.3 9,000
4 10,100
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (orHead of household 1 9,800 your spouse if married filing jointly).2 11,200
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
For 2010 you can increase your standard deduction, figured using these tables, by state or local sales taxes and a net disaster loss that
you could claim as part of your standard deduction.
TIP
Page 26 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 27 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3. 2009 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1945, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1945, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1945 M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1945 M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,700
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 11,400
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 8,350
2.  Additional amount 2. $300* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1945, or you are
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if 3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $950
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.Were Born Before January 2, 1945, or Were Blind*
6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. status.
• Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,700You Born before
January 2, 1945  M Blind M • Married filing jointlyÐ$11,400
Your spouse, if claiming Born before • Head of householdÐ$8,350spouse's exemption January 2, 1945  M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.
Total number of boxes you checked ____ a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
January 1, 1945, and not blind, stop here. ThisIF your AND the number on THEN your 
is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on tofiling status is . . . the line above is . . . standard deduction
line 7b.is . . .
b.If born before January 2, 1945, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $ 7,100 $1,400 ($1,100 if married) by the number in the2 8,500 box above.
Married filing joint return or 1 12,500 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.
Qualifying widow(er) with 2 13,600 deduction for 2009.
dependent child 3 14,700
4 15,800 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,800 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must2 7,900
include in your income.3 9,000
4 10,100
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (orHead of household 1 9,750 your spouse if married filing jointly).2 11,150
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
For 2009 you can increase your standard deduction, figured using these tables, by your real property tax (limited to $500 ($1,000 if
married filing jointly)), state or local sales or excise tax paid on the purchase of a motor vehicle after February 16, and net disaster loss
that you could claim as part of your standard deduction.
TIP
Publication 525 (2011) Page 27

Page 28 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. 2008 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1944, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1944, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1944 M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1944  M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,450
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,900
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 8,000
2.  Additional amount 2. $300* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1944, or you are
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if 3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $900
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.Were Born Before January 2, 1944, or Were Blind*
6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. status.
• Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,450You Born before
January 2, 1944 M Blind M • Married filing jointlyÐ$10,900
Your spouse, if claiming Born before • Head of householdÐ$8,000spouse's exemption January 2, 1944 M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.
Total number of boxes you checked _____ a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
January 1, 1944, and not blind, stop here. ThisTHEN your 
is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on toIF your AND the number on standard deduction
line 7b.filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . .
b. If born before January 2, 1944, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $ 6,800 $1,350 ($1,050 if married) by the number in the2 8,150 box above.
Married filing joint return or 1 11,950 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.
Qualifying widow(er) with 2 13,000 deduction for 2008.
dependent child 3 14,050
4 15,100 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,500 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must2 7,550
include in your income.3 8,600
4 9,650
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (orHead of household 1 9,350 your spouse if married filing jointly).2 10,700
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
For 2008 you can increase your standard deduction, figured using these tables, by your real property tax (limited to $500 ($1,000 if
married filing jointly)) and net disaster loss that you could claim as part of your standard deduction.
TIP
Unused tax credits. If you recover an item in the earlier year is considered to have re- tax credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). In 2011,
deducted in an earlier year in which you had Jean recovered $1,000 of her itemized deduc-duced your tax in the earlier year. If the recov-
unused tax credits, you must refigure the ear- tions. She reduces her 2010 itemized deduc-ery is for an itemized deduction claimed in a
lier year's tax to determine if you must include tions by $1,000 and recomputes that year's taxyear in which the deductions were limited, see
the recovery in your income. To do this, add the on taxable income of $6,260. However, theItemized deductions limited, earlier.
amount of the recovery to your earlier year's child care credit exceeds the recomputed tax ofIf your tax, after application of the credits,taxable income and refigure the tax and the $628. Jean's tax liability for 2010 is notdoes not change, you did not have a tax benefitcredits on the recomputed amount. If the re- changed by reducing her deductions by thefrom the deduction. Do not include the recoverycomputed tax, after application of the credits, is recovery. She did not have a tax benefit fromin your income.more than the actual tax in the earlier year, the recovered deduction and does not include
include the recovery in your income up to the any of the recovery in her income for 2011.Example. In 2010, Jean Black filed asamount of the deduction that reduced the tax in head of household and itemized her deduc- Subject to alternative minimum tax. If youthe earlier year. For this purpose, any increase tions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Her taxable were subject to the alternative minimum tax into a credit carried over to the current year that income was $5,260 and her tax was $528. She the year of the deduction, you will have toresulted from deducting the recovered amount claimed a child care credit of $1,200. The credit recompute your tax for the earlier year to deter-
reduced her tax to zero and she had an unused mine if the recovery must be included in your
Page 28 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 29 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income. This will require a recomputation of Worksheet, or the Qualified Dividends and Unemployment compensation. You must
your regular tax, as shown in the preceding include in income all unemployment compen-Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, and you receive a
example, and a recomputation of your alterna- sation you receive. You should receive a Formrefund in 2011 of a deduction claimed in that
tive minimum tax. If inclusion of the recovery 1099-G showing in box 1 the total unemploy-year, you will have to recompute your tax for
does not change your total tax, you do not ment compensation paid to you. In most cases,the earlier year to determine if the recovery
include the recovery in your income. However, you enter unemployment compensation on linemust be included in your income. If inclusion of
if your total tax increases by any amount, you 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or linethe recovery does not change your total tax,
received a tax benefit from the deduction and 3 of Form 1040EZ.you do not include the recovery in income.
you must include the recovery in your income However, if your total tax increases by any Types of unemployment compensation.up to the amount of the deduction that reduced amount, you must include the recovery in your Unemployment compensation generally in-your tax in the earlier year. income up to the amount of the deduction that cludes any amount received under an unem-reduced your tax in the earlier year. ployment compensation law of the United
States or of a state. It includes the followingNon-Itemized Deduction benefits.Recoveries Amounts Recovered for Credits
• Benefits paid by a state or the District of
This section discusses recovery of deductions If you received a recovery in 2011 for an item Columbia from the Federal Unemploy-
other than itemized deductions. for which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier ment Trust Fund.
year, you must increase your 2011 tax by theTotal recovery included in income. If you • State unemployment insurance benefits.amount of the recovery, up to the amount byrecover an amount that you deducted in an which the credit reduced your tax in the earlier • Railroad unemployment compensationearlier year when you were figuring your ad- year. You had a recovery if there was a down- benefits.justed gross income, you generally must in- ward price adjustment or similar adjustment onclude the full amount of the recovery in your • Disability payments from a governmentthe item for which you claimed a credit.income in the year received. program paid as a substitute for unem-This rule does not apply to the investment ployment compensation. (Amounts re-Total recovery not included in income. If credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries of ceived as workers' compensation forany part of the deduction you took for the re- these credits are covered by other provisions of injuries or illness are not unemploymentcovered amount did not reduce your tax, you the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax compensation. See Workers' Compensa-may be able to exclude at least part of the Credit for Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture tion under Sickness and Injury Benefits,recovery from your income. You must include of Investment Credit, for details. earlier.) the recovery in your income only up to the
amount of the deduction that reduced your tax • Trade readjustment allowances under theSurvivor Benefitsin the year of the deduction. (See Tax benefit Trade Act of 1974.
rule, earlier.) In most cases, payments made by or for an • Unemployment assistance under the Dis-employer because of an employee's deathNegative taxable income. If your taxable in- aster Relief and Emergency Assistancemust be included in income. The following dis-come for the prior year was a negative amount, Act of 1974.cussions explain the tax treatment of certainthe recovery you must include in income is
payments made to survivors. For additionalreduced by that amount. You have a negative Governmental program. If you contributeinformation, see Publication 559.taxable income for 2010 if your: to a governmental unemployment compensa-
tion program and your contributions are not• Form 1040, line 42 was more than line Lump-sum payments. Lump-sum pay- deductible, amounts you receive under the pro-41, ments you receive from a decedent's employer gram are not included as unemployment com-as the surviving spouse or beneficiary may be• Form 1040NR, line 40 was more than pensation until you recover your contributions.accrued salary payments; distributions fromline 39, or If you deducted all of your contributions to theemployee profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or program, the entire amount you receive under• Form 1040NR-EZ, line 13 was more than stock bonus plans; or other items that should the program is included in your income.line 12. be treated separately for tax purposes. The tax
Repayment of unemployment compensa-treatment of these lump-sum payments de-If you had a net operating loss (NOL) in a prior tion. If you repaid in 2011 unemploymentpends on the type of payment.year, you will have to adjust your taxable in- compensation you received in 2011, subtractcome for any NOL carryover. See Publication Salary or wages. Salary or wages re- the amount you repaid from the total amount536 for more information. ceived after the death of the employee are you received and enter the difference on line 19usually ordinary income to you. of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3Unused tax credits. If you recover an item of Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to yourQualified employee retirement plans.deducted in an earlier year in which you had entry, enter ªRepaidº and the amount you re-Lump-sum distributions from qualified em-unused tax credits, you must refigure the ear- paid. If you repaid unemployment compensa-ployee retirement plans are subject to speciallier year's tax to determine if you must include tion in 2011 that you included in your income intax treatment. For information on these distri-the recovery in your income. To do this, add the an earlier year, you can deduct the amountbutions, see Publication 575 (or Publicationamount of the recovery to your earlier year's repaid on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if721, if you are the survivor of a federal em-taxable income and refigure the tax and the you itemize deductions. If the amount is moreployee or retiree).credits on the recomputed amount. If the re- than $3,000, see Repayments, later.computed tax, after application of the credits, is Public safety officer killed in the line ofmore than the actual tax in the earlier year, Tax withholding. You can choose to haveduty. If you are a survivor of a public safetyinclude the recovery in your income up to the federal income tax withheld from your unem-officer who was killed in the line of duty, youamount of the deduction that reduced the tax in ployment compensation. To make this choice,may be able to exclude from income certainthe earlier year. For this purpose, any increase complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholdingamounts you receive. For this purpose, theto a credit carried over to the current year that Request, and give it to the paying office. Taxterm public safety officer includes law enforce-resulted from deducting the recovered amount will be withheld at 10% of your payment.ment officers, firefighters, chaplains, and res-in the earlier year is considered to have re- cue squad and ambulance crew members. For If you do not choose to have tax with-duced your tax in the earlier year. more information, see Publication 559. held from your unemployment com-If your tax, after application of the credits, pensation, you may be liable for
CAUTION
!does not change, you did not have a tax benefit estimated tax. If you do not pay enough tax,Unemployment Benefitsfrom the deduction. Do not include the recovery either through withholding or estimated tax, orin your income. The tax treatment of unemployment benefits a combination of both, you may have to pay a
you receive depends on the type of programCapital gains. If you determined your tax in penalty. For more information, see Publication
paying the benefits.the earlier year by using the Schedule D Tax 505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax.
Publication 525 (2011) Page 29

Page 30 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Supplemental unemployment benefits. victims' incomes if they are in the nature of rehabilitation of your home or repair or
Benefits received from an employer-financed welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex- replacement of its contents to the extent it
fund (to which the employees did not contrib- penses that are reimbursed by such a fund. is due to a qualified disaster;
ute) are not unemployment compensation. You must include in your income any welfare 3. By a person engaged in the furnishing orThey are taxable as wages and are subject to payments that are compensation for services sale of transportation as a common car-withholding for income tax. They may be sub- or that are obtained fraudulently. rier because of the death or personalject to social security and Medicare taxes. For Work-training program. Payments you re- physical injuries incurred as a result of amore information, see Supplemental Unem- ceive from a state welfare agency for taking qualified disaster; orployment Benefits  in section 5 of Publication part in a work-training program are not included15-A, Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide. 4. By a federal, state, or local government,in your income, as long as the payments (ex-Report these payments on line 7 of Form 1040 or agency or instrumentality in connectionclusive of extra allowances for transportation oror Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. with a qualified disaster in order to pro-other costs) do not total more than the public
mote the general welfare.Repayment of benefits. You may have to welfare benefits you would have received oth-
repay some of your supplemental unemploy- erwise. If the payments are more than the wel- You can exclude this amount only to the extentment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment fare benefits you would have received, the any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you entire amount must be included in your income ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not ap-repay supplemental unemployment benefits in as wages. ply if you were a participant or conspirator in athe same year you receive them, reduce the terrorist action or his or her representative.Alternative trade adjustment assistancetotal benefits by the amount you repay. If you (ATAA) payments. Payments you receive A qualified disaster is:repay the benefits in a later year, you must from a state agency under the Demonstrationinclude the full amount of the benefits in your • A disaster which results from a terroristProject for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis-income for the year you received them. or military action;tance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in-Deduct the repayment in the later year as cluded in your income. The state must send • A federally declared disaster; oran adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. you Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount(You cannot use Form 1040A or Form • A disaster which results from an accidentyou should include in income. The amount1040EZ.) Include the repayment on Form involving a common carrier, or from anyshould be reported on Form 1040, line 21 or1040, line 36, and enter ªSub-Pay TRAº and other event, which is determined to beForm 1040NR, line 21.the amount on the dotted line next to line 36. If catastrophic by the Secretary of the Trea-
the amount you repay in a later year is more Persons with disabilities. If you have a dis- sury or his or her delegate.
than $3,000, you may be able to take a credit ability, you must include in income compensa-
against your tax for the later year instead of tion you receive for services you perform For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster
deducting the amount repaid. For information unless the compensation is otherwise ex- is qualified if it is determined by an applicable
on this, see Repayments, later. cluded. However, you do not include in income federal, state, or local authority to warrant as-
the value of goods, services, and cash that you sistance from the federal, state, or local gov-Private unemployment fund. Unemploy- receive, not in return for your services, but for ernment, agency, or instrumentality.ment benefit payments from a private (nonun- your training and rehabilitation because youion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute are Disaster mitigation payments. You alsohave a disability. Excludable amounts includetaxable only if the amounts you receive are can exclude from income any amount you re-payments for transportation and attendantmore than your total payments into the fund. ceive that is a qualified disaster mitigation pay-care, such as interpreter services for the deaf,Report the taxable amount on Form 1040, line ment. Like qualified disaster relief payments,reader services for the blind, and services to21. qualified disaster mitigation payments are alsohelp individuals with an intellectual disability do
most commonly paid to you in the period imme-Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you their work.
diately following damage to property as a resultas an unemployed member of a union from Disaster relief grants. Do not includeregular union dues are included in your income of a natural disaster. However, disaster mitiga-post-disaster grants received under the Disas-on Form 1040, line 21. However, if you contrib- tion payments are grants you use to mitigateter Relief and Emergency Assistance Act inute to a special union fund and your payments (reduce the severity of) potential damage fromyour income if the grant payments are made toto the fund are not deductible, the unemploy- future natural disasters. They are paid to youhelp you meet necessary expenses or seriousment benefits you receive from the fund are through state and local governments based onneeds for medical, dental, housing, personalincludible in your income only to the extent they the provisions of the Robert T. Stafford Disas-property, transportation, or funeral expenses.are more than your contributions. ter Relief and Emergency Assistance Act or theDo not deduct casualty losses or medical ex- National Flood Insurance Act.Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you penses that are specifically reimbursed by
You cannot increase the basis or adjustedreceive from your employer during periods of these disaster relief grants. If you have de-
basis of your property for improvements madeunemployment, under a union agreement that ducted a casualty loss for the loss of your
with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.guarantees you full pay during the year, are personal residence and you later receive a
taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 of disaster relief grant for the loss of the same
Home Affordable Modification ProgramForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form residence, you may have to include part or all
1040EZ. (HAMP). If you benefit fromof the grant in your taxable income. See Recov-
Pay-for-Performance Success Paymentseries, earlier. Unemployment assistance pay-State employees. Payments similar to a ments under the Act are taxable under HAMP, the payments are not taxable.state's unemployment compensation may be unemployment compensation. See Unemploy-made by the state to its employees who are not ment compensation  under Unemployment Hardest Hit Fund and Emergency Home-covered by the state's unemployment compen- Benefits, earlier. owners' Loan Program. If you receive orsation law. Although the payments are fully benefit from payments made under:taxable, do not report them as unemployment Disaster relief payments. You can exclude
compensation. Report these payments on from income any amount you receive that is a • A State Housing Finance agency (State
Form 1040, line 21. qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified HFA) Hardest Hit Fund program in which
disaster relief payment is an amount paid to program payments can be used to pay
you: mortgage interest, orWelfare and Other 
Public Assistance Benefits • An Emergency Homeowners' Loan Pro-1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
gram (EHLP) administered by the De-essary personal, family, living, or funeralDo not include in your income governmental partment of Housing and Urbanexpenses that result from a qualified dis-benefit payments from a public welfare fund Development (HUD) or a state.aster;based upon need, such as payments due to
The payments are not included in gross incomeblindness. Payments from a state fund for the 2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
and are not taxable.victims of crime should not be included in the essary expenses incurred for the repair or
Page 30 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 31 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mortgage assistance payments under sec- limited. They cannot total more than the in- as the original sale, you have no income from
tion 235 of the National Housing Act. Pay- come you report and can be taken only if you the sale. If the contract is canceled and you
ments made under section 235 of the National itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form return the buyer's money in a later tax year, you
Housing Act for mortgage assistance are not 1040). See Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 must include your gain in your income for the
included in the homeowner's income. Interest of Publication 535 for information on whether year of the sale. When you return the money
paid for the homeowner under the mortgage an activity is considered carried on for a profit. and take back the property in the later year, you
assistance program cannot be deducted. treat the transaction as a purchase that givesAlaska Permanent Fund dividend. If you you a new basis in the property equal to thereceived a payment from Alaska's mineral in-Replacement housing payments. Replace- funds you return to the buyer.come fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend),ment housing payments made under the Uni- Special rules apply to the reacquisition ofreport it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, lineform Relocation Assistance and Real Property real property where a secured indebtedness13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.Acquisition Policies Act for Federal and Feder- (mortgage) to the original seller is involved. ForThe state of Alaska sends each recipient aally Assisted Programs are not includible in further information, see Repossession in Publi-document that shows the amount of the pay-gross income, but are includible in the basis of cation 537, Installment Sales.ment with the check. The amount also is re-the newly acquired property.
ported to the IRS. Car pools. Do not include in your incomeRelocation payments and home rehabilita-
amounts you receive from the passengers forAlimony. Include in your income on Formtion grants. A relocation payment under sec-
driving a car in a car pool to and from work.1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-tion 105(a)(11) of the Housing and Community
These amounts are considered reimbursementceive. Amounts you receive for child supportDevelopment Act made by a local jurisdiction to
for your expenses. However, this rule does notare not income to you. For complete informa-a displaced individual moving from a
apply if you have developed car pool arrange-tion, see Publication 504, Divorced or Sepa-flood-damaged residence to another residence
ments into a profit-making business of trans-rated Individuals.is not includible in gross income. Home rehabil-
porting workers for hire.itation grants received by low-income home- Below-market loans. A below-market loanowners in a defined area under the same act is a loan on which no interest is charged or on Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receiveare also not includible in gross income. which the interest is charged at a rate below the from a dealer or manufacturer of an item you
applicable federal rate. If you make a be- buy is not income, but you must reduce yourIndian financing grants. Nonreimbursable
low-market gift or demand loan, you must in- basis by the amount of the rebate.grants under title IV of the Indian Financing Act
clude the forgone interest (at the federal rate)of 1974 to Indians to expand profit-making In-
as interest income on your return. These loans Example. You buy a new car for $24,000dian-owned economic enterprises on or near
are considered a transaction in which you, the cash and receive a $2,000 rebate check fromreservations are not includible in gross income.
lender, are treated as having made: the manufacturer. The $2,000 is not income to
Medicare. Medicare benefits received under you. Your basis in the car is $22,000. This is• A loan to the borrower in exchange for atitle XVIII of the Social Security Act are not the basis on which you figure gain or loss if younote that requires the payment of interestincludible in the gross income of the individuals sell the car and depreciation if you use it forat the applicable federal rate, andfor whom they are paid. This includes basic business.
(part A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the • An additional payment to the borrower,
Aged)) and supplementary (part B (Supple- which the borrower transfers back to you Casualty insurance and other reimburse-
mentary Medical Insurance Benefits for the as interest. ments. You generally should not report these
Aged)). reimbursements on your return unless you areDepending on the transaction, the additional figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft.payment to the borrower is treated as a:Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance See Publication 547.benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under • Gift,section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act Charitable gift annuities. If you are the ben-• Dividend,are not includible in the gross income of the eficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you mustindividuals to whom they are paid. This applies include the yearly annuity or fixed percentage• Contribution to capital,to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance payment in your income.• Payment of compensation, orbenefits for wives, husbands, children, widows, The payer will report the types of incomewidowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, you received on Form 1099-R. Report the• Another type of payment.as well as the lump-sum death payment. gross distribution from box 1 on Form 1040,The borrower may have to report this payment line 16a, or on Form 1040A, line 12a, and theNutrition Program for the Elderly. Food as income, depending on its classification. part taxed as ordinary income (box 2a minusbenefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-
For more information on below-market box 3) on Form 1040, line 16b, or on Formgram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you
loans, see chapter 1 of Publication 550. 1040A, line 12b. Report the portion taxed asprepare and serve free meals for the program,
capital gain as explained in the Instructions forinclude in your income as wages the cash pay Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in Schedule D (Form 1040).you receive, even if you are also eligible for your income.
food benefits. Child support payments. You should notCampaign contributions. These contribu-
Payments to reduce cost of winter energy. report these payments on your return. Seetions are not income to a candidate unless they
Payments made by a state to qualified people Publication 504 for more information.are diverted to his or her personal use. To be
to reduce their cost of winter energy use are not exempt from tax, the contributions must be
Court awards and damages. To determinetaxable. spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund
if settlement amounts you receive by compro-for use in future campaigns. However, interest
mise or judgment must be included in yourearned on bank deposits, dividends receivedOther Income
income, you must consider the item that theon contributed securities, and net gains real-
settlement replaces. The character of the in-The following brief discussions are arranged in ized on sales of contributed securities are tax-
come as ordinary income or capital gain de-alphabetical order. Income items that are dis- able and must be reported on Form 1120-POL,
pends on the nature of the underlying claim.cussed in greater detail in another publication U.S. Income Tax Return for Certain Political
Include the following as ordinary income.include a reference to that publication. Organizations. Excess campaign funds trans-
ferred to an office account must be included inActivity not for profit. You must include on 1. Interest on any award.the officeholder's income on Form 1040, lineyour return income from an activity from which 21, in the year transferred. 2. Compensation for lost wages or lost prof-you do not expect to make a profit. An example its in most cases.of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you Canceled sales contract. If you sell prop-
operate mostly for recreation and pleasure. erty (such as land or a residence) under a 3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does
Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. De- contract, but the contract is canceled and you not matter if they relate to a physical in-
ductions for expenses related to the activity are return the buyer's money in the same tax year jury or physical sickness.
Publication 525 (2011) Page 31

Page 32 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. Amounts received in settlement of pen- Credit card insurance. In most cases, if you up to the amount of your share of distributable
net income.receive benefits under a credit card disability orsion rights (if you did not contribute to the
unemployment insurance plan, the benefits areplan). How to report. Treat each item of incometaxable to you. These plans make the minimum the same way that the estate or trust would5. Damages for: monthly payment on your credit card account if treat it. For example, if a trust's dividend in-you cannot make the payment due to injury,a. Patent or copyright infringement, come is distributed to you, you report the distri-illness, disability, or unemployment. Report on bution as dividend income on your return. Theb. Breach of contract, or Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits you same rule applies to distributions of tax-exemptreceived during the year that is more than the interest and capital gains.c. Interference with business operations. amount of the premiums you paid during the The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tellyear. you the type of items making up your share of6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
the estate or trust income and any credits youtress received to satisfy a claim under Down payment assistance. If you purchase are allowed on your individual income tax re-Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. a home and receive assistance from a non- turn.profit corporation to make the down payment,7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin-
Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gen-that assistance is not included in your income.gent fees) where the underlying recovery erally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.If the corporation qualifies as a tax-exemptis included in gross income.
charitable organization, the assistance is Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantor Do not include in your income compensa- treated as a gift and is included in your basis of trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-tory damages for personal physical injury or the house. If the corporation does not qualify, ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overphysical sickness (whether received in a lump the assistance is treated as a rebate or reduc- the trust. (The grantor is the one who trans-sum or installments). tion of the purchase price and is not included in ferred property to the trust.) This rule applies ifyour basis. the property (or income from the property) putEmotional distress. Emotional distress it-
into the trust will or may revert (be returned) toself is not a physical injury or physical sickness, Employment agency fees. If you get a job the grantor or the grantor's spouse.but damages you receive for emotional distress through an employment agency, and the fee is Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if thedue to a physical injury or sickness are treated paid by your employer, the fee is not includible grantor has a reversionary interest valued (atas received for the physical injury or sickness. in your income if you are not liable for it. How- the date of transfer) at more than 5% of theDo not include them in your income. ever, if you pay it and your employer reim- value of the transferred property.If the emotional distress is due to a personal burses you for it, it is includible in your income.
injury that is not due to a physical injury or Expenses paid by another. If your personal
Energy conservation subsidies. You can expenses are paid for by another person, suchsickness (for example, unlawful discrimination
exclude from gross income any subsidy pro- as a corporation, the payment may be taxableor injury to reputation), you must include the
to you depending upon your relationship withvided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-damages in your income, except for any dam-
that person and the nature of the payment. Butties for the purchase or installation of an energyages you receive for medical care due to that
if the payment makes up for a loss caused byconservation measure for a dwelling unit.emotional distress. Emotional distress includes
that person, and only restores you to the posi-physical symptoms that result from emotional Energy conservation measure. This in- tion you were in before the loss, the payment isdistress, such as headaches, insomnia, and cludes installations or modifications that are not includible in your income.stomach disorders. primarily designed to reduce consumption of
Exxon Valdez settlement income. Includeelectricity or natural gas, or improve the man-Deduction for costs involved in unlawful
in your income on Form 1040, line 21, or Formagement of energy demand.discrimination suits. You may be able to
1040NR, line 21, any qualified settlement in-deduct attorney fees and court costs paid to Dwelling unit. This includes a house, come you receive as a qualified taxpayer. Seerecover a judgment or settlement for a claim of apartment, condominium, mobile home, boat, Statement, later. Qualified settlement incomeunlawful discrimination under various provi- or similar property. If a building or structure is any interest and punitive damage awardssions of federal, state, and local law listed in contains both dwelling and other units, any that are:Internal Revenue Code section 62(e), a claim subsidy must be properly allocated.
against the United States government, or a • Otherwise includible in taxable income,
claim under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social andEstate and trust income.  An estate or trust,
Security Act. You can claim this deduction as unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal • Received in connection with the civil ac-an adjustment to income on Form 1040, line income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estate tion In re Exxon Valdez, No. 89-095-CVor trust, you may be taxed on your share of its36. The following rules apply. (HRH) (Consolidated) (D. Alaska).income distributed or required to be distributed• The attorney fees and court costs may be to you. However, there is never a double tax. You are a qualified taxpayer if you were apaid by you or on your behalf in connec- Estates and trusts file their returns on Form plaintiff in the civil action mentioned earlier ortion with the claim for unlawful discrimi- 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and you were a beneficiary of the estate of yournation, the claim against the United Trusts, and your share of the income is re- spouse or a close relative who was such aStates government, or the claim under ported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041). plaintiff and from whom you acquired the rightsection 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Se-
Current income required to be distrib- to receive qualified settlement income.curity Act.
uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or The income can be received as a lump sum• The deduction you are claiming cannot trust that must distribute all of its current in- or as periodic payments. You will receive a
be more than the amount of the judgment come, you must report your share of the distrib- Form 1099-MISC showing the gross amount of
or settlement you are including in income utable net income, whether or not you actually the settlement income paid to you in the tax
for the tax year. received it. year.
• The judgment or settlement to which your Current income not required to be distrib- Contributions to eligible retirement plan.
attorney fees and court costs apply must uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or If you are a qualified taxpayer, you can contrib-
occur after October 22, 2004. trust and the fiduciary has the choice of ute all or part of your qualified settlement in-
whether to distribute all or part of the current come, up to $100,000, to an eligible retirement
Pre-existing agreement. If you receive income, you must report: plan, including an IRA. Contributions to eligible
damages under a written binding agreement, retirement plans, other than a Roth IRA or a• All income that is required to be distrib-court decree, or mediation award that was in designated Roth contribution, reduce the quali-uted to you, whether or not it is actuallyeffect (or issued on or before) September 13, fied settlement income that you must include indistributed, plus1995, do not include in income any of those income. See Statement, later. For more infor-
damages received on account of personal inju- • All other amounts actually paid or mation on these contributions, see Publica-
ries or sickness. credited to you, tions 560, 575, and 590.
Page 32 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 33 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Legal expenses. You may be able to de- business of being an executor, report these • 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or
duct attorney fees and court costs paid in con- fees as self-employment income on Schedule older.
nection with the civil action. Depending on the C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is
Maintaining space in home. If you arefacts and circumstances, these expenses are not includible in income if it is waived.
paid to maintain space in your home for emer-either claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040) or Manager of trade or business for bank- gency foster care, you must include the pay-Form 1040NR (Schedule A), or deducted in ruptcy estate. Include in your income all ment in your income.figuring the income you report on Form 1040, payments received from your bankruptcy es-line 21, or Form 1040NR, line 21. If the quali- tate for managing or operating a trade or busi- Reporting taxable payments.  If you re-fied settlement income was received in con- ness that you operated before you filed for ceive payments that you must include in yournection with your trade or business (other than bankruptcy. Report this income on Form 1040, income, you are in business as a foster-careas an employee), you can reduce the taxable line 21. provider and you are self-employed. Report theamount of qualified settlement income by these payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZNotary public. Report payments for theseexpenses. In all other situations, you can only (Form 1040). See Publication 587, Businessservices on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZclaim these expenses as a miscellaneous item- Use of Your Home, to help you determine the(Form 1040). These payments are not subjectized deduction subject to the amount you can deduct for the use of yourto self-employment tax. See the separate in-2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit on Sched- home.structions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) forule A (Form 1040), line 23, or Schedule A
details. Found property. If you find and keep prop-(Form 1040NR), line 9. For example, an em-
erty that does not belong to you that has beenployee or the surviving spouse or beneficiary of Election precinct official. You should re- lost or abandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxablea deceased plaintiff would claim the expenses ceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv- to you at its fair market value in the first year it isas a miscellaneous itemized deduction subject ices performed as an election official or your undisputed possession.to the 2% limit. See Statement, next. election worker. Report these payments on line
7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Free tour. If you received a free tour from aStatement. If you report on Form 1040,
Form 1040EZ. travel agency for organizing a group of tourists,line 21, or Form 1040NR, line 21, qualified
you must include its value in your income. Re-settlement income that is less than the gross Food program payments to daycare provid- port the fair market value of the tour on Formamount shown on the Form 1099-MISC, you ers. If you operate a daycare service and 1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade ormust attach a statement to your tax return. The receive payments under the Child and Adult business of organizing tours. You cannot de-statement must identify and show the gross Care Food Program administered by the De- duct your expenses in serving as the voluntaryamount of the qualified settlement income, the partment of Agriculture that are not for your leader of the group at the group's request. Ifreductions for the amount contributed to an services, the payments are not included in your you organize tours as a trade or business,eligible retirement plan or allowable as legal income in most cases. However, you must in- report the tour's value on Schedule C or Sched-expenses not reported as a miscellaneous clude in your income any part of the payments ule C-EZ (Form 1040).itemized deduction, and the net amount. you do not use to provide food to individuals
Gambling winnings. You must include yourIncome averaging. For purposes of the eligible for help under the program.
gambling winnings in your income on Formincome averaging rules that apply to an individ-
Foreign currency transactions. If you have 1040, line 21. If you itemize your deductions onual engaged in a farming or fishing business,
a gain on a personal foreign currency transac- Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-qualified settlement income is treated as attrib-
tion because of changes in exchange rates, bling losses you had during the year, but onlyutable to a fishing business for the tax year in
you do not have to include that gain in your up to the amount of your winnings.which it is received. See Schedule J (Form
income unless it is more than $200. If the gain1040), Income Averaging for Farmers and Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lot-is more than $200, report it as a capital gain.Fishermen, and its instructions for more infor- teries and raffles are gambling winnings. Inmation. addition to cash winnings, you must include inFoster care providers. Payments you re-
your income the fair market value of bonds,ceive from a state, political subdivision, or aFees for services. Include all fees for your
cars, houses, and other noncash prizes. How-qualified foster care placement agency for pro-services in your income. Examples of these
ever, the difference between the fair marketviding care to qualified foster individuals in yourfees are amounts you receive for services you
value and the cost of an oil and gas leasehome are not included in your income in mostperform as:
obtained from the government through a lotterycases. However, you must include in your in-
• A corporate director, is not includible in income.come payments received for the care of more
than 5 individuals age 19 or older and certain• An executor, administrator, or personal Installment payments. Generally, if youdifficulty-of-care payments.representative of an estate, win a state lottery prize payable in installments,A qualified foster individual is a person who: you must include in your gross income the• A manager of a trade or business you
annual payments and any amounts you receiveoperated before declaring Chapter 11 1. Is living in a foster family home, and
designated as interest on the unpaid install-bankruptcy, 2. Was placed there by: ments. If you sell future lottery payments for a
• A notary public, or lump sum, you must report the amount youa. An agency of a state or one of its polit- receive from the sale as ordinary income (Form• An election precinct official. ical subdivisions, or 1040, line 21) in the year you receive it.
b. A qualified foster care placement Form W-2G. You may have received aIf you are not an employee and the agency. Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,fees for your services from the same
showing the amount of your gambling winningspayor total $600 or more for the year,
TIP
Difficulty-of-care payments. These are and any tax taken out of them. Include theyou may receive a Form 1099-MISC.
additional payments that are designated by the amount from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21.
Corporate director. Corporate director payer as compensation for providing the addi- Include the amount shown in box 2 on Form
fees are self-employment income. Report tional care that is required for physically, men- 1040, line 62, as federal income tax withheld.
these payments on Schedule C or Schedule tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified Gifts and inheritances. In most cases, prop-C-EZ (Form 1040). foster individuals. A state must determine that erty you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheri-the additional compensation is needed, and thePersonal representatives. All personal tance is not included in your income. However,care for which the payments are made must berepresentatives must include in their gross in- if property you receive this way later producesprovided in your home.come fees paid to them from an estate. If you income such as interest, dividends, or rents,You must include in your income diffi-are not in the trade or business of being an that income is taxable to you. If property isculty-of-care payments received for more than:executor (for instance, you are the executor of given to a trust and the income from it is paid,
a friend's or relative's estate), report these fees • 10 qualified foster individuals under age credited, or distributed to you, that income is
on Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade or 19, or also taxable to you. If the gift, bequest, or
Publication 525 (2011) Page 33

Page 34 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
inheritance is the income from the property, or settlement funds established for holding The excluded part of the interest is included in
that income is taxable to you. funds prior to the settlement. You also do not your income in the tax year it becomes with-
include the restitution payments and interest drawable.Inherited pension or IRA. If you inherited the funds earned prior to disbursement in anya pension or an individual retirement arrange- Interest on qualified savings bonds. Youcomputations in which you ordinarily would addment (IRA), you may have to include part of the may be able to exclude from income the inter-excludable income to your adjusted gross in-inherited amount in your income. See Survi- est from qualified U.S. savings bonds you re-come, such as the computation to determinevors and Beneficiaries in Publication 575, if you deem if you pay qualified higher educationalthe taxable part of social security benefits. If theinherited a pension. See What If You Inherit an expenses in the same year. Qualified higherpayments are made in property, your basis inIRA? in Publication 590, if you inherited an IRA. educational expenses are those you pay forthe property is its fair market value when you tuition and required fees at an eligible educa-Expected inheritance. If you sell an inter- receive it. tional institution for you, your spouse, or yourest in an expected inheritance from a living Excludable restitution payments are pay- dependent. A qualified U.S. savings bond is aperson, include the entire amount you receive ments or distributions made by any country or series EE bond issued after 1989 or a series Iin gross income on Form 1040, line 21. any other entity because of persecution of an bond. The bond must have been issued to youindividual on the basis of race, religion, physi-Bequest for services. If you receive cash when you were 24 years of age or older. Forcal or mental disability, or sexual orientation byor other property as a bequest for services you more information on this exclusion, see Educa-Nazi Germany, any other Axis regime, or anyperformed while the decedent was alive, the tion Savings Bond Program  in chapter 1 ofother Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country,value is taxable compensation. Publication 550.whether the payments are made under a law or
as a result of a legal action. They include com- Interest on state and local government obli-Gulf oil spill. If you received payments for
pensation or reparation for property losses re- gations. This interest is usually exempt fromlost wages or income, property damage, or
sulting from Nazi persecution, including federal tax. However, you must show thephysical injury due to the Gulf oil spill, the
proceeds under insurance policies issued amount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed-payment may be taxable.
before and during World War II by European eral income tax return. For more information,Lost wages or income. Payments you re- insurance companies. see State or Local Government Obligations  inceived for lost wages, lost business income, or chapter 1 of Publication 550.lost profits are taxable. Illegal activities. Income from illegal activi-
ties, such as money from dealing illegal drugs, Job interview expenses. If a prospectiveProperty damage. Payments you re- must be included in your income on Form 1040, employer asks you to appear for an interviewceived for property damage are not taxable if line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ and either pays you an allowance or reim-the payments are not more than your adjusted (Form 1040) if from your self-employment ac- burses you for your transportation and otherbasis in the property. If the payments are more tivity. travel expenses, the amount you receive is notthan your adjusted basis, you will realize a taxable in most cases. You include in incomegain. If the damage was due to an involuntary Indian fishing rights. If you are a member of only the amount you receive that is more thanconversion, you may defer the tax on the gain if a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights your actual expenses.you purchase qualified replacement property. secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of
See Publication 544. Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must beCongress as of March 17, 1988, do not include
If the payments (including insurance pro- included in your income on Form 1040, line 21.in your income amounts you receive from activ-
ceeds) you received, or expect to receive, are If you must give the pay to your employerities related to those fishing rights. The income
less than your adjusted basis, you may be able because your employer continues to pay youris not subject to income tax, self-employment
to claim a casualty deduction. See Publication salary while you serve on the jury, you cantax, or employment taxes.
547. deduct the amount turned over to your em-
Indian money account litigation settlement. ployer as an adjustment to income. Enter thePhysical injury. Payments you received Amounts received by an individual Indian as a amount you repay your employer on Formfor personal physical injuries or physical sick- lump sum or periodic payment pursuant to the 1040, line 36. Enter ªJury Payº and the amountness are not taxable. This includes payments Class Action Settlement Agreement dated De- on the dotted line next to line 36.for emotional distress that is attributable to per- cember 7, 2009, are not included in gross in-sonal physical injuries or physical sickness. Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks,come. This amount will not be used to figurePayments for emotional distress that is not side commissions, push money, or similar pay-adjusted gross income (AGI) or modified AGI inattributable to personal physical injuries or ments you receive in your income on Formapplying any Internal Revenue Code provisionphysical sickness are taxable. 1040, line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedulethat takes into account excludable income.
C-EZ (Form 1040) if from yourMore information. For the most recent Interest on frozen deposits. In general, you self-employment activity.guidance, go to IRS.gov and enter ªGulf Oil exclude from your income the amount of inter-Spillº in the search box. est earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is Example. You sell cars and help arrange
frozen if, at the end of the calendar year, youHistoric preservation grants. Do not in- car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers
cannot withdraw any part of the deposit be-clude in your income any payment you receive pay back part of their commissions to you for
cause:under the National Historic Preservation Act to referring customers to them. You must include
preserve a historically significant property. the kickbacks in your income.• The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
solvent, or Manufacturer incentive payments. YouHobby losses. Losses from a hobby are not
must include as other income on Form 1040,deductible from other income. A hobby is an • The state where the institution is located
line 21 (or Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formactivity from which you do not expect to make a has placed limits on withdrawals because
1040) if you are self-employed) incentive pay-profit. See Activity not for profit , earlier, under other financial institutions in the state are
ments from a manufacturer that you receive asOther Income. bankrupt or insolvent.
a salesperson. This is true whether you receiveIf you collect stamps, coins, or other the payment directly from the manufacturer orExcludable amount. The amount of inter-items as a hobby for recreation and through your employer.est you exclude from income for the year is thepleasure, and you sell any of the
CAUTION
!
interest that was credited on the frozen deposititems, your gain is taxable as a capital gain. Example. You sell cars for an automobilefor that tax year minus the sum of:However, if you sell items from your collection dealership and receive incentive paymentsat a loss, you cannot deduct the loss. from the automobile manufacturer every time1. The net amount withdrawn from the de-
you sell a particular model of car. You reportposit during that year, andHolocaust victims restitution. Restitution the incentive payments on Form 1040, line 21.payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (or 2. The amount that could have been with-
the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest drawn at the end of that tax year (not Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs
earned on the payments are not taxable. Ex- reduced by any penalty for premature and Medicare Advantage MSAs). In most
cludable interest is earned by escrow accounts withdrawals of a time deposit). cases, you do not include in income amounts
Page 34 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 35 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medi- iii. The name and address of the or- Example. You sold a painting on an online
ganization to receive the prize or auction website for $100. You bought the paint-care Advantage MSA if you use the money to
award, ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Reportpay for qualified medical expenses. Generally,
your $80 gain as a capital gain as explained inqualified medical expenses are those you can iv. Your name, address, and taxpayer the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040). For more identification number, andinformation about Archer MSAs or Medicare Scholarships and fellowships. A candidatev. Your signature and the dateAdvantage MSAs, see Publication 969. for a degree can exclude amounts received assigned. a qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualifiedMoving expense reimbursements. You
scholarship or fellowship is any amount yougenerally should not report these benefits on c. In the case of an unexpected presen-
receive that is for:tation, you must return the prize oryour return. See Publication 521 for more infor-
award before using it (or spending, de-mation. • Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend an
positing, investing it, etc., in the case educational institution, or
Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in a of money) and then prepare the state- • Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz ment as described in (b). quired for courses at the educational in-program, beauty contest, or other event, you d. After the transfer, you should receive stitution.must include it in your income. For example, if from the payer a written response stat-you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, Amounts used for room and board do not qual-ing when and to whom the designatedyou must report this income on Form 1040, line ify for the exclusion. See Publication 970 foramounts were transferred.21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not more information on qualified scholarships and
include its value in your income. fellowship grants.These rules do not apply to scholarship orPrizes and awards in goods or services fellowship awards. See Scholarships and fel- Payment for services. In most cases, youmust be included in your income at their fair lowships, later. must include in income the part of any scholar-market value. ship or fellowship that represents payment forQualified tuition program (QTP). A quali-Employee awards or bonuses. Cash past, present, or future teaching, research, orfied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro-awards or bonuses given to you by your em- other services. This applies even if all candi-gram) is a program set up to allow you to eitherployer for good work or suggestions generally dates for a degree must perform the services toprepay or contribute to an account establishedmust be included in your income as wages. receive the degree.for paying a student's qualified higher educa-However, certain noncash employee achieve- Do not include in income the part of anytion expenses at an eligible educational institu- scholarship or fellowship representing pay-ment awards can be excluded from income. tion. A program can be established and ment for teaching, research, or other services ifSee Bonuses and awards under Miscellaneous maintained by a state, an agency or instrumen- you receive the amount under the NationalCompensation, earlier. tality of a state, or an eligible educational insti- Health Service Corps Scholarship Program ortution.Prize points. If you are a salesperson and the Armed Forces Health Professions Scholar-The part of a distribution representing thereceive prize points redeemable for merchan- ship and Financial Assistance program.amount paid or contributed to a QTP is notdise, that are awarded by a distributor or manu- For information about the rules that apply toincluded in income. This is a return of the in-facturer to employees of dealers, you must a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided tovestment in the program.include their fair market value in your income. employees and their families by an educationalIn most cases, the beneficiary does notThe prize points are taxable in the year they are institution, see Publication 970.include in income any earnings distributed frompaid or made available to you, rather than in the
a QTP if the total distribution is less than or VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-year you redeem them for merchandise.
equal to adjusted qualified higher education partment of Veterans Affairs are not included inPulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If you expenses. See Publication 970 for more infor- your income. These allowances are not consid-were awarded a prize in recognition of accom- mation. ered scholarship or fellowship grants.plishments in religious, charitable, scientific,
Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a con-artistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you Railroad retirement annuities. The follow-
test are not scholarships or fellowships if yougenerally must include the value of the prize in ing types of payments are treated as pension or
do not have to use the prizes for educationalyour income. However, you do not include this annuity income and are taxable under the rules
purposes. You must include these amounts inprize in your income if you meet all of the explained in Publication 575.
your income on Form 1040, line 21, whether orfollowing requirements. • Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are not you use the amounts for educational pur-more than the social security equivalent1. You were selected without any action on poses.benefit.your part to enter the contest or proceed-
Smallpox vaccine injuries. If you are an eli-ing. • Tier 2 benefits. gible individual who receives benefits under the2. You are not required to perform substan- • Vested dual benefits. Smallpox Emergency Personnel Protection Acttial future services as a condition for re- of 2003 for a covered injury resulting from aceiving the prize or award. covered countermeasure, you can exclude theRewards. If you receive a reward for provid- payment from your income (to the extent it is3. The prize or award is transferred by the ing information, include it in your income. not allowed as a medical and dental expensepayer directly to a governmental unit or
Sale of home. You may be able to exclude deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040)). Eligi-tax-exempt charitable organization as
from income all or part of any gain from the sale ble individuals include health care workers,designated by you. The following condi-
or exchange of your main home. See Publica- emergency personnel, and first responders in ations apply to the transfer.
tion 523. smallpox emergency, who have received a
a. You cannot use the prize or award smallpox vaccination.Sale of personal items. If you sold an itembefore it is transferred.
you owned for personal use, such as a car, Social security and equivalent railroad re-
b. You should provide the designation refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or tirement benefits. Social security or
before the prize or award is presented silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital equivalent railroad retirement benefits, if tax-
to prevent a disqualifying use. The gain. Report it as explained in the Instructions able, must be included in the income of the
designation should contain: for Schedule D (Form 1040). You cannot de- person who has the legal right to receive the
duct a loss. benefits. Whether any of your benefits are tax-i. The purpose of the designation by However, if you sold an item you held for able, and the amount that is taxable, dependsmaking a reference to section investment, such as gold or silver bullion, on the amount of the benefits and your other74(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue coins, or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital income.Code, gain and any loss is deductible as a capital Social security benefits include any monthly
ii. A description of the prize or award, loss. benefit under Title II of the Social Security Act
Publication 525 (2011) Page 35

Page 36 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and any part of a tier I railroad retirement bene- 1040 or line 14a of Form 1040A. Report the
fit treated as a social security benefit. Social taxable part (from the last line of the worksheet) Repayments
security benefits do not include any supple- on line 20b of Form 1040 or on line 14b of Form
mental security income (SSI) payments. 1040A. If you had to repay an amount that you included
in your income in an earlier year, you may beForm SSA-1099. If you received social se-
able to deduct the amount repaid from yourcurity benefits during the year, you will receive Stolen property. If you steal property, you income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, ifForm SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State- must report its fair market value in your income the amount you repaid is more than $3,000,ment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed with in the year you steal it unless in the same year, you may be able to take a credit against youryour Form SSA-1099. This notice includes a you return it to its rightful owner. tax for the year in which you repaid it. In mostworksheet you can use to figure whether any of
cases, you can claim a deduction or credit onlyyour benefits are taxable.
if the repayment qualifies as an expense or lossTransporting school children. Do not in-For an explanation of the information found incurred in your trade or business or in aclude in your income a school board mileageon your Form SSA-1099, see Publication 915. for-profit transaction.allowance for taking children to and from
Form RRB-1099. If you received school if you are not in the business of taking Type of deduction. The type of deductionequivalent railroad retirement or special guar- children to school. You cannot deduct ex- you are allowed in the year of repayment de-anty benefits during the year, you will receive penses for providing this transportation. pends on the type of income you included in theForm RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad earlier year. In most cases, you deduct theRetirement Board. repayment on the same form or schedule onUnion benefits and dues. Amounts de-For an explanation of the information found which you previously reported it as income. Forducted from your pay for union dues, assess-on your Form RRB-1099, see Publication 915. example, if you reported it as self-employmentments, contributions, or other payments to aIf you received other railroad retirement income, deduct it as a business expense onunion cannot be excluded from your income.benefits, see Railroad retirement annuities , Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) or
You may be able to deduct some of theseearlier. Schedule F (Form 1040). If you reported it as a
payments as a miscellaneous deduction sub- capital gain, deduct it as a capital loss as ex-Joint return. If you are married and file a ject to the 2%-of-AGI limit if they are related to plained in the Instructions for Schedule Djoint return, you and your spouse must com- your job and if you itemize deductions on (Form 1040). If you reported it as wages, un-bine your incomes and your social security and Schedule A (Form 1040). For more informa- employment compensation, or other nonbusi-equivalent railroad retirement benefits when
tion, see Publication 529, Miscellaneous De- ness income, deduct it as a miscellaneousfiguring whether any of your combined benefits
ductions. itemized deduction on Schedule A (Formare taxable. Even if your spouse did not receive
1040).any benefits, you must add your spouse's in- Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits If you repaid social security or equivalentcome to yours when figuring if any of your paid to you by a union as strike or lockout railroad retirement benefits, see Publicationbenefits are taxable. benefits, including both cash and the fair mar- 915.ket value of other property, usually are includedTaxable amount. Use the worksheet in
Repayment of $3,000 or less. If the amountin your income as compensation. You can ex-the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruction pack-
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it fromclude these benefits from your income onlyage to determine the amount of your benefits to
your income in the year you repaid it. If youinclude in your income. Publication 915 also when the facts clearly show that the union
must deduct it as a miscellaneous itemizedhas worksheets you can use. However, you intended them as gifts to you.
deduction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040),must use the worksheets in Publication 915 if Reimbursed union convention expenses. line 23.any of the following situations apply. If you are a delegate of your local union chapter
Repayment over $3,000. If the amount you• You received a lump-sum benefit pay- and you attend the annual convention of the
repaid was more than $3,000, you can deductment during the year that is for one or international union, do not include in your in-
the repayment (as explained earlier undermore earlier years. come amounts you receive from the interna-
Type of deduction). However, you can choosetional union to reimburse you for expenses of• You exclude employer-provided adoption instead to take a tax credit for the year oftraveling away from home to attend the con-benefits or interest from qualified U.S. repayment if you included the income under avention. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex-savings bonds. claim of right. This means that at the time youpenses, even if you are reimbursed in a later included the income, it appeared that you had• You take the foreign earned income ex- year. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, you an unrestricted right to it. If you qualify for thisclusion, the foreign housing exclusion or must include that reimbursement in your in- choice, figure your tax under both methods anddeduction, the exclusion of income from come. compare the results. Use the method (deduc-American Samoa, or the exclusion of in-
tion or credit) that results in less tax.come from Puerto Rico by bona fide re-
Utility rebates. If you are a customer of ansidents of Puerto Rico. When determining whether theelectric utility company and you participate in amount you repaid was more or lessBenefits may affect your IRA deduction. the utility's energy conservation program, you than $3,000, consider the total
CAUTION
!You must use the special worksheets in appen- may receive on your monthly electric bill either: amount being repaid on the return. Each in-dix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxable stance of repayment is not considered sepa-• A reduction in the purchase price of elec-benefits and your IRA deduction if all of the rately.tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), orfollowing conditions apply.
• A nonrefundable credit against the Method 1. Figure your tax for 2011 claim-• You receive social security or equivalent purchase price of the electricity. ing a deduction for the repaid amount. If yourailroad retirement benefits.
must deduct it as a miscellaneous itemizedThe amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-• You have taxable compensation. deduction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040),able credit is not included in your income. line 28.• You contribute to your IRA.
Whistleblower's award. If you receive a Method 2. Figure your tax for 2011 claim-• You or your spouse is covered by a re-
whistleblower's award from the Internal Reve- ing a credit for the repaid amount. Follow thesetirement plan at work.
nue Service, you must include it in your in- steps.
come. Any deduction allowed for attorney feesHow to report. If any of your benefits are 1. Figure your tax for 2011 without deduct-and court costs paid by you, or on your behalf,taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or ing the repaid amount.in connection with the award are deducted asForm 1040A to report the taxable part. You
an adjustment to income, but cannot be morecannot use Form 1040EZ. Report your net ben- 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year
than the amount included in income for the taxefits (the amount in box 5 of your Forms without including in income the amount
year.SSA-1099 and RRB-1099) on line 20a of Form you repaid in 2011.
Page 36 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 37 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown • Get information on starting and operating
a small business.on your return for the earlier year. This is How To Get Tax Help
the credit.
You can get help with unresolved tax issues,4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for order free publications and forms, ask tax Phone. Many services are available2011 figured without the deduction (step questions, and get information from the IRS in by phone. 1). several ways. By selecting the method that is
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the best for you, you will have quick and easy
access to tax help.amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-claim the credit figured in (3) above on Form
Free help with your return. Free help in tions. Call 1-800-TAX-FORM1040, line 71 by adding the amount of the credit
preparing your return is available nationwide (1-800-829-3676) to order current-yearto other credits claimed on this line, and enter-
from IRS-certified volunteers. The Volunteer forms, instructions, and publications, anding ªI.R.C. 1341º in the column to the right of Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program is de- prior-year forms and instructions. Youline 71. signed to help low-moderate income taxpayers should receive your order within 10 days.
and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)Example. For 2010 you filed a return and • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withprogram is designed to assist taxpayers age 60reported your income on the cash method. In your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.and older with their tax returns. Most VITA and2011 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2010 TCE sites offer free electronic filing and all • Solving problems. You can getincome under a claim of right. Your filing status volunteers will let you know about credits and face-to-face help solving tax problemsin 2011 and 2010 is single. Your income and deductions you may be entitled to claim. To find every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-tax for both years are as follows: the nearest VITA or TCE site, visit IRS.gov or sistance Centers. An employee can ex-call 1-800-906-9887 or 1-800-829-1040.2010 plain IRS letters, request adjustments to
As part of the TCE program, AARP offers With Income  Without Income your account, or help you set up a pay-Taxable the Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer As-Income $15,000 $10,000 nearest AARP Tax-Aide site, call sistance Center for an appointment. To1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP's website atTax $ 1,835 $ 1,085 find the number, go to www.irs.gov/local-www.aarp.org/money/taxaide. contacts or look in the phone book underFor more information on these programs,2011 United States Government, Internal Rev-go to IRS.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in theWithout Deduction With Deduction enue Service.upper right-hand corner.Taxable
Income $49,950 $44,950 • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessInternet. You can access the IRS to TTY/TDD equipment, callTax $ 8,675 $ 7,425 website at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions ordays a week to:
 to order forms and publications.Your tax under method 1 is $7,425. Your tax
under method 2 is $7,925, figured as follows: • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to
• Check the status of your 2011 refund. Go listen to pre-recorded messages covering
Tax previously determined for 2010 $1,835 to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Re- various tax topics.
Less: Tax as refigured ........ . − 1,085 fund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS
• Refund information. To check the statusDecrease in 2010 tax $ 750 acknowledges receipt of your e-filed re-
of your 2011 refund, call 1-800-829-1954turn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a pa-
Regular tax liability for 2011 ..... . $8,675 or 1-800-829-4477 (automated refund in-per return. If you filed Form 8379 with
Less: Decrease in 2010 tax ..... . − 750 formation 24 hours a day, 7 days ayour return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks ifRefigured tax for 2011 $7,925 week). Wait at least 72 hours after theyou filed electronically). Have your 2011
IRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filedtax return available so you can provide
You pay less tax using method 1, so you should return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing ayour social security number, your filing
take a deduction for the repayment in 2011. status, and the exact whole dollar paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with
amount of your refund. your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if
you filed electronically). Have your 2011Repayment rules do not apply. This dis- • E-file your return. Find out about com- tax return available so you can providecussion does not apply to: mercial tax preparation and e-file serv-
your social security number, your filingices available free to eligible taxpayers.• Deductions for bad debts; status, and the exact whole dollar
• Download forms, including talking tax amount of your refund. If you check the• Deductions for theft losses due to crimi- forms, instructions, and publications. status of your refund and are not givennal fraud or embezzlement in a transac-
the date it will be issued, please wait until• Order IRS products online.tion entered into for profit;
the next week before checking back.• Research your tax questions online.• Deductions from sales to customers,
• Other refund information. To check thesuch as returns and allowances, and sim- • Search publications online by topic or status of a prior-year refund or amendedilar items; or keyword. return refund, call 1-800-829-1040.
• Deductions for legal and other expenses • Use the online Internal Revenue Code,
of contesting the repayment. Evaluating the quality of our telephoneregulations, or other official guidance.
services. To ensure IRS representatives give• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) accurate, courteous, and professional an-Year of deduction (or credit). If you use the published in the last few years. swers, we use several methods to evaluate thecash method, you can take the deduction (or • Figure your withholding allowances using quality of our telephone services. One methodcredit, if applicable) for the tax year in which the withholding calculator online at www. is for a second IRS representative to listen inyou actually make the repayment. If you use irs.gov/individuals. on or record random telephone calls. Anotherany other accounting method, you can deduct is to ask some callers to complete a short• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed bythe repayment or claim a credit for it only for the survey at the end of the call.using our Alternative Minimum Taxtax year in which it is a proper deduction under
(AMT) Assistant available online at www.your accounting method. For example, if you Walk-in. Many products and servicesirs.gov/individuals.use an accrual method, you are entitled to the are available on a walk-in basis.
deduction or credit in the tax year in which the • Sign up to receive local and national tax
obligation for the repayment accrues. news by email.
Publication 525 (2011) Page 37

Page 38 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Products. You can walk in to many post treated fairly, and that you know and under- you, see the LITC page on www.irs.gov/advo-
cate or IRS Publication 4134, Low Income Tax-offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick stand your rights. We offer free help to guide
payer Clinic List . This publication is alsoup certain forms, instructions, and publi- you through the often-confusing process of
available by calling 1-800-829-3676 or at yourcations. Some IRS offices, libraries, gro- resolving tax problems that you haven't been
local IRS office.cery stores, copy centers, city and county able to solve on your own. Remember, the
government offices, credit unions, and of- worst thing you can do is nothing at all. Free tax services. Publication 910, IRSfice supply stores have a collection of TAS can help if you can't resolve your prob- Guide to Free Tax Services, is your guide toproducts available to print from a CD or lem with the IRS and: IRS services and resources. Learn about freephotocopy from reproducible proofs. tax information from the IRS, including publica-• Your problem is causing financial difficul-Also, some IRS offices and libraries have tions, services, and education and assistanceties for you, your family, or your busi-the Internal Revenue Code, regulations, programs. The publication also has an index ofness.Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula- over 100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax informa-tive Bulletins available for research pur- • You face (or your business is facing) an tion) you can listen to on the telephone. Theposes. immediate threat of adverse action. majority of the information and services listed
in this publication are available to you free of• Services. You can walk in to your local • You have tried repeatedly to contact the
charge. If there is a fee associated with a re-Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- IRS but no one has responded, or the
source or service, it is listed in the publication.ness day for personal, face-to-face tax IRS has not responded to you by the
Accessible versions of IRS published prod-help. An employee can explain IRS let- date promised.
ucts are available on request in a variety ofters, request adjustments to your tax ac-
alternative formats for people with disabilities.count, or help you set up a payment plan. If you qualify for our help, we'll do everything
If you need to resolve a tax problem, we can to get your problem resolved. You will DVD for tax products. You can orderhave questions about how the tax law be assigned to one advocate who will be with Publication 1796, IRS Tax Productsapplies to your individual tax return, or you at every turn. We have offices in every DVD, and obtain:
you are more comfortable talking with state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto
someone in person, visit your local Tax- Rico. Although TAS is independent within the
payer Assistance Center where you can IRS, our advocates know how to work with the • Current-year forms, instructions, andspread out your records and talk with an IRS to get your problems resolved. And our publications.IRS representative face-to-face. No ap- services are always free. • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publi-pointment is necessaryÐjust walk in. If As a taxpayer, you have rights that the IRS cations.you prefer, you can call your local Center must abide by in its dealings with you. Our taxand leave a message requesting an ap- • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andtoolkit at www.TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov canpointment to resolve a tax account issue. finding aid.help you understand these rights.A representative will call you back within If you think TAS might be able to help you, • Tax law frequently asked questions.2 business days to schedule an in-person call your local advocate, whose number is inappointment at your convenience. If you • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-your phone book and on our website at www.have an ongoing, complex tax account sponse system.irs.gov/advocate. You can also call our toll-freeproblem or a special need, such as a
number at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of thedisability, an appointment can be re-
1-800-829-4059. U.S. Code.quested. All other issues will be handled
TAS also handles large-scale or systemicwithout an appointment. To find the num- • Links to other Internet based Tax Re-problems that affect many taxpayers. If youber of your local office, go to www.irs. search Materials.know of one of these broad issues, pleasegov/localcontacts or look in the phone
• Fill-in, print, and save features for mostreport it to us through our Systemic Advocacybook under United States Government,
tax forms.Management System at www.irs.gov/advo-Internal Revenue Service.
cate. • Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Mail. You can send your order for Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). • Toll-free and email technical support.forms, instructions, and publications Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are inde-
to the address below. You should re- • Two releases during the year.pendent from the IRS. Some clinics serve indi-
ceive a response within 10 days after your ± The first release will ship the beginningviduals whose income is below a certain level
request is received. of January 2012.and who need to resolve a tax problem. These
± The final release will ship the begin-clinics provide professional representation
ning of March 2012.Internal Revenue Service before the IRS or in court on audits, appeals,
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway tax collection disputes, and other issues for
Purchase the DVD from National TechnicalBloomington, IL 61705-6613 free or for a small fee. Some clinics can provide
Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/information about taxpayer rights and respon-
cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or callsibilities in many different languages for individ-Taxpayer Advocate Service. The Taxpayer
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30Advocate Service (TAS) is your voice at the uals who speak English as a second language.
(plus a $6 handling fee).IRS. Our job is to ensure that every taxpayer is For more information and to find a clinic near
Page 38 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 39 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Retirement pay ............ . 15 Child and Adult Care Food De minimis benefits ....... . 5, 7
Program: Death benefits  (See also LifeVeterans benefits ......... . 1583(b) election ............... . 13
Payments to daycare insurance) ................ . 21Assistance  (See Tax help)401(k) plans ................. . 9
providers ............... . 33 Accelerated ............... . 22Excess contributions ....... . 10 Astronauts .................. . 2
Child support payments .... . 31 Debts:403(b) plans ................. . 9 Athletic facilities,
Canceled ................. . 19Childcare providers ...... . 3, 33Limit for .................... . 9 employer-provided ........ . 5
Excluded debt ............. . 20Chronic illness ............. . 18457 plans .................... . 9 Automobile  (See Vehicle, Nonrecourse debts ........ . 20Accelerated death benefits paidLimit for deferrals under ..... . 9 employer-provided) Recourse ................. . 20to ...................... . 22501(c)(18)(D) plans .......... . 9 Awards  (See Damages from Stockholder's ............. . 20Citizens outside U.S.:Contributions .............. . 10 lawsuits) Deduction:Exclusion of foreign501(c)(3) organizations ..... . 20 Costs of discriminationincome .................. . 2529 program ............... . 35 suits .................... . 32B Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title1231 property sale ......... . 16 Deferred compensation:VII:Babysitting .................. . 3
Nonqualified plans ........ . 2, 4Back pay and damages forBack pay, award for ......... . 3
Dependent care benefits .... . 5emotional distressA Backup withholding:
under ................... . 32 Depletion allowance ........ . 16Academic health centers: Barter exchange
Clergy ...................... . 14 Differential wageMeals and lodging when transactions ............ . 19
payments ................. . 3teaching and research Coal ........................ . 16Bankruptcy: Armed forces ............. . 15organization ............. . 7 COBRA .................... . 18Canceled debt not deemed to Directors' fees ............. . 33Accelerated death Colleges and universities:be income .............. . 20benefits .................. . 22 Disability:Faculty lodging ............. . 7Barter income .............. . 19 Military ................... . 15Accident insurance .......... . 4 Scholarships andBelow-market loans ........ . 31 Pensions ................. . 17fellowships .............. . 35Accidental death benefits ... . 6 Bequest for services ....... . 34 Workers'Commissions:Accrual method taxpayers .. . 2 Bicycle ...................... . 8 compensation ......... . 18Advance ................... . 3Accrued leave payment: Fringe benefit .............. . 8 Person with ............... . 30Commuter highwayAt time of retirement or Black lung benefit Unemployment compensation,vehicles ................... . 8resignation ............... . 4 payments ................ . 18 paid as substitute for .... . 29Disability retirement ....... . 17 Compensation:Bonuses ................. . 3, 35 Disaster relief:Employee .................. . 3Activity not for profit ....... . 31 Disaster mitigationBreach of contract: Miscellaneous .............. . 3Adoption: payments ............... . 30Damages as income ....... . 32 Unemployment ............ . 29Employer assistance ....... . 5 Disaster Relief and EmergencyBribes ...................... . 31 Workers' .................. . 18Advance commissions ...... . 3 Assistance Act:Business expenses: Compensatory damages .. . 19,Aircraft ...................... . 8 Grants .................. . 30Reimbursements ........... . 3 32Airlines: UnemploymentBusiness income ........ . 15-16 Constructive receipt ofNo-additional-cost benefits .............. . 29income .................... . 2services ................. . 7 Mitigation payments ........ . 2
Copyrights:Valuation of flights on Payments ................. . 30C Infringement damages ..... . 32employer-provided Discounts:Cafeteria plans ............. . 17 Royalties ................. . 16aircraft ................... . 8 Employee discounts ........ . 5Campaign contributions .... . 31 Corporate directors ........ . 33Alaska Permanent Fund Employee stock purchase
Campus lodging ............. . 7dividend ................. . 31 Cost-of-living allowances ... . 3 plans ................... . 12
Cancellation of debt ........ . 19Alien status, waiver of ...... . 15 Mortgage loan for earlyCourt awards  (See also
Cancellation of sales payment ................ . 20Damages from lawsuits) ... . 31Aliens:
contracts ................. . 31Nonresident ............... . 23 Dividends:Credit card Insurance ...... . 32
Capital gains: Restricted stock ........... . 13Alimony .................... . 31 Credits:
Recoveries ........... . 23, 29 Divorced taxpayers:Alternative minimum tax (AMT): Recoveries, refiguring of
Stock options exercised incidentRecoveries, refiguring of ... . 28 unused credits ...... . 28, 29Capital gains or losses:
to divorce ............... . 11Stock options ............. . 12 Currency transactions,Employee stock option plans
Domestic partners .......... . 23Annuities: foreign ................... . 33(ESOPs) ................ . 12
Charitable gift ............. . 31 Down paymentIncentive stock options
Railroad retirement ........ . 35 assistance ............... . 32(ISOs) .................. . 12 DTax-sheltered .............. . 9 Sale of personal Damages from lawsuits .... . 31Archer MSAs ............. . 5, 34 property ................ . 35 EBack pay awards ........... . 3Armed forces ............... . 15 Car  (See Vehicle, Educational assistance:Breach of contract ......... . 32Combat zone bonus ....... . 15 employer-provided) Employer-provided ......... . 5CompensatoryDisability .................. . 15 Car pools .................. . 31 Scholarships anddamages ........... . 19, 32Disability pensions ........ . 17 Cash or deferred arrangements fellowships .............. . 35Emotional distress under TitleHealth professions (CODAs) .................. . 9 VII, Civil Rights Act of Educational institutions:scholarship .............. . 8 Cash rebates ............... . 31 1964 ................... . 32 Faculty lodging ............. . 7Military action as cause of Casualty insurance: Punitive damages ......... . 31disability injuries ........ . 17 Elderly persons:
Reimbursements from ..... . 31 Daycare providers  (See alsoQualified reservist Nutrition Program for the
Catch-up contributions ...... . 9, Childcare providers) ........ . 3distribution .............. . 15 Elderly .................. . 31
10 Food program paymentsRehabilitative program Tax Counseling for the
Charitable gift annuities .... . 31 to ...................... . 33payments ............... . 15 Elderly .................. . 15
Publication 525 (2011) Page 39

Page 40 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Election precinct Farming: Form 1040, Schedule D: Form 8853:
officials .................. . 33 Qualified farm debt, cancellation Stock options ............. . 12 Accelerated death
of ...................... . 20 Stock options reported benefits ................. . 22Elective deferrals ............ . 9
on ...................... . 11 Archer MSAs and long-termFederal employees:Catch-up contributions ...... . 9,
care insuranceAccrued leave payment ..... . 4 Form 1040, Schedule E:10
contracts ................ . 5Compensation Act (FECA) Partner's return ........... . 16Excess annual additions ... . 10
payments ............... . 19 Royalties ................. . 16 Form 8919:Excess contributions ....... . 10
Cost-of-living allowances ... . 3 Uncollected social security andForm 1040A:Excess deferrals .......... . 10 Disability pensions ........ . 17 Medicare tax on wages ... . 3Recoveries ............... . 23Increased limit for last 3 years Thrift Savings Plan for ...... . 9 Unemployment Form RRB-1099:prior to retirement age ... . 10
Federal income tax: compensation ........... . 29 Railroad retirement boardLimit on .................... . 9 Refunds .................. . 22 Wages from Form W-2 ..... . 3 payments ............... . 36Reporting by employer ..... . 10 Fees for services ........... . 33 Form 1040EZ: Form SSA-1099:Emergency Homeowners' Loan Financial counseling fees ... . 6 Recoveries ............... . 23 Social security benefitProgram ................. . 30 Fellowships ................ . 35 Unemployment statement ............... . 36Emotional distress compensation ........... . 29FICA withholding: Form W-2:damages ................. . 32 Wages from Form W-2 ..... . 3Foreign employers, U.S. 501(c)(18)(D)Employee achievement citizens working for in Form 1041: contributions ............ . 10awards .................... . 3 U.S. .................... . 14 Estates and trusts ......... . 32 Accrued leave payment at timeEmployee awards or Paid by employer ........... . 4 of retirement orForm 1041, Schedule K-1:bonuses ................. . 35 resignation ............... . 4Fiduciaries: Beneficiary's share of income,Employee Fees for services .......... . 33 Back pay awards ........... . 3deductions, credits,compensation .......... . 3-14 etc. ..................... . 32 Bonuses or awards ......... . 3Financial counseling fees  (SeeFringe benefits ........... . 4-9 Elective deferrals, reporting byalso Retirement planning Form 1065:Restricted property ..... . 13-14 employer ............... . 10services) ................... . 6 Partnership return ......... . 16Retirement plan Failure to receive fromFitness programs: Form 1065, Schedule K-1:contributions ............. . 9 employer ................ . 3Employer-provided ......... . 5 Partner's share ofStock options .......... . 11-13 Fringe benefits reportedincome ................. . 16Flights:Employee discounts ........ . 5 on ....................... . 4Employer-provided Form 1098:
Employee stock purchase Stock options fromaircraft ................... . 8 Mortgage interest
plans ................. . 11, 12 employers .............. . 11No-additional-cost statement ............... . 22
Employer, foreign .......... . 14 Wage and tax statement .... . 3services ................. . 7 Form 1099-B:
Employer-owned life Form W-2G:Food benefits: Barter exchange
insurance ................ . 21 Gambling winnings ........ . 33Daycare providers, food transactions ............ . 19
Employer-provided: program payments to .... . 33 Form W-4V:Form 1099-C:
Nutrition Program for theEducational assistance ..... . 5 Unemployment compensation,Cancellation of debt ....... . 20
Elderly .................. . 31 voluntary withholdingVehicles ................... . 8 Form 1099-DIV:
Foreign: request ................. . 29Employment: Restricted stock
Currency transactions ..... . 33 Form W-9:Abroad ................... . 15 dividends ............... . 13
Employment .............. . 14 Request for taxpayerAgency fees .............. . 32 Form 1099-G:Governments, employees identification number .... . 19State tax refunds .......... . 22Contracts: of ...................... . 15 Foster care ................. . 33UnemploymentSeverance pay for Income .................... . 2 Foster Grandparentcompensation ........... . 29cancellation of ......... . 4 Service ................... . 17 Program ................. . 15Form 1099-MISC:Endowment proceeds ...... . 21 Form 1040: Found property ............ . 33Services totaling $600 orEnergy: Excess contributions to elective more ................... . 33 Free tax services ........... . 37Assistance ................ . 31 deferrals ................ . 10 Stock options exercised incident Fringe benefits ............ . 4-9Conservation: Recoveries ............... . 23 to divorce ............... . 11 Accident and healthSubsidies ............... . 32 Unemployment Form 1099-R: insurance ................ . 4Utility rebates ........... . 36 compensation ........... . 29 Charitable gift annuities .... . 31 Adoption, employerWages from Form W-2 ..... . 3Estate income .............. . 32 Excess annual additions ... . 11 assistance ............... . 5Form 1040 or 1040A, ScheduleEstimated tax: Excess deferral Athletic facilities ............ . 5B:Unemployment amounts ................ . 10 Commuter highwayRestricted stockcompensation ........... . 29 Surrender of life insurance vehicles ................. . 8dividends ............... . 13Excess: policy for cash .......... . 21 De minimis benefits ...... . 5, 7Form 1040, Schedule A:Annual additions .......... . 10 Form 1120-POL: Dependent care benefits .... . 5Outplacement services,Contributions .............. . 10 Political organizations ..... . 31 Educational assistance ..... . 5deduction for ............. . 4Deferrals .................. . 10 Form 1120S: Employee discounts ........ . 5Repayment of commissionsExpected inheritance ....... . 34 S corporation return ....... . 16 Faculty lodging ............. . 7paid in advance .......... . 3Expenses paid by Form 1120S, Schedule K-1: Financial counseling fees ... . 6Form 1040, Schedule C:another .................. . 32 Shareholder's share of income, Holiday gifts ................ . 5Bartering .................. . 19Exxon Valdez settlement ... . 32 credits, deductions, Meals and lodging .......... . 7Childcare providers to etc. ..................... . 16Eligible retirement plan .... . 32 Moving expenses (See Movinguse ...................... . 3
Form 2441:Income averaging ......... . 33 expenses)Personal property rental,
Child and dependent careLegal expenses ........... . 33 No-additional-costreporting income from ... . 16
expenses ................ . 5 services ................. . 7Reporting Royalties ................. . 16
Form 4255: Parking .................... . 8requirement-statement........................ . 33 Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:
Recapture of investment Retirement planning (SeeBartering .................. . 19
credit ................... . 29 Retirement planning services)Childcare Providers to
F Form 6251: Transit pass ................ . 8use ...................... . 3
Faculty lodging ............. . 7 Alternative minimum tax ... . 12 Tuition reduction ........... . 8Personal property rental,
Fair market value (FMV) ..... . 8 Valuation of .............. . 8-9Form 8839:reporting income from ... . 16
Stock options ............. . 11 Royalties ................. . 16 Adoption assistance ........ . 5 Vehicle .................... . 8
Page 40 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 41 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fringe benefits (Cont.) Illegal ..................... . 34 Unemployment benefits paid N
Working condition Miscellaneous ............. . 19 from .................... . 30 National Health Service Corps
benefits .................. . 8 Other ..................... . 31 Last day of tax year, income Scholarship Program ..... . 8
Partnership ............... . 16Frozen deposits: received on ............... . 2 National Oceanic and
Prepaid .................... . 2Interest on ................ . 34 Leave  (See Accrued leave Atmospheric
S corporation ............. . 16 payment) Administration ........... . 17
Indian fishing rights ........ . 34 Length-of-service awards ... . 3 National Senior ServiceG Indian money account ...... . 34 Corps .................... . 15Life insurance:Gambling winnings and Individual retirement Employer-owned .......... . 21 No-additional-costlosses .................... . 33 arrangements (IRAs): Proceeds ................. . 21 services ................... . 7Gas: Deduction ................. . 36 Surrender of policy for Nobel prize ................. . 35Royalties from ............ . 16 Inherited IRA .............. . 34 cash .................... . 21 No-fault car insurance:Gifts ....................... . 33 Inheritance ................. . 33 Loans  (See also Disability benefits under ... . 19Holiday gifts from IRA ....................... . 34 Mortgage) ................ . 20 Nonrecourse debt .......... . 20employer ................ . 5 Property not substantially Below-market ............. . 31 Nonstatutory stockGovernment employees  (See vested .................. . 14 Student ................... . 20 options .................. . 11Federal employees; State Injury benefits ........... . 17-19 Lockout benefits ........... . 36 Nontaxable income .......... . 2employees) Insurance: Lodging: Notary fees ................. . 33Grantor trusts .............. . 32 Credit card ................ . 32 Campus lodging ............ . 7 Notes received forGroup-term life insurance: Health ..................... . 4 Clergy .................... . 14 services ................... . 4Worksheets .............. . 6, 7 Life (See Life insurance) Employer-paid or Not-for-profit activities ..... . 31Gulf oil spill .............. . 2, 34 Long-term care (See Long-term reimbursed .............. . 7 Nutrition Program for thecare insurance) Faculty lodging ............. . 7 Elderly ................... . 31Interest: Replacement housingH Canceled debt including ... . 20 payments ............... . 31HAMP: Frozen deposits ........... . 34 Long-term care OHome affordable modification Mortgage refunds ......... . 22 insurance .............. . 5, 17 Oil:program: Option on insurance ....... . 21 Lotteries and raffles ........ . 33 Royalties from ............ . 16Pay-for-performance success Recovery amounts ........ . 22 Lump-sum distributions:payments ............. . 30 Old-age, survivors, andSavings bond ............. . 34 Survivor benefits .......... . 29 disability insurance benefitsHardest Hit Fund State and local government (OASDI) .................. . 31Program ................. . 30 obligations .............. . 34
Options, stock ......... . 11, 13Health: Interference with business MFlexible spending Outplacement services ...... . 4operations: Manufacturer incentivearrangement ............. . 5 Overseas work .............. . 2Damages as income ....... . 32 payments ................ . 34Insurance .................. . 4 International organizations, Meals:Reimbursement employees of ............ . 14 Employer-paid or Parrangement ............. . 5 Interview expenses ......... . 34 reimbursed .............. . 7Savings account ......... . 2, 5 Parking fees:Investment counseling fees Nutrition Program for the Employer-paid orHelp  (See Tax help) (See also Retirement planning Elderly .................. . 31 reimbursed .............. . 8HFA Hardest Hit Fund: services) ................... . 6 Medical: Partner and partnershipEmergency Homeowners' Loan Investment income ..... . 15, 16 Care reimbursements ...... . 19 income ................... . 16Program (EHLP) ......... . 1 IRA: Savings accounts ......... . 34 Patents:Highly compensated Roth IRA ................... . 2 Medicare: Infringement damages ..... . 32employees: IRAs  (See Individual retirement Advantage MSAs .......... . 34 Royalties ................. . 16Excess contributions to elective arrangements (IRAs)) Benefits .................. . 31deferrals ................ . 10 Peace Corps ............... . 15
Iron ore .................... . 16 Tax paid by employer ....... . 4Historic preservation Pensions:
Itemized deductions: Medicare tax  (See Socialgrants .................... . 34 Clergy .................... . 14
Limited ................... . 24 security and Medicare taxes) Disability pensions ........ . 17Hobby losses .............. . 34 Recoveries ........... . 22, 23 Military  (See Armed forces) Inherited pensions ......... . 34Holding period
Minerals: Military ................... . 15requirement .............. . 12
Royalties from ............ . 16 Personal property:Holiday gifts ................ . 5 J Rental income andMiscellaneous:Holocaust victims Job interview expenses .... . 34 expense ................ . 15Compensation ............. . 3restitution ................ . 34 Joint returns: Sale of .................... . 35Income ................... . 19Home, sale of .............. . 35 Social security benefits or Personal representatives  (SeeMissing children, photographsHost or hostess ............ . 21 railroad retirement Fiduciaries)of ......................... . 2Hotels: payments ............... . 36 Prepaid income ............. . 2More information  (See Tax help)No-additional-cost Joint state/local tax return: Price reduced afterMortgage:services ................. . 7 Recoveries ............... . 23 purchase ................. . 20Assistance payment (under sec.Housing  (See Lodging) Jury duty pay .............. . 34 235 of National Housing Prizes and awards ........ . 3, 35
Act) .................... . 31 Achievement awards ....... . 3
Discounted loan ........... . 20I Employee awards orK Interest refund ............ . 22 bonuses ................ . 35Illegal activities ............ . 34 Kickbacks .................. . 34 Qualified principal residence Length-of-service awards ... . 3Incentive stock options
indebtedness ........... . 21 Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar(ISOs) ................ . 11, 12
Relief ..................... . 20 prizes .................. . 35LIncome: Safety achievement ........ . 3Motor vehicle,Assigned .................. . 2 Labor unions: Scholarship prizes ......... . 35employer-provided ........ . 8Business and Convention expenses,
Profit-sharing plan ......... . 17Moving expenses:investment .......... . 15, 16 reimbursed ............. . 36
Reimbursements ........ . 3, 35 Public assistanceConstructive receipt of ...... . 2 Dues ..................... . 36
benefits .................. . 30MSAs (Medical savingsEstate and trust ........... . 32 Strike and lockout
accounts) ................ . 34Foreign employers ........ . 14 benefits ................. . 36 Public Health Service ....... . 17
Publication 525 (2011) Page 41

Page 42 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Public safety officers killed in Retirement plans  (See also Stock options .......... . 11, 13 Reimbursements ........... . 3
line of duty ............... . 29 Pensions) ................. . 15 School children, transportingStock options, nonstatutory:
Automatic contribution of ...................... . 36Public transportation passes, Exercise or transfer ........ . 11
arrangements ............ . 9employer-provided ........ . 8 Grant ..................... . 11 Trusts:
Contributions ........ . 9, 11, 12 Sale ...................... . 11 Grantor trusts ............. . 32Publications  (See Tax help)
Elective deferrals (See Elective Income ................... . 32Stock options, statutory:Pulitzer prize ............... . 35 deferrals) Exercise .................. . 12 TTY/TDD information ....... . 37Punitive damages .......... . 31 Rewards ................... . 35 Grant ..................... . 12 Tuition program, qualified
Roth contributions ......... . 10 Sale ...................... . 12 (QTP) .................... . 35Q Royalties ................... . 16 Stockholder debts .......... . 20 Tuition reduction ............ . 8Qualified joint venture ....... . 2 Stolen property ............ . 36Qualified tuition program Strike benefits .............. . 36S U(QTP) .................... . 35 Student loans:S corporations ............. . 16 UnemploymentCancellation of debt ....... . 20Safety achievement compensation ............ . 29R Substantial risk ofawards .................... . 3 Unions  (See Labor unions)Raffles ..................... . 33 forfeiture ................. . 13Salary reduction simplified Unlawful discrimination suits:Railroad: Substantially vestedemployee pension plans  (See Deduction for costs ........ . 32Retirement annuities ....... . 35 property .................. . 13SARSEPs)Retirement benefits ........ . 35 Supplemental security incomeSale of home ............... . 35 VSick pay .................. . 18 (SSI) payments ........... . 35Sales contracts:Unemployment compensation VA payments ............... . 35Supplemental unemploymentCancellation of ............ . 31benefits ................. . 29 Valuation:benefits .................. . 30SARSEPs ................... . 9Real estate: Fringe benefits ........... . 8, 9Surviving spouse:Excess contributions ....... . 10Qualified real property business Stock options ............. . 11Life insurance proceeds paidSavings bonds ............. . 34debt, cancellation of ..... . 20 Vehicle:to ...................... . 21Savings incentive match plansReal property tax ........... . 22 Commuter highway ......... . 8Survivor benefits ........... . 29for employees  (See SIMPLE Employer-provided ......... . 8Rebates: plans)Cash ..................... . 31 Veterans benefits .......... . 15Scholarships and TUtility ..................... . 36 Disability compensation .... . 17fellowships ............... . 35 Tables and figures: Retroactive VARecovery of amounts Self-employed persons: Group-term life insurance determination ........... . 17previously deducted .... . 22, U.S. citizens working for foreign (Table 1) ................ . 6 Special statute of24 employers in U.S. treated Standard deduction (Tables limitations. .............. . 17Itemized deductions ... . 22, 23 as ...................... . 14 2-4) ......... . 24, 26, 27, 28Non-itemized Viatical settlements ........ . 22
Senior Companion Tax benefit rule ............ . 22deductions .............. . 29 Volunteer work ............. . 15Program ................. . 15 Tax Counseling for theUnused tax credits, refiguring Tax counseling (Volunteer
Service Corps of Retired Elderly ................... . 15of .................. . 28, 29 Income Tax Assistance
Executives (SCORE) ..... . 15 Tax help .................... . 37Worksheet of itemized Program) ............... . 15
Severance pay .............. . 4deductions (Worksheet Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 38 Volunteers in Service to
Outplacement services ..... . 42) ...................... . 25 Tax-sheltered annuity plans America (VISTA) ......... . 15
Sick pay ..................... . 4Refunds: (403(b) plans) ............. . 9
Federal income tax ........ . 22 Sickness and injury Limit for .................... . 9 WMortgage interest ......... . 22 benefits .............. . 17, 19 Terminal illness ............ . 22 W-2 form  (See Form W-2)State tax .................. . 22 SIMPLE plans ............... . 9 Terrorist attacks: Welfare benefits ............ . 30Rehabilitative program Limit for deferrals under ..... . 9 Disability payments for injuries Whistleblower .............. . 36payments ................ . 15 Smallpox vaccine from .................... . 17 Winter energy payments ... . 31Reimbursements: injuries ................... . 35 Victims of, tax relief ......... . 2
Withholding:Business expenses ......... . 3 Social security and Medicare Thrift Savings Plan .......... . 9 Barter exchangeCasualty losses ........... . 31 taxes: Title VII, Civil Rights Act of transactions ............ . 19Meals and lodging .......... . 7 Foreign employers, U.S. 1964: UnemploymentMedical expenses ......... . 19 citizens working for in Back pay and damages for compensation ........... . 29Moving expenses ....... . 3, 35 U.S. .................... . 14 emotional distress Workers' compensation .... . 18Related party transactions: Paid by employer ........... . 4 under ................... . 32
Working conditionStock option transfer ....... . 11 Social security benefits .... . 35 Tour guides, free tours benefits ................... . 8Religious order Standard deduction: for ....................... . 33
Worksheets:members ................. . 14 Recoveries ............... . 24 Trade Act of 1974: Group-term life insuranceRental income and expenses: Tables (2010-2008) ... . 24, 26, Trade readjustment allowances (Worksheet 1) .......... . 6, 7Personal property rental ... . 15 27, 28 under ............... . 29, 30 Recoveries of itemizedReporting of ............... . 16 State employees: Transferable property ...... . 13 deductions (WorksheetRepayments ............. . 36-37 Unemployment benefits paid Transit passes .............. . 8 2) ...................... . 25to ...................... . 30Repossession .............. . 31 Travel agencies: Work-training programs .... . 30State or local governments:Restricted property ..... . 13, 14 Free tour to organizer of group
Interest on obligations of ... . 34Retired Senior Volunteer of tourists ............... . 33 ■
State or local taxes:Program (RSVP) .......... . 15 Travel and transportation
Refunds .................. . 22Retirement: expenses:
Statutory stock option holdingSettlement ................. . 2 Free tours from travel
period .................... . 12 agencies ............... . 33Retirement planning
Stock appreciation rights .... . 4 Fringe benefits ............. . 8services ................. . 6, 8
Page 42 Publication 525 (2011)

Page 43 of 43 of Publication 525 6:13 -  1-JAN-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including by computer,
phone, and mail.
531 Reporting Tip Income 908 Bankruptcy Tax GuideGeneral Guides
535 Business Expenses 915 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad1 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Retirement Benefits536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for17 Your Federal Income Tax For Individuals Individuals, Estates, and Trusts 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules334 Tax Guide for Small Business (For 537 Installment Sales 926 Household Employer's Tax Guide ForIndividuals Who Use Schedule C or Wages Paid in 2012541 PartnershipsC-EZ) 929 Tax Rules for Children and Dependents544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets509 Tax Calendars for 2012 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts910 IRS Guide to Free Tax Services 946 How To Depreciate Property550 Investment Income and ExpensesSpecialized Publications (Including Capital Gains and Losses) 947 Practice Before the IRS and Power of
Attorney551 Basis of Assets3 Armed Forces' Tax Guide
950 Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes554 Tax Guide for Seniors54 Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
969 Health Savings Accounts and Other555 Community PropertyResident Aliens Abroad
Tax-Favored Health Plans556 Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,225 Farmer's Tax Guide
970 Tax Benefits for Educationand Claims for Refund463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
971 Innocent Spouse Relief559 Survivors, Executors, and AdministratorsExpenses
972 Child Tax Credit561 Determining the Value of Donated501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Property 1542 Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within theFiling Information
Continental United States)570 Tax Guide for Individuals With Income502 Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
From U.S. Possessions 1544 Reporting Cash Payments of Overthe Health Coverage Tax Credit)
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or571 Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Business)Plans) For Employees of Public504 Divorced or Separated Individuals
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt 1546 Taxpayer Advocate Service ± Your505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Organizations Voice at the IRS514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
575 Pension and Annuity Income516 U.S. Government Civilian Employees Spanish Language Publications584 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft LossStationed Abroad 1SP Derechos del ContribuyenteWorkbook (Personal-Use Property)517 Social Security and Other Information for 17(SP) El Impuesto Federal sobre los Ingresos587 Business Use of Your Home (IncludingMembers of the Clergy and Religious Para Personas FisicasUse by Daycare Providers)Workers 547(SP) Hechos Fortuitos Desastres y Robos590 Individual Retirement Arrangements519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens 584(SP) Registro de PÂerdidas por Hechos(IRAs)521 Moving Expenses Fortuitos (Imprevistos), Desastres y594 The IRS Collection Process523 Selling Your Home Robos (Propiedad de Uso Personal)596 Earned Income Credit (EIC)524 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled 594SP El Proceso de Cobro del IRS721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income 596SP CrÂedito por Ingreso del TrabajoRetirement Benefits526 Charitable Contributions 850(EN/ English-Spanish Glossary of Words and901 U.S. Tax Treaties527 Residential Rental Property (Including SP) Phrases Used in Publications Issued907 Tax Highlights for Persons withRental of Vacation Homes) by the Internal Revenue ServiceDisabilities529 Miscellaneous Deductions 1544 Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en Exceso530 Tax Information for Homeowners (SP) de $10,000 (Recibidos en una
OcupaciÂon o Negocio)
Commonly Used Tax Forms See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
2441 Child and Dependent Care ExpensesForm Number and Title
2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration of Representative1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 2848(SP) Poder Legal y DeclaraciÂon del RepresentanteSch A Itemized Deductions 3903 Moving ExpensesSch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends 4562 Depreciation and AmortizationSch C Profit or Loss From Business 4868 Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S.Sch C-EZ Net Profit From Business Individual Income Tax ReturnSch D Capital Gains and Losses 4868(SP) Solicitud de PrÂorroga AutomÂatica para Presentar laSch E Supplemental Income and Loss DeclaraciÂon del Impuesto sobre el Ingreso Personal de losSch EIC Earned Income Credit Estados UnidosSch F Profit or Loss From Farming 4952 Investment Interest Expense DeductionSch H Household Employment Taxes 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) andSch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Other Tax-Favored AccountsFishermen 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐIndividualsSch R Credit for the Elderly or 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributionsthe Disabled 8582 Passive Activity Loss LimitationsSch SE Self-Employment Tax 8606 Nondeductible IRAs1040A U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit Sch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends 8822 Change of Address1040EZ Income Tax Return for Single and Joint Filers With No 8829 Expenses for Business Use of Your HomeDependents 8863 Education Credits (American Opportunity, and Lifetime1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals Learning Credits)1040X Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 8949 Sales and Other Dispositions of Capital Assets2106 Employee Business Expenses 9465 Installment Agreement Request2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses 9465(SP) Solicitud para un Plan de Pagos a Plazos2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals, Estates, and
Trusts
Publication 525 (2011) Page 43