Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P334.cvt (25-Nov-2003) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\LRBurk00\documents\epicfiles\03P334 SGML.sgm
Page 1 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 334
Catalog Number 11063pTax Guide for
Department Small Business For use in
of the
preparingTreasury
(For Individuals Who UseInternal 2003Revenue
Service Schedule C or C–EZ) Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet • www.irs.gov orFTP • ftp.irs.gov
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine)
www.irs.gov/efile

Page 2 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.

Page 3 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
partnership, whether or not you have a formal partnership
agreement. Do not use Schedule C or C-EZ. Instead, fileContents
Form 1065. For more information, see Publication 541.
Introduction.............................. 3 Exception. If you and your spouse wholly own an unin-
corporated business as community property under theImportant Changes for 2003.................. 4 community property laws of a state, foreign country, or
U.S. possession, you may treat the business either as aImportant Changes for 2004.................. 4
sole proprietorship or a partnership. The only states with
Important Reminders....................... 4 community property laws are Arizona, California, Idaho,
Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes......... 6 Wisconsin. A change in your reporting position will be
treated as a conversion of the entity.2. Accounting Periods and Methods.......... 12
This publication does not cover the topics listed in3. Dispositions of Business Property......... 17
the following table.
4. General Business Credit................. 19
5. Business Income....................... 21 IF you need information THEN you should see:
about:6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold......... 26
Commercial fishing........ Publication 5957. Figuring Gross Profit.................... 28
Corporations............. Publication 5428. Business Expenses..................... 30 Direct selling............. Publication 911
Farming ................ Publication 2259. Figuring Net Profit or Loss............... 39
Partnerships............. Publication 541
10. Sample Returns........................ 40 Passive activities......... Publication 925
Recordkeeping........... Publication 58311. Your Rights as a Taxpayer............... 57 S corporations........... Instructions for Form
1120S12. How To Get More Information............. 58
Index .................................... 62
What you need to know.Table A (shown later) provides
a list of questions you need to answer to help you meet
your federal tax obligations. After each question is theIntroduction location in this publication where you will find the related
The purpose of this publication is to provide general infor-discussion.
mation about the federal tax laws that apply to small
IRS mission.Provide America’s taxpayers top qualitybusiness owners who are sole proprietors and to statutory
service by helping them understand and meet their taxemployees.
responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrityA sole proprietor is someone who owns an unincorpor-
and fairness to all.ated business by himself or herself. However, if you are the
sole member of a domestic limited liability company (LLC),Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com-you are not a sole proprietor if you elect to treat the LLC asments about this publication and your suggestions fora corporation. A statutory employee has a checkmark in future editions.box 13 of his or her Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement. You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. Please putStatutory employees have to use Schedule C or C–EZ to“Publications Comment” on the subject line.report their wages and expenses. You can write us at the following address:To use this publication, you will generally need the
following forms. Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications• Form 1040 and its instructions.
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B• Schedule C or C–EZ and its instructions. 1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224See chapter 12 for information on ordering these forms.
Husband and wife business.If you and your spouse We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
jointly own and operate an unincorporated business and would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone
share in the profits and losses, you are partners in a number, including the area code, in your correspondence.
Page 3

Page 4 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Important Changes for 2003 Important Changes for 2004
The following are some of the tax changes for 2003. For The following are some of the tax changes for 2004. For
information on other changes, see Publication 553, High- information on other changes, see Publication 553, High-
lights of 2003 Tax Changes. lights of 2003 Tax Changes.
Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for theStandard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for the
cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in
2003 is 36 cents a mile for all business miles. For more 2004 is 37.5 cents a mile for all business miles.
information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8. Self-employment tax.The maximum net self-employ-
Self-employment tax.The maximum net self-employ- ment earnings subject to the social security part of the
ment earnings subject to the social security part (12.4%) of self-employment tax increases to $87,900 for 2004.
the self-employment tax is $87,000 for 2003. For moreStandard mileage rate available for small fleets.Begin-information, see Self-Employment Tax in chapter 1. ning in 2004, the business standard mileage rate may be
Self-employed health insurance deduction.Beginning used for as many as four vehicles that you own or lease
in 2003, the self-employed health insurance deduction and use simultaneously.
percentage increases to 100%. For more information, see
Insurance in chapter 8.
Important RemindersAdditional depreciation.You may be able to claim an
additional 50% special depreciation allowance for property
Accounting methods. Certain small business taxpayersacquired after May 5, 2003. For more information, see
may be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method ofDepreciation in chapter 8.
accounting and may not be required to account for invento-
Increased section 179 deduction dollar limit.The max- ries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2.
imum section 179 deduction you can elect for property you
Reportable transactions.You must file Form 8886,Re-purchased and placed in service beginning in 2003 has
portable Transaction Disclosure Statement, to report cer-increased from $24,000 to $100,000. This amount will be
tain transactions. Reportable transactions include (1)adjusted for inflation for 2004 and 2005. For more informa-
transactions the same as or substantially similar to taxtion, see Publication 946.
avoidance transactions identified by the IRS, (2) transac-
Inclusion of off-the-shelf computer software as eligi-tions offered to you under conditions of confidentiality, (3)
ble section 179 property.The types of property thattransactions for which you have, or a related party has,
qualify for the section 179 deduction have been expandedcontractual protection against disallowance of the tax ben-
to include off-the-shelf computer software purchased andefits, (4) transactions that result in losses of at least $2
placed in service beginning in 2003. For more information,million in any single year or $4 million in any combination of
see Publication 946. years, (5) transactions resulting in book-tax differences of
more than $10 million in any year, and (6) transactions with
asset holding periods of 45 days or less and that result in a
tax credit of more than $250,000. For more information,
see the Instructions for Form 8886.
Photographs of missing children.The Internal Reve-
nue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missing
children selected by the Center may appear in this publica-
tion on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can help
bring these children home by looking at the photographs
and calling 1–800–THE–LOST (1–800–843–5678) if
you recognize a child.
Page 4

Page 5 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note: The following is a list of questions you may need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax
return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What must I know  Where to find the answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1.
What forms must I file? See chapter 1.
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1.
Do I have to start my tax year in January? Or may I start it in any other See Accounting Periods in chapter 2.
month?
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2.
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5.
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See chapter 8.
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8.
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9.
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3.
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11.
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12.
Page 5

Page 6 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get an
SSN. To apply for an ITIN, file Form W–7, Application for
1. IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number, with the
IRS. It usually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to get an ITIN.
Enter it wherever an SSN is requested on a tax return. IfFiling and Paying you must include another person’s SSN on your return and
that person does not have and cannot get an SSN, enter
Business Taxes that person’s ITIN. 
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle the
holder to social security benefits or change the
Introduction
holder’s employment or immigration status.CAUTION
!
This chapter explains the business taxes you may have to
pay and the forms you may have to file. It also discussesEmployer identification number (EIN).You must alsotaxpayer identification numbers. have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number ifTable 1–2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay,you do either of the following.their due dates, and the forms you use to report them.
• Pay wages to one or more employees.Table 1–3 provides checklists that highlight the typical
forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out• File pension or excise tax returns.of business.
If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSNYou may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen-
on your Schedule C or C–EZ.dars for 2004. It has tax calendars that tell you
You may apply for an EIN:when to file returns and make tax payments.
TIP
• Online—Click on the EIN link at www.irs.gov/busi-
nesses/small. The EIN is issued immediately onceUseful Items the application information is validated.You may want to see:
• By telephone at 1–800–829–4933  from 7:30 a.m.
Publication to 5:30 p.m. in the local time zone.
❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax • By mailing or faxing Form SS-4, Application for Em-
ployer Identification Number.
Form (and Instructions)
New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either the❏❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return form or the ownership of your business changes. For more
information, see Publication 1635, Understanding Your❏ 1040–ES Estimated Tax for Individuals EIN.
❏ Sch C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss From Business
When you need identification numbers of other per-
❏ Sch C–EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit From Business sons. In operating your business, you will probably make
certain payments you must report on information returns.❏ Sch SE (Form 1040)Self-Employment Tax
These payments are discussed under Information Re-See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient oftions and forms. these payments (the payee) a statement showing the total
amount paid during the year. You must include the payee’s
identification number and your identification number on the
returns and statements.
Identification Numbers
Employee. If you have employees, you must get anThis section explains three types of taxpayer identificationSSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN ofnumbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how toeach employee exactly as they are shown on theget them. employee’s social security card. If the employee’s name is
Social security number (SSN).Generally, use your SSN not correct as shown on the card, the employee should
as your taxpayer identification number. You must put this request a new card from the SSA. This may occur if the
number on each of your individual income tax forms, such employee’s name was changed due to marriage or di-
as Form 1040 and its schedules. vorce.
To apply for an SSN, use Form SS–5, Application for a If your employee does not have an SSN, he or she
Social Security Card. This form is available at Social Se- should file Form SS–5 with the SSA.
curity Administration (SSA) offices or by calling Other payee.If you make payments to someone who is1–800–772–1213. It is also available from the SSA web-not your employee and you must report the payments onsite at www.ssa.gov. an information return, get that person’s SSN. If you must
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).The report payments to an organization, such as a corporation
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident or partnership, you must get its EIN.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To get the payee’s SSN or EIN, use Form W–9, Re- able to participate in the Self-Select PIN (personal identifi-
quest for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification.cation number) program. If you are married filing jointly,
you and your spouse will each need to create a PIN andA payee who does not provide you with an identification
enter these PINs as your electronic signatures.number may be subject to backup withholding. For infor-
 To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted grossmation on backup withholding, see the Form W–9 instruc-
income (AGI) from your originally filed 2002 income taxtions and the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
return (not from an amended return, Form 1040X, or any5498, and W–2G.
math error notice from the IRS). You will also need to
provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB is
accurate and matches the information on record with theIncome Tax Social Security Administration before you e-file. To do this,
check your annual Social Security Statement.This part explains whether you have to file an income taxIf you use a Self-Select PIN, there’s nothing to sign andreturn and when you file it. It also explains how you pay thenothing to mail—not even your Forms W-2. For moretax. details on the Self-Select PIN program, visit the IRS web-
site at www.irs.gov.Do I Have To File
Forms 8453 and 8453-OL. Your return is not completean Income Tax Return? without your signature. If you are not eligible or choose not
to sign your return electronically, you must complete, sign,You have to file an income tax return for 2003 if your net
and file Form 8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declara-earnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If your
tion for an IRS e-file Return, or Form 8453-OL, U.S. Indi-net earnings from self-employment were less than $400,
vidual Income Tax Declaration for an IRS e-file Onlineyou still have to file an income tax return if you meet any
Return, whichever applies.other filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc-
tions. State returns.In most states, you can file an electronic
state return simultaneously with your federal return. For
more information, check with your local IRS office, state
How Do I File?
tax agency, tax professional, or the IRS website at
File your income tax return on Form 1040 and attach www.irs.gov.
Schedule C  or Schedule C–EZ.  Enter the net profit orRefunds. You can have your refund check mailed to you,loss from Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ on page 1 ofor you can have your refund deposited directly to yourForm 1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or losschecking or savings account.from your business. If you operated more than one busi-With e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time asness as a sole proprietorship, you must attach a separatewhen filing on paper. Most refunds are issued within 3Schedule C for each business. You can use the simplerweeks. If you choose Direct Deposit, you can receive yourSchedule C–EZ if you operated only one business as arefund in as few as 10 days.sole proprietorship, you did not have a net loss, and you
meet the other requirements listed in Part I of the schedule.Offset against debts.As with a paper return, you may
(Part I of Schedule C–EZ is printed in chapter 10.)not get all of your refund if you owe certain past-due
amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, or
child support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed
IRS e-file (Electronic Filing)
has been offset against your debts.
Refund inquiries.You can check the status of your re-
fund if it has been at least 3 weeks from the date you filed
your return. Be sure to have a copy of your tax return
available because you will need to know the filing status,You may be able to file your tax returns electronically
the first social security number shown on the return, andusing an IRS e-file option. Table 1–1 lists the benefits of
the exact whole-dollar amount of the refund. To check onIRS e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most of
your refund, do one of the following.the manual steps needed to process paper returns. As a
result, the processing of e-file returns is faster and more• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on Where’s My Re-accurate than the processing of paper returns. As with afund.paper return, you are responsible for making sure your
• Call 1–800–829–4477  for automated refund infor-return contains accurate information and is filed on time.
mation, and follow the recorded instructions.Using e-file does not affect your chances of an IRS
examination of your return. • Call 1–800–829–1954  during the hours shown in
your form instructions.Electronic signatures.Paperless filing is easier than you
think and it’s available to most taxpayers who file electroni-
cally—including those first-time filers who were 16 or olderBalance due.If you owe tax, you must pay it by April 15,
at the end of 2003. If you file electronically using tax 2004, to avoid late-payment penalties and interest. You
preparation software or a tax professional, you may be can make your payment electronically by scheduling an
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
electronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savings these services, visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage at
account or by credit card. www.irs.gov.
If you cannot use the free services, you can buy tax
preparation software at various electronics stores or com-Using an Authorized IRS e-file Provider puter and office supply stores. You can also download
software from the Internet or prepare and file your returnMany tax professionals can electronically file paperlesscompletely online by using a tax preparation softwarereturns for their clients. You have two options. package available on the Internet.
1) You can prepare your return, take it to an authorized
IRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit itThrough Employers and Financial
electronically to the IRS. Institutions
2) You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre- Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees,pare your return and transmit it for you electronically.members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask your
You will be asked to complete Form 8879 to authorizeemployer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as an
the provider to enter your self-selected PIN on your return.employee, member, or customer benefit.
Depending on the provider and the specific services
requested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorizedFree Help With Your ReturnIRS e-file provider near you, go to www.irs.gov or look for
an “Authorized IRS e-file Provider” sign. Free help in preparing your return is available nationwide
from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax
Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low-income
Using Your Personal Computer taxpayers and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)
program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or olderA computer with a modem or Internet access is all you
with their tax returns. Some locations offer free electronicneed to file your tax return using IRS e-file. Best of all,
filing.when you use your personal computer, you can e-file your
return from the comfort of your home any time of the day or
night. Sign your return electronically using a self-selected
When Is My Tax Return Due?
PIN to complete the process. There is no signature form to
Form 1040 for calendar year 2003 is due by April 15, 2004.submit or Forms W-2 to send in.
If you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter 2), your return
is due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of yourFree Internet filing options.More taxpayers can now fiscal year. If you file late, you may have to pay penaltiesprepare and e-file their individual income tax returns freeand interest. If you cannot file your return on time, useusing commercial tax preparation software accessibleForm 4868, Application for Automatic Extension of Timethrough www.irs.gov or www.firstgov.gov. The IRS is To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to request anpartnering with the tax software industry to offer free prep-automatic 4-month extension. aration and filing services to a significant number of tax-
payers. Security and privacy certificate programs will
assure tax data is safe and secure. To see if you qualify for
Table 1–1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic signatures • Create your own personal identification number (PIN) and file a completely
paperless return through your tax preparation software or tax professional. There is
nothing to mail!
Proof of acceptance
• You receive an electronic acknowledgement within 48 hours that the IRS has
accepted your return for processing.
Fast refunds • You get your refund in half the time, even faster with Direct Deposit—in as few as
10 days.
Free internet filing options• Use the IRS website www.irs.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file
services available at no cost to eligible taxpayers.
Electronic payment • Convenient, safe and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and
options pay your taxes in a single step. Schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your
checking or savings account (up to and including April 15, 2004) or pay by credit
card.
Federal/State filing
• Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits
you get from e-file.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
By not reporting all of your self-employment in-How Do I Pay Income Tax? come, you could cause your social security bene-
fits to be lower when you retire.Federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay itCAUTION
!
as you earn or receive income during the year. An em-
How to become insured under social security.Youployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay.
must be insured under the social security system beforeIf you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do not
you begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-pay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimated
sured if you have the required number of credits (alsotax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments if
called quarters of coverage), discussed next.you expect to owe taxes, including self-employment tax
(discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file yourEarning credits in 2003 and 2004.For 2003, you re-return. Use Form 1040–ES to figure and pay the tax. If youceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for eachdo not have to make estimated tax payments, you may pay$890 ($900 for 2004) of income subject to social securityany tax due when you file your return. For more informationtaxes. Therefore, for 2003, if you had income (self-employ-on estimated tax, see Publication 505. ment and wages) of $3,560 that was subject to social
security taxes, you received four credits ($3,560 ÷ $890).What are my payment options?You may pay your esti-
For an explanation of the number of credits you mustmated tax electronically using various options. If you pay
have to be insured and the benefits available to you andelectronically, there is no need to mail in Form 1040–ES
your family under the social security program, consult yourpayment vouchers. These options include:
nearest Social Security Administration (SSA) office.
1) Paying electronically through the Electronic Federal Making false statements to get or to increaseTax Payment System (EFTPS). social security benefits may subject you to penal-
2) Paying by authorizing an electronic funds withdrawal ties.CAUTION
!
when you file Form 1040 electronically.
3) Paying by credit card over the phone or by Internet.The Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit for
posting self-employment income.Generally, the SSAOther options include crediting an overpayment from yourwill give you credit only for self-employment income re-2003 return to your 2004 estimated tax, and mailing aported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15check or money order with a Form 1040–ES payment days after the tax year you earned the income. If you filevoucher. your tax return or report a change in your self-employment
income after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec-Penalty for underpayment of tax.If you did not pay
ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSAenough income tax and self-employment tax for 2003 by
will not change its records to increase your self-employ-withholding or by making estimated tax payments, you
ment income.may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRS
will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or you
Who must pay self-employment tax.You must pay SEcan use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
tax and file Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of theIndividuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay a
following applies. penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor-
mation, see Publication 505. 
1) Your net earnings from self-employment (excluding
church employee income) were $400 or more.
2) You had church employee income of $108.28 orSelf-Employment Tax
more.
Self-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security and
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you areMedicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-
and even if you are already receiving social se-selves. It is similar to the social security and Medicare
curity or Medicare benefits.taxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners. CAUTION
!
If you earned income as a statutory employee,
Methods for figuring net earnings.There are threeyou do not pay SE tax on that income.
ways to figure net earnings from self-employment.CAUTION
!
1) The regular method
2) The nonfarm optional methodSocial security coverage.Social security benefits are
available to self-employed persons just as they are to3) The farm optional methodwage earners. Your payments of SE tax contribute to your
You must use the regular method unless you are eligiblecoverage under the social security system. Social security
to use one or both of the optional methods. Multiply yourcoverage provides you with retirement benefits, disability
total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235) to getbenefits, survivor benefits, and hospital insurance (Medi-
your net earnings under the regular method.care) benefits.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1–2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF you are liable for: THEN use Form: DUE by: 1
Income tax 1040 and Schedule C 2 or C–EZ 15th day of 4th month after end of
tax year.
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040.
Estimated tax 1040–ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year.
Social security and Medicare taxes 941 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
and income tax withholding January 31
4.
8109 (to make deposits)3 See Publication 15.
Providing information on social W–2 (to employee) January 31 4.
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding W–2 and W–3 (to the Social Last day of February (March 31 if
Security Administration) filing electronically)
4.
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax 940 or 940–EZ January 31 4.
8109 (to make deposits)3 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability for
unpaid tax is more than $100.
Filing information returns for See  Information Returns Forms 1099–to the recipient by
payments to nonemployees and January 31 and to the IRS by
transactions with other persons February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically).
Other forms—See the General
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
5498, and W–2G.
Excise tax See Excise Taxes See the instructions to the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the due date is the next business day. For more information, see
Publication 509, Tax Calendars for 2004.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 Do not use if you deposit taxes electronically.
4 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
Why use the optional methods?You may want to use 2003 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social
the optional methods when you have a loss or a small net security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad
profit and any one of the following applies. retirement (tier 1) tax.
All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2003
• You want to receive credit for social security benefitare subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare part
coverage. of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1)
tax.• You incurred child or dependent care expenses for
If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-which you could claim a credit. (An optional method
ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total atmay increase your earned income, which could in-
least $87,000, do not pay the 12.4% social security part ofcrease your credit.)
the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you
• You are entitled to the earned income credit. (Anmust pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your
optional method may increase your earned income,net earnings.
which could increase your credit.)
Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment
• You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (Anto income on line 28 of Form 1040. 
optional method may increase your earned income,
TIP
which could increase your credit.)
More information.For more information on the SE tax,
see Publication 533, Self-Employment Tax.SE tax rate.The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
Maximum earnings subject to SE tax.Only the first
$87,000 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1–3. Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note:The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you
ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
IF you are liable for: THEN you may need to:
Income tax ❏  File Schedule C or C–EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
❏  File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or exchange
property used in your business or in which the business use of certain section 179
or listed property drops to 50% or less.
❏  File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-employment tax ❏  File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment taxes ❏  File Form 941 for the calendar quarter in which you make final wage payments.
Note: Do not forget to check the final return box on line A and enter the date final
wages were paid above line 1.
❏  File Form 940 or 940–EZ for the calendar year in which final wages were paid.
Note: Do not forget to check the box, If you will not have to file returns in the
future..., under Question C box.
Information returns ❏  Provide Forms W–2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you make
final wage payments. Note: These forms are generally due by the due date of your
final Form 941.
❏  File Form W–3 to file Forms W–2. Note: These forms are generally due within 1
month after the due date of your final Form 941.
❏  Provide Forms 1099–MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least $600
for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in which you go
out of business.
❏  File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099–MISC.
Employment Taxes Excise Taxes
If you have employees, you will need to file forms to reportThis section explains the excise taxes you may have to pay
employment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow-and the forms you have to file if you do any of the following.
ing items.
• Manufacture or sell certain products.• Social security and Medicare taxes.
• Operate certain kinds of businesses.• Federal income tax withholding.
• Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-• Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax. ucts.
For more information, see Publication 15, Circular E, • Receive payment for certain services.Employer’s Tax Guide. That publication explains your tax
responsibilities as an employer. For more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,
Excise Taxes for 2004.To help you determine whether the people working for
you are your employees, see Publication 15–A, Form 720. The federal excise taxes reported on FormEmployer’s Supplemental Tax Guide. That publication has720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-information to help you determine whether an individual iseral broad categories of taxes, including the following.an independent contractor or an employee.
• Environmental taxes on the sale or use of ozone-de-If you incorrectly classify an employee as an
pleting chemicals and imported products containingindependent contractor, you can be held liable for
or manufactured with these chemicals.employment taxes for that worker plus a penalty.CAUTION
!
• Communications and air transportation taxes.An independent contractor is someone who is
self-employed. You do not generally have to withhold or• Fuel taxes.pay any taxes on payments to an independent contractor. 
• Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,
and tractors.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 11

Page 12 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a variety correctly report the information. For more information, see
of different articles. the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and
W–2G.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of• Failure to file information returns. This penaltycertain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-applies if you do not file information returns by theways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable grossdue date, do not include all required information, orweight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on Formreport incorrect information. 2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For more
• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. Thisinformation, see the instructions for Form 2290.
penalty applies if you do not furnish a required state-Depositing excise taxes.If you have to file a quarterlyment to a payee by the required date, do not includeexcise tax return on Form 720, you may have to depositall required information, or report incorrect informa-your excise taxes before the return is due. For details ontion. depositing excise taxes, see the instructions for Form 720.
Waiver of penalties.These penalties will not apply if
you can show that the failure was due to reasonable cause
Information Returns and not willful neglect.
In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include allIf you make or receive payments in your business, yourequired information, or for including incorrect information,may have to report them to the IRS on information returns.on a de minimis (small) number of information returns ifThe IRS compares the payments shown on the informationyou correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returnsreturns with each person’s income tax return to see if theare due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater ofpayments were included in income. You must give a copy10 or 1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you areof each information return you are required to file to therequired to file for the year.)recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be-
low, you may have to use other returns to report certain
kinds of payments or transactions. For more details onForm 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of Cash
information returns and when you have to file them, seePayments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, andif you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac-
W–2G. tion, or two or more related business transactions. Cash
includes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-Form 1099–MISC. Use Form 1099–MISC, Miscellane- cludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier’s andous Income, to report certain payments you make in yourtraveler’s checks and money orders. Cash does not in-business. These payments include the following items.clude a check drawn on an individual’s personal account
• Payments of $600 or more for services performed(personal check). For more information, see Publication
for your business by people not treated as your em-1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re-
ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys,ceived in a Trade or Business).
accountants, or directors.
Penalties.There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-
• Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rentsing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (orpaid to real estate agents. causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, or
structuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not for
services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows.
• Royalty payments of $10 or more.
• Payments to certain crew members by operators of
fishing boats.
2.You also use Form 1099–MISC to report your sales of
$5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resale
anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment.
Accounting Periods
Form W–2. You must file Form W–2, Wage and Tax and MethodsStatement, to report payments to your employees, such as
wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income,
social security, and Medicare taxes, and advance earned
income credit payments. For more information on what to
Introduction
report on Form W–2, see the Instructions for Forms W–2You must figure your taxable income and file an income taxand W–3. return for an annual accounting period called a “tax year.”
Also, you must consistently use an accounting method thatPenalties.The law provides for the following penalties if
clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year.you do not file Form 1099–MISC or Form W–2 or do not
Page 12 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Change in tax year.Generally, you must file Form 1128,Useful Items
Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year, toYou may want to see:
request IRS approval to change your tax year. See the
instructions for Form 1128 for exceptions. If you qualify forPublication
an automatic approval request, a use fee is not required. If❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods you do not qualify for automatic approval, a ruling must be
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-requested. See the instructions for Form 1128 for informa-
tions and forms. tion about user fees if you are requesting a ruling. 
Accounting Periods Accounting Methods
When preparing a statement of income and expensesAn accounting method is a set of rules used to determine
(generally your income tax return), you must use yourwhen and how income and expenses are reported. Your
books and records for a specific interval of time called anaccounting method includes not only the overall method of
accounting period. The annual accounting period for youraccounting you use, but also the accounting treatment you
income tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of use for any material item.
the following tax years. You choose an accounting method for your business
when you file your first income tax return that includes a• A calendar tax year.
Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to• A fiscal tax year. change your accounting method, you must generally get
Unless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax yearIRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.
by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. A
required tax year is a tax year required under the InternalKinds of methods.Generally, you can use any of the
Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regulations. following accounting methods.
• Cash method.Calendar tax year.A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive
months beginning January 1 and ending December 31. • An accrual method.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the• Special methods of accounting for certain items offollowing apply.
income and expenses.
• You keep no books.
• Combination method using elements of two or more
• You have no annual accounting period. of the above.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscal
You must use the same accounting method to figureyear.
your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you
• Your use of the calendar tax year is required undermust use an accounting method that clearly shows your
the Internal Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regu-income.
lations.
Business and personal items.You can account for busi-If you filed your first income tax return using the calendarness and personal items under different accounting meth-tax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor,ods. For example, you can figure your business incomeyou must continue to use the calendar tax year unless youunder an accrual method, even if you use the cash methodget IRS approval to change it or are otherwise allowed toto figure personal items.change it without IRS approval. For more information, see
Change in tax year, later. Two or more businesses.If you have two or more sepa-If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintainrate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-your books and records and report your income and ex-counting method for each if the method clearly reflects thepenses for the period from January 1 through Decemberincome of each business. They are separate and distinct31 of each year. only if you maintain complete and separate books and
records for each business.Fiscal tax year.A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive
months ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52-53-week tax year is a fiscal tax year that
Cash Method
varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on the
Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven-last day of a month.
tory use the cash method because they find it easier toIf you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain your
keep cash method records. However, if an inventory isbooks and records and report your income and expenses
necessary to account for your income, you must generallyusing the same tax year.
use an accrual method of accounting for sales andFor more information on a fiscal tax year, including a
purchases. For more information, see Inventories, later.52-53-week tax year, see Publication 538.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Income Expenses
Under the cash method, include in your gross income all Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses in
the tax year in which you actually pay them. This includesitems of income you actually or constructively receive
business expenses for which you contest liability. How-during your tax year. If you receive property or services,
ever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid inyou must include their fair market value in income.
advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.Example. On December 30, 2002, Mrs. Sycamore sent
you a check for interior decorating services you provided toExpenses paid in advance.You can deduct an expenseher. You received the check on January 2, 2003. You mustyou pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.include the amount of the check in income for 2003.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and youConstructive receipt.You have constructive receipt ofpay $1,000 in 2003 for a business insurance policy effec-income when an amount is credited to your account ortive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 inmade available to you without restriction. You do not need2003 and $500 in 2004.to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated asAccrual Methodhaving received it when your agent received it.
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generallyExample. Interest is credited to your bank account inreport income in the year earned and deduct or capitalizeDecember 2003. You do not withdraw it or enter it into yourexpenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrualpassbook until 2004. You must include it in your grossmethod of accounting is to match income and expenses inincome for 2003. the correct year.
Delaying receipt of income.You cannot hold checks
or postpone taking possession of similar property from oneIncome—General Ruletax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You
must report the income in the year the property is receivedUnder an accrual method, you generally include an
or made available to you without restriction. amount in your gross income for the tax year in which all
events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-
Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en-curred and you can determine the amount with reasonable
titled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De-accuracy.
cember 2003. She was told in December that her payment
was available. At her request, she was not paid untilExample. You are a calendar year, accrual method
January 2004. She must include this payment in her 2003taxpayer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2003.
income because it was constructively received in 2003.You billed the customer in the first week of January 2004,
but you did not receive payment until February 2004. YouChecks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the taxmust include the amount received for the computer in youryear is constructive receipt of income in that year, even if2003 income.you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following
year.
Income—Special Rules
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-
The following are special rules that apply to advance pay-cember 31, 2003, from a patient. She could not deposit the
ments, estimating income, and changing a paymentcheck in her business account until January 2, 2004. She
schedule for services.must include this fee in her income for 2003.
Debts paid by another person or canceled.If your Estimated income.If you include a reasonably estimated
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by your amount in gross income, and later determine the exact
amount is different, take the difference into account in thecreditors, you may have to report part or all of this debt
tax year in which you make the determination.relief as income. If you receive income in this way, you
constructively receive the income when the debt is can-Change in payment schedule for services.If you per-celed or paid. For more information, see Canceled Debt form services for a basic rate specified in a contract, youunder Kinds of Income in chapter 5. must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agree
to receive payments at a lower rate until you complete theRepayment of income. If you include an amount in in-services and then receive the difference.come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,
you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in whichAdvance payments for services.Generally, you report
you make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, aan advance payment for services to be performed in a later
special rule applies. For details about the special rule, seetax year as income in the year you receive the payment.
Repayments in chapter 13 of Publication 535, Business However, if you receive an advance payment for services
Expenses. you agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, you
Page 14 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can elect to postpone including the advance payment inExample. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use an
income until the next tax year. However, you cannot post-accrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies in
pone including any payment beyond that tax year. December 2003. You receive the supplies and the bill in
December, but you pay the bill in January 2004. You canFor more information, see Advance Payment for Serv-
deduct the expense in 2003 because all events that fix theices under Accrual Method in Publication 538. That publi-
fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liabilitycation also explains special rules for reporting the following
could be reasonably determined, and economic perform-types of income.
ance occurred in that year.
• Advance payments for service agreements. Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.
In that case, you can deduct them in 2003 even if the• Advance payments under guarantee or warranty
supplies are not delivered until 2004 (when economiccontracts.
performance occurs).• Prepaid interest.
Keeping inventories.When the production, purchase, or• Prepaid rent.
sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
business, you must generally take inventories into accountAdvance payments for sales.Special rules apply to in-at the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you mustcluding income from advance payments on agreements foraccount for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima-crual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of yourFor more information, see Inventories, later.business. If the advance payments are for contracts involv-
ing both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessarySpecial rule for related persons.You cannot deductto treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes abusiness expenses and interest owed to a related persongift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treatwho uses the cash method of accounting until you makeamounts that are due and payable as amounts you re-the payment and the corresponding amount is includible inceived. the related person’s gross income. Determine the relation-You generally include an advance payment in incomeship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which thefor the tax year in which you receive it. However, you canexpense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If ause an alternative method. For information about the alter-deduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con-native method, see Publication 538. tinue to apply even if your relationship with the person
ends before the expense or interest is includible in the
gross income of that person.
Expenses
Related persons include members of your immediate
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generallyfamily, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
deduct or capitalize a business expense when both thehalf), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
following apply. a list of other related persons, see Related Persons under
Accrual Method in Publication 538.
1) The all-events test has been met. The test has been
met when: Combination Method
a) All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil-You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,ity, and
and special methods of accounting if the combination
b) The liability can be determined with reasonableclearly shows your income and expenses and you use it
accuracy. consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.
• If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-2) Economic performance has occurred.
come, you must generally use an accrual method for
purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories,Economic performance. You generally cannot deduct or later.) You can use the cash method for all othercapitalize a business expense until economic performanceitems of income and expenses.occurs. If your expense is for property or services provided
• If you use the cash method for figuring your income,to you, or for your use of property, economic performance
you must use the cash method for reporting youroccurs as the property or services are provided or as the
expenses.property is used. If your expense is for property or services
you provide to others, economic performance occurs as• If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex-you provide the property or services. An exception allowspenses, you must use an accrual method for figuringcertain recurring items to be treated as incurred during ayour income.tax year even though economic performance has not oc-
• If you use a combination method that includes thecurred. For more information on economic performance,
cash method, treat that combination method as thesee Economic Performance under Accrual Method in Pub-
cash method.lication 538.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 15

Page 16 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
determine the raw material used to produce finished goodsInventories that were sold during the year.
Generally, if you produce, purchase or sell merchandise inChanging methods. If you are a qualifying taxpayer oryour business, you must keep an inventory and use thesmall business taxpayer and want to change to the cashaccrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise.method or to account for inventoriable items as non-inci-However, the following taxpayers can use the cash methoddental materials and supplies, you must file Form 3115,of accounting even if they produce, purchase, or sell mer-Application for Change in Accounting Method.chandise. These taxpayers can also account for inventori-
able items as materials and supplies that are not incidentalMore information. For more information about the quali-(discussed later). fying taxpayer exception, see Revenue Procedure
2001–10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001–2. For more1) A qualifying taxpayer under Revenue Procedure
information about the qualifying small business taxpayer2001–10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001–2.
exception, see Revenue Procedure 2002–28 in Internal
2) A qualifying small business taxpayer under RevenueRevenue Bulletin 2002–18.
Procedure 2002–28 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
2002–18. Items included in inventory.If you are required to ac-
count for inventories, include the following items when
accounting for your inventory.Qualifying taxpayer.You are a qualifying taxpayer if:
• Merchandise or stock in trade.• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior
tax year ending on or after December 17, 1998, is $1• Raw materials.million or less. (Your average annual gross receipts
• Work in process.for a tax year is figured by adding the gross receipts
for that tax year and the 2 preceding tax years and• Finished products.dividing by 3.)
• Supplies that physically become a part of the item• Your business is not a tax shelter, as defined underintended for sale.section 448(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Valuing inventory.You must value your inventory at theQualifying small business taxpayer.You are a qualify-beginning and end of each tax year to determine your costing small business taxpayer if: of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine the
value of your inventory, you need a method for identifying• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior
the items in your inventory and a method for valuing thesetax year ending on or after December 31, 2000, is
items.more than $1 million but not more than $10 million.
Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for all(Your average annual gross receipts for a tax year is
kinds of businesses. The method you use to value yourfigured by adding the gross receipts for that tax year
inventory must conform to generally accepted accountingand the 2 preceding tax years and dividing the total
principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflectby 3.)
income. Your inventory practices must be consistent from• You are not prohibited from using the cash methodyear to year.under section 448 of the Internal Revenue Code.
More information.For more information about invento-• Your principle business activity is an eligible busi-ries, see Publication 538.ness (described in Publication 538 and Revenue
Procedure 2002–28).
Uniform Capitalization Rules
Business not owned or not in existence for 3 years.If Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalizeyou did not own your business for all of the 3-tax-yearthe direct costs and part of the indirect costs for productionperiod used in figuring your average annual gross receipts,or resale activities. Include these costs in the basis ofinclude the period of any predecessor. If your business hasproperty you produce or acquire for resale, rather thannot been in existence for the 3-tax-year period, base yourclaiming them as a current deduction. You recover theaverage on the period it has existed including any short taxcosts through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goodsyears, annualizing the short tax year’s gross receipts.sold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop-
erty.Materials and supplies that are not incidentalIf you
account for inventoriable items as materials and suppliesActivities subject to the rules.You may be subject tothat are not incidental, you will deduct the cost of the itemsthe uniform capitalization rules if you do any of the follow-you would otherwise include in inventory in the year youing, unless the property is produced for your use other thansell the items, or the year you pay for them, whichever isin a business or an activity carried on for profit.later. If you are a producer, you can use any reasonable
method to estimate the raw material in your work in pro-• Produce real or tangible personal property. For this
cess and finished goods on hand at the end of the year to purpose, tangible personal property includes a film,
Page 16 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 17 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop- the taxpayer complies with the provisions of the automatic
erty. change procedures. No user fee is required for an applica-
tion filed under an automatic change procedure generally• Acquire property for resale. covered in Revenue Procedure 2002–9.
Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-Exceptions.These rules do not apply to the following
matic change. For more information, see the form instruc-property.
tions.
1) Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver-
age annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.
2) Property you produce if you meet either of the follow-
ing conditions.
3.a) Your indirect costs of producing the property are
$200,000 or less.
Dispositions ofb) You use the cash method of accounting and do
not account for inventories. For more information,
Business Propertysee Inventories, earlier.
IntroductionSpecial Methods
If you dispose of business property, you may have a gainThere are special methods of accounting for certain itemsor loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in someof income or expense. These include the following.cases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss that
• Amortization, discussed in chapter 9 of Publicationis not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you have
535, Business Expenses. a disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where to
report the gain or loss.• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 11 of Publication
535.
Useful Items• Depletion, discussed in chapter 10 of PublicationYou may want to see:535.
• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How To Publication
Depreciate Property. ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
• Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In-
stallment Sales. Form (and Instructions)
❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property
❏ Sch D (Form 1040)Capital Gains and LossesChange in
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-Accounting Method
tions and forms.
Once you have set up your accounting method, you must
generally get IRS approval before you can change to
another method. A change in your accounting methodWhat Is a Dispositionincludes a change in:
of Property?1) Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac-
crual method, and A disposition of property includes the following transac-
2) Your treatment of any material item. tions.
To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application for • You sell property for cash or other property.Change in Accounting Method. You can get IRS approval
• You exchange property for other property.to change an accounting method under either the auto-
matic change procedures or the advance consent request• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellationprocedures. You may have to pay a user fee. For more of a lease.information, see the form instructions. 
• You receive money for granting the exclusive use of
Automatic change procedures.Certain taxpayers can a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium.
presume to have IRS approval to change their method of• You transfer property to satisfy a debt.accounting. The approval is granted for the tax year for
which the taxpayer requests a change (year of change), if• You abandon property.
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business PropertyPage 17

Page 18 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on
your mortgage or repossesses your property. How Do I Figure
• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, anda Gain or Loss?you receive property or money in payment.
• Your property is condemned, or disposed of under
the threat of condemnation, and you receive prop-
Table 3–1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss
erty or money in payment.
IF your... THEN you have a...For details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property,
Adjusted basis is more than thesee Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
amount realized Loss.details about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica-
tion 544. Amount realized is more than
the adjusted basis Gain.Nontaxable exchanges.Certain exchanges of property
are not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange isBasis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair marketnot recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gainvalue, and amount recognized are defined next. You needor loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwiseto know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.dispose of the property you receive.
Basis.The cost or purchase price of property is usually itsLike-kind exchanges.A like-kind exchange is the ex-
basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or otherchange of property for the same kind of property. It is the
disposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a
inheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you mustlike-kind exchange, the property traded and the property
use a basis other than its cost. For more information aboutreceived must be both of the following.
basis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.• Business or investment property.
Adjusted basis.The adjusted basis of property is your• Like property. original cost or other basis plus certain additions, and
minus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-Report the exchange of like-kind property on Form alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information aboutferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,like-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication 544. are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
Installment sales.An installment sale is a sale of prop-
erty where you receive at least one payment after the taxAmount realized.The amount you realize from a disposi-
year of the sale. If you finance the buyer’s purchase of yourtion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair market
property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort-value of all property or services you receive. The amount
gage from a third party, you probably have an installmentyou realize also includes any of your liabilities that were
sale. assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which the
For more information about installment sales, see Publi-property you transferred is subject, such as real estate
cation 537, Installment Sales. taxes or a mortgage.
Sale of a business.The sale of a business usually is notFair market value.Fair market value is the price at whicha sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the businessthe property would change hands between a buyer and aare sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treatedseller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having rea-as being sold separately for determining the treatment ofsonable knowledge of all necessary facts.gain or loss.
Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of aAmount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from a
business must report to the IRS the allocation of the salesdisposition of property is usually a recognized gain or loss
price among the business assets. Use Form 8594, Asset for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included in
Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide thisgross income. Recognized losses are deductible from
information. The buyer and seller should each attach Formgross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer-
8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in whichtain exchanges of property is not recognized. See Nontax-
the sale occurred. able exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a loss
For more information about the sale of a business, seefrom the disposition of property held for personal use.
chapter 2 of Publication 544.
Is My Gain or Loss
Ordinary or Capital?
You must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary
or capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure your
net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital
gain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most
Page 18 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 19 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or
investment is a capital asset.
4.Certain property you use in your business is not a
capital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this
property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held
General Business
the property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat
the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and
Credit
losses are called section 1231 gains and losses.
For more information about ordinary and capital gains
and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544.Introduction
Your general business credit for the year consists of your
Is My Capital Gain or Loss carryforward of business credits from prior years plus the
total of your current year business credits. In addition, yourShort Term or Long Term?
general business credit for the current year may be in-
If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determinecreased later by the carryback of business credits from
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or losslater years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.
is long or short term depends on how long you own the
property before you dispose of it. The time you own prop-Useful Itemserty before disposing of it is called the holding period.You may want to see:
Table 3–2. Do I Have a Short-Term or Publication
Long-Term Gain or Loss? ❏ 954 Tax Incentives for Distressed Communities
IF you hold the
Form (and Instructions)property... THEN you have a...
❏ 3800 General Business Credit1 year or less Short-term capital gain or loss.
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—IndividualsMore than 1 year Long-term capital gain or loss.
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
For more information about short-term and long-termtions and forms.
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544.
Business Credits
Where Do I Report All of the following credits are part of the general business
credit. The form you use to figure each credit is shown inGains and Losses?
parentheses. Be sure you also read How To Claim the
Credit later because you may also have to fill out FormReport gains and losses from the following dispositions on
3800 in certain situations.the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explain
how to fill them out. Credit for alcohol used as a fuel (Form 6478).This
credit applies to alcohol you sold or used as fuel. Alcohol,
Dispositions of business property and depreciablefor purposes of this credit, includes ethanol and methanol.
property.Use Form 4797. If you have taxable gain, youIt does not include alcohol produced from petroleum, natu-
may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). ral gas, coal, or peat. Nor does it include alcohol of less
than 150 proof. For more information, see Form 6478.
Like-kind exchanges.Use Form 8824, Like-Kind Ex- Credit for contributions to selected community devel-changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 and opment corporations (Form 8847).This credit applies toSchedule D (Form 1040). certain contributions made to a selected community devel-
opment corporation before June 30, 1999. For more infor-
Installment sales.Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-mation, see Form 8847.
come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and Schedule
Credit for employee social security and medicareD (Form 1040). 
taxes paid on certain employee tips (Form 8846).The
credit is generally equal to your (employer’s) portion ofCasualties and thefts.Use Form 4684, Casualties and social security and Medicare taxes paid on tips received byThefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. employees of your food and beverage establishment
where tipping is customary. The credit applies regardless
Condemned property. Use Form 4797 . You may also of whether the food is consumed on or off your business
have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). premises. However, you cannot get credit for your part of
Chapter 4 General Business Credit Page 19

Page 20 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
social security and Medicare taxes on those tips that areInvestment credit (Form 3468).The investment credit is
used to meet the federal minimum wage rate that applies the total of the following three credits.
to the employee under the Fair Labor Standards Act. For
• Energy credit.more information, see Form 8846.
• Reforestation credit.
Credit for employer-provided childcare facilities and• Rehabilitation credit.services (Form 8882).This credit applies to the qualified
expenses you paid for employee childcare and qualifiedEnergy credit.This credit applies to certain expensesexpenses you paid for childcare resource and referralfor solar or geothermal energy property you placed inservices. The credit is 25% of qualified expenses you paidservice during the tax year. For more information, see thefor employee childcare and 10% of qualified expenses youinstructions for Form 3468.paid for childcare resource and referral services. This
credit is limited to $150,000 each year. For more informa-Reforestation credit.The reforestation credit applies
tion, see Form 8882. to part of the expenses you incur each year to forest or
reforest property you hold for growing trees for sale or useCredit for increasing research activities (Form 6765).in the commercial production of timber products. For infor-The research credit is designed to encourage businessesmation about these expenses, see chapter 9 in Publicationto increase the amounts they spend on research and535, Business Expenses.experimental activities. The credit is generally 20% of the
Rehabilitation credit.This credit applies to expensesamount by which your research expenses for the year are
you incur to rehabilitate certain buildings. For more infor-more than your base amount. However, the credit is
mation, see the instructions for Form 3468.scheduled to expire for expenses you pay or incur after
June 30, 2004. For more information, see Form 6765.Low-income housing credit (Form 8586).This credit
generally applies to qualified low-income housing buildingsCredit for small employer pension startup costs (Formplaced in service after 1986. For more information, see8881).This credit applies to pension plan startup costs. IfForm 8586.you begin a new qualified defined benefit or defined contri-
bution plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, orNew York Liberty Zone business employee credit
simplified employee pension, you can receive a tax credit(Form 8884).This credit provides businesses with an
of 50% of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs. Forincentive to hire individuals from a new targeted group of
more information, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans employees in the Liberty Zone. However, the credit is
for Small Business (SEP, Simple, and Qualified Plans. scheduled to expire for individuals who begin work for you
after December 31, 2003. For more information, see Form
Disabled access credit (Form 8826).The disabled ac- 8884.
cess credit is a nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible
Orphan drug credit (Form 8820).The orphan drug creditsmall business that pays or incurs expenses to provide
applies to qualified expenses incurred in testing certainaccess to persons who have disabilities. You must pay or
drugs, known as “orphan drugs for rare diseases andincur the expenses to enable your business to comply with
conditions.” For more information, see Form 8820.the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. For more
information, see Form 8826. Renewable electricity production credit (Form 8835).
The renewable electricity production credit is available toEmpowerment zone and renewal community employ- sellers of electricity. It is based on electricity that was soldment credit (Form 8844).You may qualify for this credit ifto unrelated persons and was produced from qualifiedyou have employees and are engaged in a business in anenergy resources at a qualified facility during the 10-yearempowerment zone for which the credit is available. Forperiod after the facility is placed in service. However, themore information, see Form 8844 and Publication 954.credit is scheduled to expire for facilities placed in service
after 2003. For more information, see Form 8835.Enhanced oil recovery credit (Form 8830).This credit
applies to your qualified enhanced oil recovery costs forWelfare-to-work credit (Form 8861). The
the tax year. For more information, see Form 8830.welfare-to-work credit provides businesses with an incen-
tive to hire long-term family assistance recipients. How-Indian employment credit (Form 8845).This credit ap-ever, the credit is scheduled to expire for individuals whoplies to the part of the qualified wages and health insur-begin work for you after December 31, 2003. For moreance costs (up to $20,000 per employee) you paid orinformation, see Form 8861 and Publication 954.incurred during a tax year that is more than the sum of the
comparable costs you (or your predecessor) paid or in-Work opportunity credit (Form 5884).The work oppor-
curred during calendar year 1993. The employee must be tunity credit provides businesses with an incentive to hire
an enrolled member, or the spouse of an enrolled member, individuals from targeted groups that have a particularly
of an Indian tribe. The employee must perform substan- high unemployment rate or other special employment
tially all of his or her services within an Indian reservation needs. However, the credit is scheduled to expire for
while living on or near the reservation. However, the credit individuals who begin work for you after December 31,
is scheduled to expire after 2004. For more information, 2003. For more information, see Form 5884 and Publica-
see Form 8845 and Publication 954. tion 954.
Page 20 Chapter 4 General Business Credit

Page 21 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If there is a connection between any income you receive
and your business, the income is business income. AHow To Claim the Credit
connection exists if it is clear that the payment of income
would not have been made if you did not have the busi-To claim a general business credit, you will first have to get
ness.the forms you need to claim your current year business
credits. You can have business income even if you are not
In addition to the credit form, you may also need to fileinvolved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Income
Form 3800. See the next discussion to decide whether youfrom work you do on the side in addition to your regular job
need to file Form 3800. can be business income.
You report most business income, such as income fromWho must file Form 3800? the sale of your products or services, on Schedule C orYou must file Form 3800 if any of the following apply.
C–EZ. But you report the income from the sale of business
• You have more than one of the credits listed aboveassets, such as land and office buildings, on other forms
(other than the empowerment zone and renewal instead of Schedule C or C–EZ. For information on selling
community employment credit or New York Libertybusiness assets, see chapter 3.
Zone business employee credit).
Nonemployee compensation. Business income
• You have a carryback or carryforward of any of includes amounts you received in your business
these credits (other than the empowerment zone that were properly shown on Forms 1099–MISC.
TIP
and renewal community employment credit or NewThis includes amounts reported as nonemployee compen-
York Liberty Zone business employee credit). sation in box 7 of the form. You can find more information
in the instructions on the back of the Form 1099–MISC you• Any of these credits (other than the low-income
received. housing credit, the empowerment zone and renewal
community employment credit, or the New York Lib-
erty Zone business employee credit) is from a pas-
sive activity. For information about passive activity
Kinds of Incomecredits, see Form 8582–CR.
You must report on your tax return all income you receive
from your business unless it is excluded by law. In mostClaiming the empowerment zone and renewal commu-
cases, your business income will be in the form of cash,nity employment credit.The empowerment zone and
checks, and credit card charges. But business income canrenewal community employment credit is subject to differ-
be in other forms, such as property or services. These andent rules. The credit is figured separately on Form 8844
other types of income are explained next.and is not carried to Form 3800. For more information, see
the instructions for Form 8844. If you are a U.S. citizen who has business income
from sources outside the United States (foreignClaiming the New York Liberty Zone business em-
income), you must report that income on your taxployee credit.The New York Liberty Zone business em-CAUTION
!
return unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If youployee credit is an expansion of the work opportunity credit
live outside the United States, you may be able to excludeto include a new targeted group of employees in the New
part or all of your foreign-source business income. ForYork Liberty Zone. This credit is figured separately on
details, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. CitizensForm 8884 and is generally not carried to Form 3800. For
and Resident Aliens Abroad.more information, see the instructions for Form 8884.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).Although you may not
Bartering for Property or Servicesowe AMT, you must still figure your tentative minimum tax
on Form 6251 if you claim a general business credit. After
Bartering is an exchange of property or services. You mustyou fill in Form 6251, attach it to your tax return. 
include in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fair
market value of property or services you receive in bar-
tering. If you exchange services with another person and
you both have agreed ahead of time on the value of the
services, that value will be accepted as the fair market
5. value unless the value can be shown to be otherwise.
Example 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per-Business Income form legal services for a client, a small corporation. In
payment for your services, you receive shares of stock in
the corporation. You must include the fair market value ofIntroduction the shares in income.
This chapter primarily explains business income and how
Example 2.You are an artist and create a work of art toto account for it on your tax return. It also explains what
items are not considered income. compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of your
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
apartment. You must include the fair rental value of theReal Estate Rentsapartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
clude the fair market value of the work of art in his or herIf you are a real estate dealer who receives income from
rental income. renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,
who provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,
Example 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Bothreport the rental income and expenses on Schedule C or
you and a house painter are members of a barter club, anC–EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind of
organization that each year gives its members a directoryowner described in the preceding sentence, report the
of members and the services each member provides.rental income and expenses on Schedule E, instead of on
Members get in touch with other members directly andSchedule C or C–EZ.
bargain for the value of the services to be performed.
Prepaid rent.Advance payments received under a leaseIn return for accounting services you provided for thethat does not put any restriction on their use or enjoymenthouse painter’s business, the house painter painted yourare income in the year you receive them. This is true nohome. You must include in gross receipts the fair marketmatter what accounting method or period you use.value of the services you received from the house painter.
The house painter must include the fair market value ofLease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee foryour accounting services in his or her gross receipts.granting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in your
gross receipts in the year it is received.Example 4. You are a member of a barter club that
Lease cancellation payments.Report payments you re-uses credit units to credit or debit members’ accounts for
ceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in your grossgoods or services provided or received. As soon as units
receipts in the year received.are credited to your account, you can use them to buy
goods or services or sell or transfer the units to otherPayments to third parties.If your lessee makes pay-members. ments to someone else under an agreement to pay yourYou must include the value of credit units you receiveddebts or obligations, include the payments in your grossin your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units arereceipts when the lessee makes the payments. A commoncredited to your account. example of this kind of income is a lessee’s payment ofThe dollar value of units received for services by anyour property taxes on leased real property.employee of the club, who can use the units in the same
manner as other members, must be included in the Settlement payments.Payments you receive in settle-
employee’s gross income for the tax year in which re-ment of a lessee’s obligation to restore the leased property
ceived. It is wages subject to social security and Medicareto its original condition are income in the amount that the
taxes (FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), andpayments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im-
income tax withholding. See Publication 15, Circular E, provements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon-
Employer’s Tax Guide. nected by the lessee.
Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and usePersonal Property Rentsthe cash method of accounting. You join a barter club and
agree to provide plumbing services to any member for aIf you are in the business of renting personal property
specified number of hours. Each member has access to a(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental
directory that lists the members of the club and the serv-amount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule C
ices available. or C–EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described in
Members contact each other directly and request serv-the preceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also be
ices to be performed. You are not required to providereceived for renting personal property. If you receive any of
services unless requested by another member, but youthose payments, include them in your gross receipts as
can use as many of the offered services as you wishexplained in that discussion.
without paying a fee.
You must include the fair market value of any servicesInterest and Dividend Incomeyou receive from club members in your gross receipts
when you receive them even if you have not provided anyInterest and dividends may be considered business in-
services to club members. come.
Information returns.If you are involved in a barteringInterest.Interest received on notes receivable that you
transaction, you may have to file either of the followinghave accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi-
forms. ness income. Interest received on loans is business in-
come if you are in the business of lending money.• Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter
Uncollectible loans.If a loan payable to you becomesExchange Transactions.
uncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrual• Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income. method of accounting, you must include in gross income
For information about these forms, see the General In- interest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-
structions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G. ble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you
Page 22 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
may be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts • Accrual method – You include the canceled debt in
in chapter 8. income because the expense was deductible when
you incurred the debt.Unstated interest.If little or no interest is charged on
an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of eachFor information on the cash and accrual methods ofpayment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest andaccounting, see chapter 2.Original Issue Discount in Publication 537, Installment
Sales.
ExclusionsDividends.Generally, dividends are business income to
dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-Do not include canceled debt in income in the following
tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-situations. However, you may be required to file Form 982,
come. If you hold stock as a personal investment Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted-
separately from your business activity, the dividends fromness. For more information, see Form 982.  
the stock are nonbusiness income.
1) The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy caseIf you receive dividends from business insurance premi-
under title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank-ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all or
ruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.part of the dividend as business income on your return. To
find out how much you have to report, see Recovery of 2) The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent.items previously deducted under Other Income, later. You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you
are insolvent. See Publication 908.
Canceled Debt 3) The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to a
qualified person. See chapter 4 in Publication 225,The following explains the general rule for including can-Farmer’s Tax Guide.celed debt in income and the exceptions to the general
rule. 4) The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi-
ness debt. This situation is explained later.
If a canceled debt is excluded from income because itGeneral Rule
takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa-
Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other thantions (2), (3), and (4) do not apply. If it takes place when
as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceledyou are insolvent, the exclusions in situations (3) and (4)
amount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report thedo not apply to the extent you are insolvent.
canceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurredDebt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes anythe debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,debt for which you are liable or which attaches to propertyreport the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.you hold.
Qualified real property business debt.You can chooseExceptions to exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
real property business debt. If you make the choice, youThe following discussion covers some exceptions to the
must reduce the basis of your depreciable real property bygeneral rule for canceled debt.
the amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginning
of your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel-Price reduced after purchase.If you owe a debt to the
lation occurs. However, if you dispose of the propertyseller for property you bought and the seller reduces the
before that time, you must reduce its basis immediatelyamount you owe, you generally do not have income from
before the disposition.the reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treat
the amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-Cancellation of qualified real property businessment and reduce your basis in the property. debt.Qualified real property business debt is debt (other
than qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi-Deductible debt.You do not realize income from a can-tions.celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would
have led to a deduction. 1) It was incurred or assumed in connection with real
property used in a trade or business.
Example. You get accounting services for your busi-
2) It was secured by such real property.ness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-
ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Your3) It was incurred or assumed at either of the following
accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for thetimes.
accounting services. How you treat the canceled debt
depends on your method of accounting. a) Before January 1, 1993.
• Cash method – You do not include the canceled b) After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumed
debt in income because payment of the debt would to acquire, construct, or substantially improve the
have been deductible as a business expense. real property.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 23

Page 24 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4) It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules. them at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated
interest) when you receive them.Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-
ing of debt described in (3) above, but only to the extent itLost income payments.If you reduce or stop your busi-
does not exceed the debt being refinanced. ness activities, report on Schedule C or C–EZ any pay-
You cannot exclude more than either of the followingment you receive for the lost income of your business from
amounts. insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C or
C–EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive1) The excess (if any) of: the payment.
a) The outstanding principal of qualified real prop-Damages. You must include in gross income compensa-erty business debt (immediately before the can-tion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of thecellation), over following injuries connected with your business.
b) The fair market value (immediately before the• Patent infringement.cancellation) of the business real property that is
security for the debt, reduced by the outstanding• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty.
principal amount of any other qualified real prop-• Antitrust injury.erty business debt secured by this property imme-
diately before the cancellation. Economic injury.You may be entitled to a deduction
against the income if it compensates you for actual eco-2) The total adjusted bases of depreciable real propertynomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the followingheld by you immediately before the cancellation.amounts.These adjusted bases are determined after any ba-
sis reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy,• The amount you receive or accrue for damages in
insolvency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take into the tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incur
account depreciable real property acquired in con- in the tax year to recover that amount.
templation of the cancellation.
• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de-
ducted.Choice. To make this choice, complete Form 982 and
attach it to your income tax return for the tax year in whichPunitive damages. You must also include punitivethe cancellation occurs. You must file your return by thedamages in income.due date (including extensions). If you timely filed your
return for the year without making the choice, you can stillKickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them in
make the choice by filing an amended return within 6your income on Schedule C or C–EZ. However, do not
months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-include them if you properly treat them as a reduction of a
sions). For more information, see When to file in the form related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost of
instructions. goods sold.
Recovery of items previously deducted.If you recover
Other Income a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year,
include the recovery in income on Schedule C or C–EZ.The following discussion explains how to treat other types
However, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years didof business income you may receive.
not reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not
Restricted property.Restricted property is property thatreduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from
has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receiveincome, you must include with your return a computation
restricted stock or other property for services performed,showing how you figured the exclusion.
the fair market value of the property in excess of your cost
is included in your income on Schedule C or C–EZ whenExample. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in-
the restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to become of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and other
taxed in the year you receive the property. For moreallowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personal
information on including restricted property in income, seeexemptions of $6,100. He would not pay income tax even if
Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income. he did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, he will not report
as income any part of the $300 he may recover in anyGains and losses.Do not report on Schedule C or C–EZfuture year.a gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither
Exception for depreciation.This rule does not applystock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers.
to depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rulesInstead, you must report these gains and losses on other
explained next.forms. For more information, see chapter 3.
Promissory notes.Report promissory notes and otherRecapture of depreciation.In the following situations,
evidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange of you have to recapture the depreciation deduction. This
property that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale to means you include in income part or all of the depreciation
customers on Schedule C or C–EZ. In general, you report you deducted in previous years.
Page 24 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Listed property.If your business use of listed propertyConsignments. Consignments of merchandise to others
(explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% or to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandise
less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the property remains with you, the consignor, even after the consignee
in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia- possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goods
tion deduction. You do this by including in income on on consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-
Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ- signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have
ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Business shipped out on consignment is included in your inventory
Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C. until it is sold.
For more information, see What is the Business-Use Re- Do not include merchandise you receive on consign-quirement in chapter 5 of Publication 946, How To Depre- ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commissionciate Property. That chapter explains how to determineon merchandise consigned to you in your income whenwhether property is used more than 50% in your business.you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit or
commission, depending upon the method of accountingSection 179 property.If you take a section 179 deduc-
you use.tion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an
asset and before the end of the asset’s recovery period the
Construction allowances.If you enter into a lease afterpercentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must
August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con-recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by
struction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rentincluding in income on Schedule C part of the deduction
reduction) from your landlord if you receive it under bothyou took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount to
the following conditions.include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 to
find out when you recapture the deduction.
• Under a short-term lease of retail space.
Sale or exchange of depreciable property.If you sell
• For the purpose of constructing or improving quali-or exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may have
fied long-term real property for use in your busi-to treat all or part of the gain due to depreciation as
ness at that retail space.ordinary income. You figure the income due to deprecia-
tion recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more informa-
Amount you can exclude.You can exclude the con-tion, see chapter 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Other
struction allowance to the extent it does not exceed theDispositions of Assets.
amount you spent for construction or improvements.
Short-term lease.A short-term lease is a lease (or
other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space forItems That Are Not Income
15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining
whether the lease is for 15 years or less.In some cases the property or money you receive is not
income.
• Take into account options to renew when figuring
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do notLoans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is not
take into account any option to renew at fair marketincome.
value determined at the time of renewal.
Sales tax.State and local sales taxes imposed on the
• Two or more successive leases that are part of thebuyer, which you were required to collect and pay over tosame transaction (or a series of related transactions)state or local governments, are not income. for the same or substantially similar retail space are
treated as one lease.Appreciation.Increases in value of your property are not
income until you realize the increases through a sale orRetail space.Retail space is real property leased, oc-other taxable disposition. cupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your
business of selling tangible personal property or servicesLeasehold improvements.If a tenant erects buildings or
to the general public.makes improvements to your property, the increase in the
value of the property due to the improvements is notQualified long-term real property.Qualified long-term
income to you. However, if the facts indicate that thereal property is nonresidential real property that is part of,
improvements are a payment of rent to you, then theor otherwise present at, your retail space and that reverts
increase in value would be income. to the landlord when the lease ends.
Exchange of like-kind property.If you exchange your
business property or property you hold for investment
solely for property of a like kind to be used in your business
Accounting for Your Income
or to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized.
This means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is not Accounting for your income for income tax purposes differs
deductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is the at times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec-
trade-in of a business automobile for another business tion discusses some of the more common differences that
automobile. See Nontaxable exchanges in chapter 3. may affect business transactions.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 25

Page 26 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure your business income on the basis of a tax yearAdvance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-
and according to your regular method of accounting (seecrual method of accounting for payments received in ad-
chapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producingvance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.
factor in your business, you usually have to use inventories
to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are notInsurance proceeds.If you receive insurance or anotherallowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-type of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you musttories, see chapter 2. subtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.
You cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty orIncome paid to a third party.All income you earn is
theft loss.taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income
paid to a third party. For information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-
tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.
Example. You rent out your property and the rental
agreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son.
The amount paid to your son is gross income to you.
Cash discounts.These are amounts the seller permits
you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment.6.For income tax purposes you can use either of the follow-
ing two methods to account for cash discounts.
How To Figure1) Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line
36, Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn for
Cost of Goods SoldPersonal Use in chapter 6).
2) Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-
count.
IntroductionYou must use the chosen method every year for all your
If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost ofpurchase discounts.
goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-If you use the second method, the credit balance in the
ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-account at the end of your tax year is business income.
tory at the beginning and end of each tax year.Under this method, you do not reduce the cost of goods
sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuingThis chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,
your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice pricewholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-
of merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by theness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.
average or estimated discounts received on the merchan-This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-
dise. ness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,
or painter. However, if you work in a personal serviceTrade discounts.These are reductions from list or cata-
business and also sell or charge for the materials andlog prices and usually are not written into the invoice or
supplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on
plies to you.your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount as
the cost of the merchandise purchased. For more informa- If you must account for an inventory in your busi-tion, see Trade discounts in chapter 6. ness, you must generally use an accrual method
of accounting for your purchases and sales. ForPayment placed in escrow.If the buyer of your property
CAUTION
!
more information, see chapter 2.places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you do
not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually or
constructively receive it. However, upon completion of the
terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you will
Figuring Cost of Goods Sold –have taxable income, even if you do not accept the money
until the next year.
Schedule C Lines 35 – 42
Sales returns and allowances.Credits you allow cus-
Figure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35–42 oftomers for returned merchandise and any other al-
Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below and arelowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales. explained in the discussion that follows.
Page 26 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 27 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last income for 2003 must not include the $400. You remove
year’s closing inventory, attach explanation...... that amount from opening inventory for 2003.
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-u s e .................................
uted property in 2003 at a cost of $400, you would include
37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goodsyourself.............................. sold for 2003 and deduct the $50 of administrative and
other expenses attributable to the property for that year.38 Materials and supplies....................
You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-
39 Other costs............................ duction for the contributed property.
40 Add lines 35 through 39...................
Line 36
41 Inventory at end of year.................... Purchases Less Cost of Items
Withdrawn for Personal Use42 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4.......
If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise you
bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, this
includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased for
Line 35
manufacture into a finished product.Inventory at Beginning of Year
Trade discounts.The differences between the statedIf you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost ofprices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them are
merchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that youcalled trade discounts. You must use the prices you pay
will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro-(not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases.
ducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work inDo not show the discount amount separately as an item in
process, finished goods, and materials and supplies usedgross income.
in manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2). An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car in
Opening inventory usually will be identical to the closinginventory reduced by a manufacturer’s rebate that repre-
inventory of the year before. You must explain any differ-sents a trade discount.
ence in a schedule attached to your return.
Cash discounts.Cash discounts are amounts your sup-
pliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices forDonation of inventory.If you contribute inventory (prop-
prompt payments. There are two methods of accountingerty that you sell in the course of your business), the
for cash discounts. You may either credit them to a sepa-amount you can claim as a contribution deduction is the
rate discount account or deduct them from total purchasessmaller of its fair market value on the day you contributed it
for the year. Whichever method you use, you must beor its basis. The basis of donated inventory is any cost
consistent. If you want to change your method of figuringincurred for the inventory in an earlier year that you would
inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application forotherwise include in your opening inventory for the year of
Change in Accounting Method. For more information, seethe contribution. You must remove the amount of your
Change in Accounting Method in chapter 2.contribution deduction from your opening inventory. It is
If you credit cash discounts to a separate account, younot part of the cost of goods sold.
must include this credit balance in your business income atIf the cost of donated inventory is not included in yourthe end of the tax year. If you use this method, do notopening inventory, the inventory’s basis is zero and youreduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.cannot claim a charitable contribution deduction. Treat the
inventory’s cost as you would ordinarily treat it under yourPurchase returns and allowances.You must deduct all
method of accounting. For example, include the purchasereturns and allowances from your total purchases during
price of inventory bought and donated in the same year inthe year.
the cost of goods sold for that year.
Merchandise withdrawn from sale.If you withdraw mer-
Example 1.You are a calendar year taxpayer who useschandise for your personal or family use, you must exclude
an accrual method of accounting. In 2003 you contributedthis cost from the total amount of merchandise you bought
property from inventory to a church. It had a fair marketfor sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac-
value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2002count with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per-
properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition ofsonal use. You should charge the amount to your drawing
the property, and in 2002, you properly deducted $50 ofaccount. 
administrative and other expenses attributable to the prop-A drawing account is a separate account you should
erty as business expenses. The charitable contributionkeep to record the business income you withdraw to pay
allowed for 2003 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is thefor personal and family expenses. As stated above, you
amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold thealso use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-
contributed inventory at fair market value on the date of thesonal or family use. This account is also known as a
gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining gross“withdrawals account” or “personal account.”
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 27

Page 28 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
overhead expenses you have as direct and necessaryLine 37
expenses of the manufacturing operation are included inCost of Labor your cost of goods sold.
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold
Line 40only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer-
chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do notAdd Lines 35 through 39have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop-The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of the
erly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both thegoods available for sale during the year.
direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material
into a finished, saleable product.
Line 41
Direct labor.Direct labor costs are the wages you pay toInventory at End of Year
those employees who spend all their time working directly
on the product being manufactured. They also include aSubtract the value of your closing inventory (including, as
part of the wages you pay to employees who work directlyappropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materials
on the product part time if you can determine that part ofand supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) from
their wages. line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known as
closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory willIndirect labor.Indirect labor costs are the wages you payusually become the beginning inventory of your next taxto employees who perform a general factory function thatyear.does not have any immediate or direct connection with
making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of
Line 42the manufacturing process.
Cost of Goods SoldOther labor.Other labor costs not properly chargeable to
the cost of goods sold may be deducted as selling orWhen you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at theadministrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of laborend of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold arethe remainder is your cost of goods sold during the taxthe direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costsyear.treated as overhead expenses properly charged to the
manufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39
Other Costs.
Line 38 7.Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals,
Figuring Gross Profitused in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process
are treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
business expense when you use them. Business ex-
Introduction
penses are discussed in chapter 8. After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),
Line 39 you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter-
mine gross profit before you can deduct any business
Other Costs
expenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
Examples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing orIf you are filing Schedule C–EZ, your gross profit is yourmining process that you charge to your cost of goods soldgross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained laterare as follows. under Additions to Gross Profit.
Containers.Containers and packages that are an integral
Businesses that sell products.If you are filing Schedulepart of the product manufactured are a part of your cost of
C, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts.goods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-
Figure net receipts on Schedule C by subtracting anytured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.
returns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts (line 1).Freight-in.Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawReturns and allowances include cash or credit refunds youmaterials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-make to customers, rebates, and other allowances off thedise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.actual sales price.
Next, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from netOverhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-
receipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from yourpenses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-
business.ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. The
Page 28 Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit

Page 29 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Businesses that sell services.You do not have to figureInventory at end of year.Check to make sure your pro-
the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not an cedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-
income-producing factor for your business. Your gross dures should ensure all items have been included in
profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receipts inventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.
minus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Most Use inventory forms and adding machine tapes as the
professions and businesses that sell services rather than only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-
products can figure gross profit directly from net receipts in able at office supply stores. These forms have columns for
this way. recording the description, quantity, unit price, and value of
each inventory item. Each page has space to record who
Illustration.This illustration of the gross profit section ofmade the physical count, who priced the items, who made
the income statement of a retail business shows how grossthe extensions, and who proofread the calculations. These
profit is figured. forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record toIncome Statement support its validity.Year Ended December 31, 2003 Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.
Gross receipts............................... $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances................... 14,940
Net receipts................................ $385,060 Testing GrossMinus: Cost of goods sold....................... 288,140
Gross profit................................ $96,920
Profit AccuracyThe cost of goods sold for this business is figured as
follows:
If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can check
Inventory at beginning of year................... $37,845 the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide gross
Plus: Purchases.................... $285,900 profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measuresMinus: Items withdrawn for personal use.... 2,650 283,250
the average spread between the merchandise cost ofGoods available for sale....................... $321,095
Minus: Inventory at end of year.................. 32,955 goods sold and the selling price.
Cost of goods sold.......................... $288,140 Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.
Little or no difference between these two percentages
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
difference between these percentages may show that you
Items To Check did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or
other items of cost. You should determine the reason forConsider the following items before figuring your grossthe difference.profit.
Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he willGross receipts.At the end of each business day, make
realize a gross profit of 33
1/3% on its sales. The net receiptssure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown onreceipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cash
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isregisters to keep track of receipts. You should also use a
$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank account
($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year’sfor your business.
results, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receipts
Sales tax collected.Check to make sure your records($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-
show the correct sales tax collected. centage of 331/3%.
If you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on you
as the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you must
include the amount collected in gross receipts. Additions to Gross Profit
If you are required to collect state and local taxes im-
posed on the buyer and turn them over to state or localIf your business has income from a source other than its
governments, you generally do not include these amountsregular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of
in income. Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross
business income. If you use Schedule C–EZ, include the
Inventory at beginning of year.Compare this figure withincome on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples include
last year’s ending inventory. The two amounts shouldincome from an interest-bearing checking account, income
usually be the same. from scrap sales, and amounts recovered from bad debts.
Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-
sonal use — use them yourself, provide them to your
family, or give them as personal gifts, etc. — be sure to
remove them from the cost of goods sold. For details on
how to adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise with-
drawn from sale in chapter 6.
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 29

Page 30 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts or
notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad
8. debt.
You can take a bad debt deduction for these
accounts and notes receivable only if the amount
Business Expenses
owed you was included in your gross incomeCAUTION
!
either for the year the deduction is claimed or for a prior
year.
Introduction
Accrual method.If you use an accrual method of ac-You can deduct the costs of running your business. These
counting, you normally report income as you earn it. Youcosts are known as business expenses. These are costs
can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of goods
ble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-sold.
come.To be deductible, a business expense must be both
ordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that Cash method. If you use the cash method of account-is common and accepted in your field of business. Aing, you normally report income when you receive pay-necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriatement. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amountsfor your business. An expense does not have to be indis-owed to you that you have not received and cannot collectpensable to be considered necessary. if you never included those amounts in income.For more information about the general rules for deduct-
More information.For more information about businessing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535,
bad debts, see chapter 11 in Publication 535.Business Expenses.
If you have an expense that is partly for businessNonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-
and partly personal, separate the personal partbusiness bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-
from the business part. tal losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For moreCAUTION
!
information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Publication
550, Investment Income and Expenses.Useful Items
You may want to see:
Car and Truck ExpensesPublication
❏ 535 Business Expenses If you use your car or truck in your business, you may be
able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining yourSee chapter 12 for information about getting publica-vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of localtions and forms. transportation and traveling away from home overnight on
business.
You may be entitled to a tax credit for an electricBad Debts
vehicle or a deduction from gross income for a
part of the cost of a clean-fuel vehicle you placeIf someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have
TIP
in service during the year. The vehicle must meet certaina bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts—business
requirements and you do not have to use it in your busi-bad debts and nonbusiness bad debts.
ness to qualify for the credit or the deduction. For moreA business bad debt is generally one that comes from
information, see chapter 12 in Publication 535.    operating your trade or business. You may be able to
deduct business bad debts as an expense on your busi-Local transportation expenses.Local transportation ex-ness tax return. penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all the
following.Business bad debt.A business bad debt is a loss from
the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following.• Getting from one workplace to another in the course
of your business or profession when you are travel-1) Created or acquired in your business. ing within the city or general area that is your tax
2) Closely related to your business when it became home. Tax home is defined later.
partly or totally worthless.
• Visiting clients or customers.
A debt is closely related to your business if your primary• Going to a business meeting away from your regularmotive for incurring the debt is a business reason. workplace.Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to• Getting from your home to a temporary workplace
suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and when you have one or more regular places of work.
services customers have not paid for are shown in your These temporary workplaces can be either within the
books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If area of your tax home or outside that area.
Page 30 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 31 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Local business transportation does not include expenses choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actual
expenses.you have while traveling away from home overnight. Those
expenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis-If you use the standard mileage rate for a car you lease,
you must choose to use it for the entire lease periodcussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment.
(including renewals).However, if you use your car while traveling away from
home overnight, use the rules in this section to figure yourStandard mileage rate not allowed.You cannot usecar expense deduction. the standard mileage rate if you:
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-
1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.
It includes the entire city or general area in which your2) Operate two or more cars at the same time,
business or work is located. 3) Claimed a depreciation deduction using any method
other than straight line, for example, ACRS orExample. You operate a printing business out of rentedMACRS,office space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to
4) Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,your customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip
transportation between your customers and your print5) Claimed the special depreciation allowance on theshop. car,
You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car6) Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, oror truck between your home and your main or
7) Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-regular workplace. These costs are personalCAUTION
!
bursement.commuting expenses.
Office in the home.Your workplace can be your home In 2004, you cannot use the standard mileage
if you have an office in your home that qualifies as yourrate if you operate five (instead of two) or more
cars at the same time.principal place of business. For more information, see
TIP
Business Use of Your Home, later.
Parking fees and tolls.In addition to using the stan-
dard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-relatedExample. You are a graphics designer. You operate
parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park youryour business out of your home. Your home qualifies as
car at your place of work are nondeductible commutingyour principal place of business. You occasionally have to
expenses.)drive to your clients to deliver your completed work. You
can deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be-Actual expenses.If you do not choose to use the stan-tween your home and your clients. dard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actual
car or truck expenses.
Methods for Deducting
If you qualify to use both methods, figure yourCar and Truck Expenses deduction both ways to see which gives you a
larger deduction.
TIP
For local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck,
you generally can use one of the following methods to Actual car expenses include the costs of the following
items.figure your expenses.
Depreciation Lease payments Registration• Standard mileage rate.
Garage rent Licenses Repairs
Gas Oil Tires• Actual expenses.
Insurance Parking fees Tolls
If you use your vehicle for both business and personalStandard mileage rate.You may be able to use the purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi-standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs ofness and personal use. You can divide your expensesoperating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for businessbased on the miles driven for each purpose.purposes. For 2003, the standard mileage rate is 36 cents
a mile for all business miles. Example. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop.
If you choose to use the standard mileage rate forYou drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000
a year, you cannot deduct your actual expensesmiles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000
for that year except for business-related parkingmiles were for personal use. You can claim only 80%CAUTION
!
fees and tolls. (16,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of operating your van as a
business expense.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.If you want to
use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own,More information.For more information about the rules
you must choose to use it in the first year the car isfor claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463,
available for use in your business. In later years, you canTravel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Section 179 deduction.You can choose to deduct aReimbursing Your Employees limited amount of the cost of certain depreciable propertyfor Expenses in the year you place the property in service. This deduc-
tion is known as the “section 179 deduction.” For moreYou generally can deduct the amount you reimburse yourinformation, see Publication 946. It explains what propertyemployees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse-qualifies for the deduction, what limits apply to the deduc-ment you deduct and the manner in which you deduct ittion, and when and how to recapture the deduction.depend in part on whether you reimburse the expenses
under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. ForSpecial depreciation allowance.You may be able todetails, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. That chapterclaim an additional 30% special depreciation allowance forexplains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tellsproperty acquired after September 10, 2001. You may beyou whether to report the reimbursement on your able to claim an additional 50% special depreciation allow-employee’s Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement. ance for property acquired after May 5, 2003. The special
depreciation allowance is an additional deduction you can
take before you figure MACRS depreciation for the year
Depreciation you place the property in service. For more information,
see the Instructions for Form 4562 or Publication 946.
If property you acquire to use in your business is expected
to last more than one year, you generally cannot deductListed property.Listed property is any of the following.
the entire cost as a business expense in the year you
• Most passenger automobiles.acquire it. You must spread the cost over more than one
tax year and deduct part of it each year on Schedule C or• Most other property used for transportation.
C–EZ. This method of deducting the cost of business
• Any property of a type generally used for entertain-property is called depreciation.
ment, recreation, or amusement.The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa-
tion about depreciation in Publication 946, How To Depre- • Certain computer and related peripheral equipment.
ciate Property. • Any cellular telephone (or similar telecommunica-
tions equipment).What property can be depreciated?You can depreciate
property if it meets all the following requirements. You must follow special rules and recordkeeping re-
quirements when depreciating listed property. For more• It must be property you own. information about listed property, see Publication 946.
• It must be used in business or held to produce in-
come. You never can depreciate inventory (ex- Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-
plained in chapter 2) because it is not held for use intion, if you are claiming any of the following.
your business.
• Depreciation on property placed in service during the
• It must have a useful life that extends substantiallycurrent tax year.
beyond the year it is placed in service.
• A section 179 deduction.
• It must have a determinable useful life, which means
• Depreciation on any listed property (regardless ofthat it must be something that wears out, decays,
when it was placed in service).gets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value
from natural causes. You never can depreciate the
cost of land because land does not wear out, be- If you have to use Form 4562, you must file
come obsolete, or get used up. Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C–EZ.
• It must not be excepted property. This includes
CAUTION
!
property placed in service and disposed of in the
same year.
Employees’ Pay
Repairs. You cannot depreciate repairs and replace-
ments that do not increase the value of your property,You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give
make it more useful, or lengthen its useful life. You canyour employees for the services they perform for your
deduct these amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 ofbusiness. The pay may be in cash, property, or services.
Schedule C–EZ. To be deductible, your employees’ pay must be an
ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or
incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet bothDepreciation method.The method for depreciating most
the following tests.business and investment property placed in service after
1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
• The pay must be reasonable.System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-
cation 946. • The pay must be for services performed.
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines these rent or lease expense. If you own the property, include
requirements. your deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179
deduction or a depreciation deduction.You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal
withdrawals you make from your business. As a sole pro- You may be able to exclude all or part of the fringe
prietor, you are not an employee of the business. benefits you provide from your employees’
wages. For more information about fringe bene-
TIP
If you had employees during the year, you mustfits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15–B,use Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.C–EZ.CAUTION
!
Kinds of pay.Some of the ways you may provide pay to
Insuranceyour employees are listed below. For an explanation of
each of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535.
You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-
• Awards. ing kinds of insurance related to your business. 
• Bonuses. 1) Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
• Education expenses. 2) Credit insurance that covers losses from business
• Fringe benefits (discussed later). bad debts.
• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee3) Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-
to repay if they are for personal services actuallyployees, including long-term care insurance.
performed. 4) Liability insurance.
• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for5) Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia-services. bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or
• Reimbursements for employee business expenses. damage to patients or clients.
• Sick pay. 6) Workers’ compensation insurance set by state law
that covers any claims for bodily injuries or job-re-• Vacation pay. lated diseases suffered by employees in your busi-
ness, regardless of fault.Fringe benefits.A fringe benefit is a form of pay pro-
vided to any person for the performance of services by that7) Contributions to a state unemployment insurance
person. The following are examples of fringe benefits.fund are deductible as taxes if they are considered
taxes under state law.• Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs.
8) Overhead insurance that pays for business overhead• Meals and lodging. expenses you have during long periods of disability
• The use of a car. caused by your injury or sickness.
• Flights on airplanes. 9) Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehicles
used in your business for liability, damages, and• Discounts on property or services. other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per-
• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.sonal use, deduct only the part of the insurance
premium that applies to the business use of the vehi-• Tickets to entertainment or sporting events. cle. If you use the standard mileage rate to figure
your car expenses, you cannot deduct any car insur-Employee benefit programs include the following. ance premiums.
• Accident and health plans. 10) Life insurance covering your employees if you are
• Adoption assistance. not directly or indirectly the beneficiary under the
contract.• Cafeteria plans.
11) Business interruption insurance that pays for lost• Dependent care assistance. profits if your business is shut down due to a fire or
• Educational assistance. other cause.
• Group-term life insurance coverage.
Nondeductible premiums.You cannot deduct premiums
• Welfare benefit funds. on the following kinds of insurance.
You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you 1) Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct
provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost amounts credited to a reserve set up for self-insur-
falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car or ance. This applies even if you cannot get business
other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as a insurance coverage for certain business risks. How-
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ever, your actual losses may be deductible. For moreExample. In 2003, you signed a 3-year insurance con-
tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2003, 2004,information, see Publication 547 ,Casualties, Disas-
and 2005 when you signed the contract, you can onlyters, and Thefts.
deduct the premium for 2003 on your 2003 tax return. You2) Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for acan deduct in 2004 and 2005 the premium allocable topolicy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick-those years.ness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ-
ous list. More information.For more information about deducting
insurance, see chapter 7 in Publication 535.3) Certain life insurance and annuities.
a) For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insuranceInterestpolicy covering you, an employee, or any person
with a financial interest in your business if you areYou can generally deduct as a business expense all inter-
directly or indirectly a beneficiary of the policy.est you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts related
You are included among possible beneficiaries ofto your business. Interest relates to your business if you
the policy if the policy owner is obligated to repayuse the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. It
a loan from you using the proceeds of the policy.does not matter what type of property secures the loan.
A person has a financial interest in your businessYou can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of the
if the person is an owner or part owner of thefollowing requirements.
business or has lent money to the business.
• You are legally liable for that debt.
b) For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen-
• Both you and the lender intend that the debt beerally cannot deduct the premiums on any life
repaid.insurance policy, endowment contract, or annuity
contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-• You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-
ciary. The disallowance applies without regard totionship.
whom the policy covers.
You cannot deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ the interest
4) Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policyyou paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business and
on your life or on the life of another person with apart personal, you must divide the interest between the
financial interest in your business to get or protect apersonal part and the business part.
business loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as a
business expense. Nor can you deduct the premi- Example. In 2003, you paid $600 interest on a car loan.
ums as interest on business loans or as an expenseDuring 2003, you used the car 60% for business and 40%
of financing loans. In the event of death, the pro-for personal purposes. You are claiming actual expenses
ceeds of the policy are not taxed as income even ifon the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% × $600) for
they are used to liquidate the debt. 2003 on Schedule C or C–EZ. The remaining interest of
$240 is a nondeductible personal expense.
Self-employed health insurance deduction.You may More information.For more information about deductingbe able to deduct 100% of the amount you paid for medicalinterest, see chapter 5 in Publication 535. That chapterand dental insurance and qualified long-term care insur-explains the following items.ance for you and your family.
• Interest you can deduct.How to figure the deduction.Generally, you can use
• Interest you cannot deduct.the worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure your
deduction. However, if any of the following apply, you must• How to allocate interest between personal and busi-use the worksheet in chapter 7 of Publication 535. ness use.
• You have more than one source of income subject to• When to deduct interest.
self-employment tax.
• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (This
• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555–EZ (relating to is a loan on which no interest is charged or on which
foreign earned income). interest is charged at a rate below the applicable
federal rate.)• You are using amounts paid for qualified long-term
care insurance to figure the deduction.
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,Legal and Professional Fees
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to any
expense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create anLegal and professional fees, such as fees charged by
asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond theaccountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses
end of the current tax year. directly related to operating your business are deductible
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on Schedule C or C–EZ. However, you usually cannot
deduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. AddRent Expense
them to the basis of the property.
Rent is any amount you pay for the use of property you doIf the fees include payments for work of a personalnot own. In general, you can deduct rent as a businessnature (such as making a will), you can take a businessexpense only if the rent is for property you use in yourdeduction only for the part of the fee related to yourbusiness. If you have or will receive equity in or title to thebusiness. The personal part of legal fees for producing orproperty, you cannot deduct the rent.collecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or for
tax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) ifUnreasonable rent.You cannot take a rental deduction
you itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi-for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-
cation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. bleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Rent
paid to a related person is reasonable if it is the sameTax preparation fees.You can deduct on Schedule Camount you would pay to a stranger for use of the sameor C–EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax returnproperty. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-relating to your business as a sole proprietor or statutoryured as a percentage of gross receipts.employee. You can deduct the remaining cost on ScheduleRelated persons include members of your immediate
A (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
You can also deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ the half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
a list of the other related persons, see Publication 538,amount you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficien-
Accounting Periods and Methods.cies for your business as a sole proprietor or statutory
employee. Rent on your home.If you rent your home and use part of
it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct the
rent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirements
for business use of your home. For more information, see
Pension Plans
Business Use of Your Home, later.
You can set up and maintain the following small business
Rent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid in your busi-retirement plans for yourself and your employees.
ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you pay
rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount that• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans.
applies to your use of the rented property during the tax• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only overees) plans. the period to which it applies.
• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans).More information.For more information about rent, see
chapter 4 in Publication 535.SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. You
can deduct contributions you make to the plan for your
Taxesemployees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a sole
proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to the
You can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ various federal,plan for yourself on line 30 of Form 1040. You can also
state, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to yourdeduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the plan do notbusiness.cover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally tax
free until you or your employees receive distributions fromIncome taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ a
the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax credit of 50%state tax on gross income (as distinguished from net
of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs if you begin aincome) directly attributable to your business. You can
new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plandeduct other state and local income taxes on Schedule A
(including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deduct
ployee pension. federal income tax.
Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-Employment taxes. You can deduct the social security,ute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. TheseMedicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes youamounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax freepaid out of your own funds as an employer. Employmentuntil your employees receive distributions from the plan.taxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can also
For more information on retirement plans for small busi-deduct payments you made as an employer to a state
ness, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Smallunemployment compensation fund or to a state disability
Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans). benefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes.
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-Self-employment tax.You can deduct one-half of your
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored waysself-employment tax on line 28 of Form 1040. Self-employ-
to save for retirement.
TIP
ment tax is explained in chapter 1.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Personal property tax.You can deduct on Schedule C or more information, see Publication 378, Fuel Tax Credits
C–EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government onand Refunds.
personal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use
property within a state or local area.
Travel, Meals,
Example. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000and Entertainmentbusiness miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had to
pay $25 for their annual state license tags and $20 for theirThis section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-city registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city per-tainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C orsonal property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They areC–EZ.claiming their actual car expenses. Because they used the
car 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, orTravel expenses.These are the ordinary and necessary$196, as a business expense. expenses of traveling away from home for your business.
You are traveling away from home if both the followingReal estate taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or conditions are met.C–EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business
property. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
1) Your duties require you to be away from the generalor foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general public
area of your tax home (defined later) substantiallywelfare. The taxing authority must base the taxes on the
longer than an ordinary day’s work.assessed value of the real estate and charge them uni-
formly against all property under its jurisdiction.2) You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demands
For more information about real estate taxes, see chap-of your work while away from home.
ter 6 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rules
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-for deducting the following items.
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.
• Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks,It includes the entire city or general area in which your
streets, water mains, and sewer lines. business is located. See Publication 463 for more
information.• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell property
during the year. The following is a brief summary of the expenses you
can deduct.
• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method of
accounting and choose to accrue real estate taxTransportation.You can deduct the cost of travel by
related to a definite period ratably over that period.airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
business destination.
Sales tax.Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or onTaxi, commuter bus, and limousine.You can deduct
the purchase or use of property as part of the cost of thefares for these and other types of transportation between
service or property. If the service or the cost or use of thethe airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotel
property is a deductible business expense, you can deductand your work location away from home.
the tax as part of that service or cost. If the property is
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost ofmerchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of the
sending baggage and sample or display material betweencost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, add
your regular and temporary work locations.the sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For information
on the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis of Car or truck.You can deduct the costs of operating and
Assets. maintaining your vehicle when traveling away from home
on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan-Do not deduct state and local sales taxes im-
dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and Truckposed on the buyer that you must collect and pay
Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. Ifover to the state or local government. Do not
CAUTION
!
you rent a car while away from home on business, you caninclude these taxes in gross receipts or sales.
deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
Meals and lodging.You can deduct the cost of mealsExcise taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ all
and lodging if your business trip is overnight or longexcise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses of
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properlycarrying on your business. Excise taxes are discussed
perform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct onlybriefly in chapter 1.
50% of your meal expenses.
Fuel taxes.Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and otherCleaning.You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning andmotor fuels you use in your business are usually includedlaundry while on your business trip.as part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as
a separate item. Telephone. You can deduct the cost of business calls
You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federal while on your business trip, including business communi-
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. For cation by fax machine or other communication devices.
Page 36 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8–1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details about
these rules, see Publication 463.)
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client,
customer, or employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the
associated test.
Definitions
• Entertainmentincludes any activity generally considered to provide
entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a
customer or client.
• An ordinaryexpense is one that is common and accepted in your field of
business, trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not
necessarily required, for your business.
Directly-related testTests to be met
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or 
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
1) You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment
period, and
2) You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other
specific business benefit.
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion.
Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you
are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the
circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment
expenses.
Tips.You can deduct the tips you pay for any expense deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse the
in this list. expenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable
plan. For details, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. ThatMore information.For more information about travelchapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plansexpenses, see Publication 463, Travel, Entertainment,and tells you whether to report the reimbursement on yourGift, and Car Expenses. employee’s Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement.
Entertainment expenses.You may be able to deduct
business-related entertainment expenses for entertaining
a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you can
Business Use
deduct only 50% of these expenses.
of Your HomeThe following are examples of entertainment expenses.
To deduct expenses related to the part of your home used• Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs, the-
for business, you must meet specific requirements. Evenaters, or sporting events.
then, your deduction may be limited.• Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to business
To qualify to claim expenses for business use of yourcustomers or their families.
home, you must meet the following tests.
To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listed
in Table 8–1. For details about these rules, see Publica-1) Your use of the business part of your home must be:
tion 463.
a) Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive
Reimbursing your employees for expenses.You gen- use, later),
erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-b) Regular,ees for travel and entertainment expenses. The
reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which you c) For your business, AND
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) The business part of your home must be one of the qualify as your principal place of business based on the
following: previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-
ness based on the following factors.
a) Your principal place of business (defined later),
• The relative importance of the activities performed at
b) A place where you meet or deal with patients, each location.
clients, or customers in the normal course of your
• If the relative importance factor does not determinebusiness, or
your principal place of business, you can also con-
c) A separate structure (not attached to your home)sider the time spent at each location.
you use in connection with your business.
If, after considering your business locations, your home
cannot be identified as your principal place of business,Exclusive use.To qualify under the exclusive use test,
you cannot deduct home office expenses. However, foryou must use a specific area of your home only for your
other ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, seetrade or business. The area used for business can be a
Publication 587.room or other separately identifiable space. The space
does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition.Deduction limit.If your gross income from the businessYou do not meet the requirements of the exclusive useuse of your home equals or exceeds your total businesstest if you use the area in question both for business andexpenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all yourfor personal purposes. business expenses related to the use of your home. If your
gross income from the business use is less than your totalExample. You are an attorney and use a den in yourbusiness expenses, your deduction for certain expenseshome to write legal briefs and prepare clients’ tax returns.for the business use of your home is limited.Your family also uses the den for recreation. The den is notYour deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot claim a such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-business deduction for its use. ation taken last), allocable to the business is limited to the
Exceptions to exclusive use.You do not have to meetgross income from the business use of your home minus
the exclusive use test if you use part of your home in eitherthe sum of the following.
of the following ways.
1) The business part of expenses you could deduct
1) For the storage of inventory or product samples. even if you did not use your home for business (such
as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualty2) As a daycare facility. and theft losses that are allowable as itemized de-
For an explanation of these exceptions, see Publicationductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)).
587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by Day-2) The business expenses that relate to the businesscare Providers). activity in the home (for example, business phone,
Regular use.To qualify under the regular use test, yousupplies, and depreciation on equipment), but not to
must use a specific area of your home for business on athe use of the home itself.
continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your businessDo not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half ofuse of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if youyour self-employment tax.do not use that area for any other purpose. Use Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Your
Home, to figure your deduction. Principal place of business.You can have more than
one business location, including your home, for a single
More information.For more information on deductingtrade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses for
expenses for the business use of your home, see Publica-the business use of your home under the principal place of
tion 587.business test, your home must be your principal place of
business for that business. To determine your principal
place of business, you must consider all the facts and
circumstances.
Other Expenses
Your home office will qualify as your principal place of
business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet theYou Can Deduct
following requirements.
You may also be able to deduct the following expenses.• You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deducttive or management activities of your business.them.
• You have no other fixed location where you conduct• Advertising.substantial administrative or management activities
• Clean-fuel vehicles and refueling property.of your business.
• Donations to business organizations.Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and regu-
• Education expenses.larly for your business, but your home office does not
Page 38 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Environmental cleanup costs. You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-
ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,• Impairment-related expenses. the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-
• Interview expense allowances. come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are more
than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually• Licenses and regulatory fees. can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.
• Moving machinery. But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter
briefly explains two of those situations. Other situations• Outplacement services. that may limit your loss are explained in the instructions for
• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance orline G and line 32 of Schedule C.
nonperformance of a contract. If you have more than one business, you must
• Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficientfigure your net profit or loss for each business on
operating condition. a separate Schedule C.CAUTION
!
• Repayments of income.
• Subscriptions to trade or professional publications.
Net Operating Losses (NOLs)• Supplies and materials.
If your deductions for the year are more than your income• Utilities.
for the year (line 38 of your Form 1040 is a negative
number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You
can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
another year or years.
Expenses You Cannot Deduct Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOL
include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from theYou usually cannot deduct the following as business ex-following.penses. For more information, see Publication 535.
• Your trade or business.
• Bribes and kickbacks. • Your work as an employee (unreimbursed employee
business expenses).• Charitable contributions
• A casualty or theft.• Demolition expenses or losses.
• Moving expenses.• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport-
ing, airline, and hotel clubs.
• Rental property.
• Lobbying expenses.
A loss from operating a business is the most common• Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental reason for an NOL.agency or instrumentality because you broke the For details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper-law. ating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It
explains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claim• Political contributions.
an NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.• Repairs that add to the value of your property or
significantly increase its life.
Not-for-Profit Activities
If you do not carry on your business to make a profit, there
is a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use a
loss from the activity to offset other income. Activities you9. do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, come
under this limit.
For details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1
in Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex-Figuring Net Profit plains how to determine whether your activity is carried on
to make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss youor Loss can deduct.
Introduction
After figuring your business income and expenses, you are
ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.
Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or LossPage 39

Page 40 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part I—Income and
Part III—Cost of Goods Sold10.
Susan enters items of income in Part I.
Line 1.Susan enters her total sales of $410,000 for theSample Returns
year.
This chapter shows how two sole proprietors fill out theirLine 2.She enters the refunds she gave on merchandiseincome tax returns. Susan J. Brown reports her net profither customers returned, as well as other adjustments shefrom her business on Schedule C. She cannot use Sched-made to customers’ purchases. They total $1,442.ule C–EZ. Stanley Price reports his net profit from his
Line 4.Susan uses Part III on page 2 of Schedule C tobusiness on Schedule C–EZ.
figure her cost of goods sold.
Part III, line 35.Her inventory at the beginning of the
year, $42,843, is the same as her inventory at the end ofPreparing the Return
last year. This figure matches the amount on Part III, line
for Susan J. Brown 41, of her last year’s Schedule C.
Part III, line 36.The total cost of goods she bought toSusan J. Brown owns and operates Family Fashions, a
sell to customers, minus the cost of the goods she returnedready-to-wear clothing shop. She uses an accrual method
to her suppliers, was $241,026. From this stock, she with-of accounting and files her return on a calendar year basis.
drew clothing and accessories for her own use that costFive employees worked in her shop during the year.$774. She subtracts the cost of these items from her totalShe filed all the necessary employment tax forms andpurchases to figure net purchases of $240,252.made the required tax deposits. See Publication 15, Circu-
lar E, Employer’s Tax Guide. Part III, line 40.She adds her net purchases to her
beginning inventory. This sum is the total goods Susan had
available for sale during the year.
Schedule C
Part III, line 41.Susan’s inventory at the end of the yearFirst, Susan fills in the information required at the top ofwas $43,746.Schedule C. She starts by entering her name and social
Part III, line 42.Susan subtracts her inventory at thesecurity number. Then she completes lines A through H.
end of the year (line 41) from the goods that were available
for sale (line 40) to get the cost of goods sold during theLine A.She enters her principal business.
year. For more information on inventories, see chapter 2.
For more information on cost of goods sold, see chapter 6.Line B.She enters 448140, which is the 6-digit business
code for a family clothing shop. She found the code onLine 5.Susan’s gross profit, $169,209, is the differencepage C–9 of the instructions for Schedule C. Susan lo-between her net sales (line 3) and the cost of goods soldcates the major business category that describes her busi-(line 4).ness. She reads down the items under “Retail Trade” to
find 448140—“Family clothing stores.” Line 7.Because Susan did not have any income to report
on line 6, the gross income is the same as the gross profit
Line C.She enters the name of her business—“Family(line 5).
Fashions.”
Part II—ExpensesLine D. She enters her employer identification number
(EIN). She has to have an EIN because she has employ-Susan enters her expense items in Part II.ees. For information about EINs, see Identification Num-
bers in chapter 1. Line 8.Susan paid $3,500 for ads.
Line 9.She used her van 75% for business during theLine E.She enters her business address.
year. She spent a total of $3,000 for gas and oil. She can
deduct 75% of $3,000 or $2,250 for gas and oil. Other vanLine F.She checks box 2 for accrual method of account-
expenses include $713 (75% of $950) for insurance, $812ing.
(75% of $1,083) for repairs and upkeep, and $75 (75% of
$100) for tags. She enters the total, $3,850, on line 9. SeeLine G.Susan checks “Yes” because she materially par-
Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.ticipated in her business during the year. The material
participation rules are explained in the instructions forLine 13.Susan enters the $4,277 depreciation from FormSchedule C. 4562, discussed later.
Line H.She leaves the box blank because she did notLine 15.Susan’s $238 deduction is for insurance on her
start or acquire her business during the year. business property (van insurance is included in line 9). The
Page 40 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 41 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduction is only for premiums that give her coverage forLines 1 through 13.On May 19, Susan bought a $200
the year. See Insurance in chapter 8. adding machine and placed it in service on that same day.
She chooses to deduct its cost as a section 179 deduction.Line 16b.Susan had borrowed money to use in her busi-She enters $200 on line 2 and $100,000 on line 5. In line 6,ness. The interest on these loans was $2,633 for the year.she writes in “adding machine” in column a, $200 in col-See Interest in chapter 8. umn b, and $200 in column c. She writes in $200 on lines 8
and 9. She must make a computation for line 11. Since sheLine 18.The $216 Susan paid for postage during the year
has no other business income, she can add the $200 takenis her only office expense.
as a section 179 deduction to the net profit shown in line 31Line 20b.Her rent for the store was $1,000 a month, orof Schedule C ($63,424) to arrive at total business income$12,000 for the year. See Rent Expense in chapter 8. of $63,624. Since this amount is less than the amount
shown on line 5, she enters $63,624 on line 11. SeeLine 21.She had her store counters refinished and other
Depreciation in chapter 8.painting done at a total cost of $964.
Line 22.She spent $1,203 on supplies. Line 14.Susan elects to not take either of the special
depreciation allowances. She attaches a statement statingLine 23.Susan renewed her business license and paid
she is electing not to take the special depreciation al-property tax on her store fixtures. She also paid the
lowances for any of the 5-year property purchased in 2003employer’s share of social security and Medicare taxes for
(van, adding machine, and clothing racks). She leaves thisher employees and paid state and federal unemployment
line blank.taxes. She enters the total of all these taxes, $5,727, on
this line. See Taxes in chapter 8. Line 16.Susan enters $1,117 for depreciation on assets
she purchased before 1987. For items bought after 1980Line 25.Susan’s total expense for heat, light, and tele-
and before 1987, she uses the regular Accelerated Costphone for the year is $3,570.
Recovery System (ACRS) percentages. For items boughtLine 26.Susan paid her employees a total of $59,050 forbefore 1981, she uses the straight-line method. See Publi-the year. She does not include in wages any amounts shecation 534, Depreciating Property Placed in Servicepaid to herself or withdrew from the business for her ownBefore 1987, for information about ACRS.use. See Employees’ Pay in chapter 8.
Line 19b.On May 19, Susan also bought and placed inLine 27.Susan enters the total of her other business
service some used clothing racks. They cost $800. Sheexpenses on this line. These expenses are not included on
uses the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Systemlines 8–26. She lists the type and amount of the expenses
(MACRS) to figure depreciation. The racks are 5-yearseparately in Part V of page 2, and carries the total entered
property. Susan figures depreciation using the half-yearon line 48 to line 27. See chapter 8 for expenses you can or
convention and the 200% declining balance method. Shecannot deduct.
uses Table A-1 in Publication 946 to determine the per-
Line 28.Susan adds all her deductions listed in Part II andcentage she is allowed to take for the first year (20%). She
enters the total on this line. multiplies $800 times .20 to arrive at $160. She enters this
amount in column (g) of line 19(b). See Publication 946 forLine 29.She subtracts her total deductions (line 28) frominformation about MACRS.her gross income (line 7). Susan has a tentative profit of
$63,424. Line 21.Susan enters the depreciation on listed property
from line 28 (explained next).Line 30.Susan did not use any part of her home for
business, so she does not make an entry here. For infor-
Lines 26 and 28.On March 20, Susan bought a used vanmation about business use of the home, see Business Use
that she placed in service in her business. The van weighsof Your Home in chapter 8.
over 6,000 pounds; therefore, it is not a passenger auto-
Line 31.Susan has a net profit of $63,424 ( line 29 minusmobile for the special deduction limits. The van is 5-year
line 30). She enters her net profit here, on line 12 of Formproperty. She figures depreciation using the 200% declin-
1040, and on line 2, Section A, of Schedule SE (Forming balance method and applying the half-year convention
1040). under MACRS. The van cost $18,667. Her basis for depre-
ciation is 75% of $18,667, or $14,000, because only 75%Line 32.Susan does not have a loss, so she skips thisof the total miles she drove during the year were businessline. If she had a loss and she was not “at risk” for all hermiles. Susan does not choose to deduct any part of theinvestment in the business, the amount of loss she couldcost of the van as a section 179 deduction. She uses Tableenter on line 12 of Form 1040 might be limited. For anA-1 in Publication 946 to determine the percentage she isexplanation of an investment “at risk,” see the Schedule Callowed to take for the first year (20%). She multipliesinstructions for line 32. $14,000 times .20 to arrive at $2,800. She enters this
amount in column (h) of line 26. Since she has no otherForm 4562—Depreciation listed property, she enters $2,800 on line 28.
and Amortization
Lines 30 through 36.Because Susan is a sole proprietor,
Susan figures her depreciation for the year on Form 4562. she must complete lines 30 through 36.
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 41

Page 42 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 22.Susan has a total depreciation deduction ofLine 30.Susan enters her simplified employee pension
$4,277. She enters her deduction here and on line 13 of (SEP) deduction of $2,264. She figures her deduction by
Schedule C. using Publication 560.
Line 33.Susan adds the amounts on lines 23 through 32a
Schedule SE—Self-Employment Tax and enters the total, $9,145.
After Susan prepares Schedule C, she fills out ScheduleLine 34.Susan subtracts the amount on line 33 from the
SE. She starts by entering her name and social security amount on line 22 to arrive at her adjusted gross income,
number at the top of the schedule. Then she reads the $55,067. She also enters this amount on line 35.
chart on page 1 of the schedule, which tells her she canLine 37.She enters $4,750. This is the standard deduc-use Section A—Short Schedule SE to figure her self-em-tion for a single filer.ployment tax. She fills out the following lines in Section A.
Line 38.Susan subtracts line 37 from line 35 to getLines 2 and 3.She enters $63,424. This is her net profit$50,317.from line 31 of Schedule C.
Line 39.She multiplies $3,050 by the number of exemp-Line 4.She multiplies $63,424 by 92.35% (.9235) to gettions claimed on line 6d to get her total exemptions,her net earnings from self-employment ($58,572). This is$3,050.her net profit subject to self-employment tax.
Line 40.Susan subtracts line 39 from line 38 to get herLine 5. Because the amount on line 4 is less than taxable income, $47,267.$87,000, Susan multiplies the amount on line 4 ($58,572)
Line 41.Susan uses the Tax Table in the Form 1040by 15.3% (.153) to get her self-employment tax of $8,962.
instructions to figure her income tax. In the Tax Table sheShe enters that amount here and on line 55 of Form 1040.
looks for the income bracket that includes $47,267. SheLine 6.She multiplies the amount on line 5 by 50% (.5) tofinds the bracket for incomes of at least $47,250 but lessget her deduction for one-half of self-employment tax ofthan $47,300 and sees that the tax for a person filing as$4,481. She enters that amount here and on line 28 ofsingle is $8,629. She enters this amount here.Form 1040.
Lines 42 and 43.Because she does not owe alternative
minimum tax, she skips line 42 and enters $8,629 on line
Form 1040 43.
Susan fills out Form 1040 as follows: Lines 53 and 54.Because Susan does not have any of
the credits listed on lines 44 through 52, she enters -0- onName, address, and social security number.Susan line 53 and $8,629 on line 54.enters her name, home address, and social security num-
ber. Line 55.She enters $8,962 from line 5 in Section A of
Schedule SE.Presidential election campaign fund.Susan chooses to
have $3 go to this fund. She checks the box under “Yes.”Line 60.Susan adds the amounts on lines 54 through 59
and enters the total, $17,591.Line 1.Susan checks the box on this line because she is
filing as single. Line 62.She enters $17,000 of estimated tax payments
she made for the year.Lines 6a and 6d.Susan claims an exemption for herself.
She checks the box next to “Yourself” and enters “1” in theLine 68.She enters $17,000.
far right-hand entry space. She also enters “1” in the boxLine 72.Susan subtracts line 68 from line 60 to get theon line 6d. amount of tax she owes, $591. She writes a check payable
to the United States Treasury for $591. On the check sheLine 8a.Susan enters $788 of taxable interest credited to
writes her social security number, her daytime telephoneher personal savings account for the year.
number, and “2003 Form 1040.” Her name and addressLine 12.She enters her business net profit of $63,424are printed on the check. She sends her payment withfrom line 31 of Schedule C. Form 1040–V, Payment Voucher (not illustrated). She fills
out that form and sends it to the IRS with her check and taxLine 22.Susan adds the amounts on lines 7 through 21return. and enters the total, $64,212.
Signing and assembling the return.She signs herLine 28.Susan enters one-half of her self-employmentname and enters the date signed, her occupation, and atax. She got this amount from line 6 in Section A ofdaytime telephone number. Since she does not want toSchedule SE. designate a third party to discuss her return with the IRS,
Line 29.Susan enters $2,400 as her deduction for her she checks the “No” block in the Third Party Designee area
health insurance. This is 100% of her health insurance just above the signature area. She assembles her original
premiums for the year. He health insurance plan was Form 1040, Schedules C and SE, and Form 4562 in that
established under her business. order. (See “Attachment Sequence No.” in the upper right
Page 42 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 43 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
corner of each schedule or form.) Then she makes a copy
of the return for her records. Finally, she mails it to the IRS.
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 43

Page 44 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SUSAN J. BROWN
1313 EMPIRE BLVD
ANYTOWN, NY 18725
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
1
788 00
63,424
64,212
4,481
2,400
2,264
9,145
55,067
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
Department of the Treasury—Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1–Dec. 31, 2003, or other tax year beginning , 2003, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 19.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 19. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 19.
Presidential
Election Campaign
1 Single
Filing Status Married filing jointly (even if only one had income)2
Check only
one box.
3
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child. (See page 20.)
6a Yourself. If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent on his or her tax
return, do not check box 6aExemptions
Spouseb
(4) if qualifying
child for child tax
credit (see page 21)
Dependents:c (2) Dependent’s
social security number
(3) Dependent’s
relationship to
you(1) First name Last name
If more than five
dependents,
see page 21.
d Total number of exemptions claimed
7Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Attach Form(s) W-27
8a8a Taxable interest. Attach Schedule B if requiredIncome
8bb Tax-exempt interest. Do not include on line 8aAttach 
Forms W-2 and
W-2G here.
Also attach
Form(s) 1099-R
if tax was
withheld.
9a9a Ordinary dividends. Attach Schedule B if required
1010 Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes (see page 23)
1111 Alimony received
1212 Business income or (loss). Attach Schedule C or C-EZ
Enclose, but do
not attach, any
payment. Also,
please use
Form 1040-V.
13a
13a Capital gain or (loss). Attach Schedule D if required. If not required, check here /H17075
1414 Other gains or (losses). Attach Form 4797
15a 15bIRA distributions b Taxable amount (see page 25)15a
16b16aPensions and annuities b Taxable amount (see page 25)16a
1717 Rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Attach Schedule E
1818 Farm income or (loss). Attach Schedule F
1919 Unemployment compensation
20b20a b Taxable amount (see page 27)20a Social security benefits
2121
22 Add the amounts in the far right column for lines 7 through 21. This is your total income /H1707522
24IRA deduction (see page 29)
23
26
25
One-half of self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
27
Self-employed health insurance deduction (see page 33)
26
28
27
Self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans
29
28
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings
30
29
Alimony paid  b Recipient’s SSN /H17075
33Add lines 23 through 32a
30
Subtract line 33 from line 22. This is your adjusted gross income /H17075
31
Adjusted
Gross
Income
34
If you did not
get a W-2,
see page 22. Form
Married filing separately. Enter spouse’s SSN above
and full name here. /H17075
Cat. No. 11320B
/H17075
/H20854
Label
Form 1040 (2003)
IRS Use Only—Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 20.) If
the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent, enter
this child’s name here. 
/H17075
Other income. List type and amount (see page 27)
Moving expenses. Attach Form 3903
24
25
For Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 77.
No. of boxes
checked on
6a and 6b
No. of children
on 6c who:
Dependents on 6c
not entered above
Add numbers
on lines
above
/H17075
● lived with you
● did not live with
you due to divorce
or separation
(see page 21)
32a 32a
Student loan interest deduction (see page 31)
31
33
/H17073/H17073Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
(See page 19.)
(99)
Tuition and fees deduction (see page 32)
34
4
5
23Educator expenses (see page 29)
2003
9bb Qualified dividends (see page 23)
13bb If box on 13a is checked, enter post-May 5 capital gain distributions
1
Page 44 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 45 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
55,067 00
4,750
50,317
3,050
47,267
8,629
- 0 -
8,629
8,962
17,591
17,000
17,000
591
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
3/27/04 Retail shop owner
Susan J. Brown
8,629 00
555 735-0001
Itemized deductions (from Schedule A) or your standard deduction (see left margin)
Add lines 61 through 67. These are your total payments /H17075
Page 2Form 1040 (2003)
Amount from line 34 (adjusted gross income)35 35
Check
if:
36aTax and
Credits 36a
Single or
Married filing
separately,
$4,750
If you are married filing separately and your spouse itemizes deductions, or
you were a dual-status alien, see page 34 and check here /H17075
b
36b
37 37
38Subtract line 37 from line 3538
39
If line 35 is $104,625 or less, multiply $3,050 by the total number of exemptions claimed on
line 6d. If line 35 is over $104,625, see the worksheet on page 35
39
40Taxable income. Subtract line 39 from line 38. If line 39 is more than line 38, enter -0-40
41 41
45
46
51
Education credits. Attach Form 8863
44
49
Other credits. Check applicable box(es):
48
53
54
Add lines 44 through 52. These are your total credits
48
Subtract line 53 from line 43. If line 53 is more than line 43, enter -0- /H17075
53
Self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
54
Other
Taxes
55
69
Social security and Medicare tax on tip income not reported to employer. Attach Form 4137
57Tax on qualified plans, including IRAs, and other tax-favored accounts. Attach Form 5329 if required
56
58
Add lines 54 through 59. This is your total tax /H17075
59 59
Federal income tax withheld from Forms W-2 and 109961 61
622003 estimated tax payments and amount applied from 2002 return62
Payments
63
66Amount paid with request for extension to file (see page 56)
65
64Excess social security and tier 1 RRTA tax withheld (see page 56)
66
68
Other payments from:67
70a70a
71 71
If line 68 is more than line 60, subtract line 60 from line 68. This is the amount you overpaid
72 72
Amount of line 69 you want refunded to you /H17075
Refund
73
Amount of line 69 you want applied to your 2004 estimated tax /H17075
Estimated tax penalty (see page 58)
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
73
You were born before January 2, 1939, Blind.
Spouse was born before January 2, 1939, Blind.
a Form 3800
b Form 8801 c Specify
a Form 2439 b Form 4136
57
Household employment taxes. Attach Schedule H
58
67
Amount
You Owe
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
Tax (see page 36). Check if any tax is from:
Amount you owe. Subtract line 68 from line 60. For details on how to pay, see page 57 /H17075
b
Direct deposit?
See page 56
and fill in 70b,
70c, and 70d.
Routing number
Account number
c Checking Savings
a Form(s) 8814 Form 4972
b
d
/H17075
/H17075
68
47
44
Retirement savings contributions credit. Attach Form 8880
55
56
Advance earned income credit payments from Form(s) W-2
69
/H17075
Child tax credit (see page 40)
Credits from:
47
51
49
Additional child tax credit. Attach Form 8812
64
65
Head of
household,
$7,000
Married filing
jointly or
Qualifying
widow(er),
$9,500
Standard
Deduction
for—
Joint return?
See page 20.
Daytime phone number
()
Earned income credit (EIC)
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Attach Schedule R
42
43
45
Alternative minimum tax (see page 38). Attach Form 6251
Add lines 41 and 42 /H17075
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Attach Form 2441
46
If you have a
qualifying
child, attach
Schedule EIC.
42
43
63
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2003)
● People who
checked any
box on line
36a or 36b or
who can be
claimed as a
dependent,
see page 34.
● All others:
Designee’s
name /H17075
Do you want to allow another person to discuss this return with the IRS (see page 58)?Third Party
Designee Phone
no. /H17075()
Yes. Complete the following. No
Personal identification
number (PIN) /H17075
52
Foreign tax credit. Attach Form 1116 if required
52
a Form 8396 b Form 8859
5050 Adoption credit. Attach Form 8839
60 60
Type:
c Form 8885
Total boxes
checked /H17075/H20853/H20854
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 45

Page 46 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
8140
1012345 67
Susan J. Brown
Retail Trade, Family Clothing Store
Family Fashions
725 Big Sur Drive
Anytown, NY 18725
410,000
1,442
408,558
239,349
169,209
169,209
00
00
00
00
00
00
3,500
3,850
4,277
238
2,633
216
00
00
00
00
00
00
12,000
964
1,203
5,727
3,570
59,050
8,557
105,785
63,424
63,424
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
44
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE C
(Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business
(Sole Proprietorship)
/H17075Partnerships, joint ventures, etc., must file Form 1065 or 1065-B.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 09/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or 1041. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule C (Form 1040).
Name of proprietor Social security number (SSN)
A Principal business or profession, including product or service (see page C-2 of the instructions) B Enter code from pages C-7, 8, & 9
/H17075
D Employer ID number (EIN), if anyBusiness name. If no separate business name, leave blank.C
Accounting method:
E
F
Yes NoG
H
Did you “materially participate” in the operation of this business during 2003? If “No,” see page C-3 for limit on losses
If you started or acquired this business during 2003, check here /H17075
Income
Gross receipts or sales. Caution. If this income was reported to you on Form W-2 and the “Statutory
employee” box on that form was checked, see page C-3 and check here /H17075
1
1
22 Returns and allowances
33 Subtract line 2 from line 1
44 Cost of goods sold (from line 42 on page 2)
5Gross profit. Subtract line 4 from line 35
6Other income, including Federal and state gasoline or fuel tax credit or refund (see page C-3)6
7 Gross income. Add lines 5 and 6 /H170757
Expenses. Enter expenses for business use of your home only on line 30.
8
21Repairs and maintenance21
Advertising8
22Supplies (not included in Part III)22
23
9
Taxes and licenses23
10
Travel, meals, and entertainment:24
Car and truck expenses
(see page C-3)
9
24a
11
Travela
Commissions and fees10
12Depletion12
Meals and
entertainment
b
Depreciation and section 179
expense deduction (not included
in Part III) (see page C-4)
13
Enter nondeduct-
ible amount in-
cluded on line 24b
(see page C-5)
c
13
14 Employee benefit programs
(other than on line 19)
24d
14
Subtract line 24c from line 24bd
25
15
Utilities25
Insurance (other than health)15
26Wages (less employment credits)26
Interest:16
16aMortgage (paid to banks, etc.)a
Other expenses (from line 48 on
page 2)
27
16bOtherb
17
Legal and professional
services
17
18Office expense18
19Pension and profit-sharing plans19
Rent or lease (see page C-5):20
20aVehicles, machinery, and equipmenta
b Other business property 20b
Total expenses before expenses for business use of home. Add lines 8 through 27 in columns /H1707528 28
31
31
All investment is at risk.32a
32
Some investment is not
at risk.
32b
Schedule C (Form 1040) 2003For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions.
(1) Cash (2) Accrual (3) Other (specify) /H17075
Business address (including suite or room no.) /H17075
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code
Cat. No. 11334P
29
30
Tentative profit (loss). Subtract line 28 from line 7
Expenses for business use of your home. Attach Form 8829
29
30
/H20854
Part I
Part II
27
Net profit or (loss). Subtract line 30 from line 29.
● If a profit, enter on Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2 (statutory employees,
see page C-6). Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.
● If a loss, you must go to line 32.
If you have a loss, check the box that describes your investment in this activity (see page C-6).
● If you checked 32a, enter the loss on Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2
(statutory employees, see page C-6). Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.
● If you checked 32b, you must attach Form 6198.
/H20854
(99)
2003
Contract labor
(see page C-4)
11
Page 46 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 47 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
42,843
240,252
283,095
43,746
239,349
00
00
00
00
00
180
60
6,000
1,600
238
8,557
00
00
00
00
00
00
Bank service charges
Chamber of Commerce
Free Credit Card Co.
Trash removal
Window washing
479
00
Bad debt
Page 2Schedule C (Form 1040) 2003
Cost of Goods Sold (see page C-6)
35Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last year’s closing inventory, attach explanation
33
36Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal use
34
37Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to yourself
35
38Materials and supplies
36
39Other costs
37
40Add lines 35 through 39
38
41Inventory at end of year
39
Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40. Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4
40
42
Part IV
Part III
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming car or truck expenses on
line 9 and are not required to file Form 4562 for this business. See the instructions for line 13 on page
C-4 to find out if you must file Form 4562.
41
When did you place your vehicle in service for business purposes? (month, day, year) /H17075 .
42
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2003, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
a Business b Commuting c Other
45 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
46 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
47a Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
b If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Yes No
Other Expenses. List below business expenses not included on lines 8–26 or line 30.
48 Total other expenses. Enter here and on page 1, line 27
//
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
48
Part V
Printed on recycled paper
Method(s) used to
value closing inventory: Cost b Other (attach explanation)
Was there any change in determining quantities, costs, or valuations between opening and closing inventory? If
“Yes,” attach explanation
Lower of cost or market ca
NoYes
43
44
Schedule C (Form 1040) 2003
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 47

Page 48 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Susan J. Brown 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
63,424
58,572
8,962
4,481
00
00
00
00
63,424 00
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE SE
Self-Employment Tax(Form 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 17/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Name of person with self-employment income (as shown on Form 1040) Social security number of person
with self-employment income /H17075
Who Must File Schedule SE
You must file Schedule SE if:
● You had net earnings from self-employment from other than church employee income (line 4 of Short Schedule SE or line 4c of
Long Schedule SE) of $400 or more or
Exception. If your only self-employment income was from earnings as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian Science
practitioner and you filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval not to be taxed on those earnings, do not file Schedule SE. Instead,
write “Exempt–Form 4361” on Form 1040, line 55.
Section A—Short Schedule SE. Caution. Read above to see if you can use Short Schedule SE.
Net farm profit or (loss) from Schedule F , line 36, and farm partnerships, Schedule K-1 (Form
1065), line 15a
1
1
Net profit or (loss) from Schedule C, line 31; Schedule C-EZ, line 3; Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),
line 15a (other than farming); and Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 9. Ministers and members
of religious orders, see page SE-1 for amounts to report on this line. See page SE-2 for other
income to report
2
2
3Combine lines 1 and 23
Net earnings from self-employment. Multiply line 3 by 92.35% (.9235). If less than $400,
do not file this schedule; you do not owe self-employment tax /H17075
4
4
5 Self-employment tax. If the amount on line 4 is: 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule SE (Form 1040) 2003
● You had church employee income of $108.28 or more. Income from services you performed as a minister or a member of a
religious order is not church employee income (see page SE-1).
Cat. No. 11358Z
Deduction for one-half of self-employment tax. Multiply line 5 by
50% (.5). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 28
● $87,000 or less, multiply line 4 by 15.3% (.153). Enter the result here and on 
Form 1040, line 55.
● More than $87,000, multiply line 4 by 2.9% (.029). Then, add $10,788.00 to the
result. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 55.
May I Use Short Schedule SE or Must I Use Long Schedule SE?
Did You Receive Wages or Tips in 2003?
Was the total of your wages and tips subject to social security
or railroad retirement tax plus your net earnings from
self-employment more than $87,000?
Did you receive tips subject to social security or Medicare tax
that you did not report to your employer?
Are you using one of the optional methods to figure your net
earnings (see page SE-3)?
Are you a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian
Science practitioner who received IRS approval not to be taxed
on earnings from these sources, but you owe self-employment
tax on other earnings?
Did you receive church employee income reported on Form
W-2 of $108.28 or more?
You May Use Short Schedule SE Below You Must Use Long Schedule SE on page 2
/H17074 /H17074Yes
/H17074YesNo
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
No
No
Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074
/H17074 /H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Note. Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE and
use either “optional method” in Part II of Long Schedule SE (see page SE-3).
6
5
6
/H20854
(99)
2003
Page 48 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 49 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Susan J. Brown Family Fashions 1 1 1 - 00 - 1 1 1 1
200
- 0 -
100,000
200
200
- 0 -
63,624
200
Adding machine 200 200
800 5 HY 200 DB 160
2,800
4,277
1,117
OMB No. 1545-0172Depreciation and Amortization4562Form
(Including Information on Listed Property)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 67/H17075See separate instructions.
Identifying numberName(s) shown on return Business or activity to which this form relates
Election To Expense Certain Property Under Section 179
Note: If you have any listed property, complete Part V before you complete Part I.
$100,0001Maximum amount. See page 2 of the instructions for a higher limit for certain businesses1
2Total cost of section 179 property placed in service (see page 2 of the instructions)2
$400,0003Threshold cost of section 179 property before reduction in limitation3
4Reduction in limitation. Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-4
Dollar limitation for tax year. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. If married
filing separately, see page 2 of the instructions
5
5
(a) Description of property (b) Cost (business use only) (c) Elected cost
6
7Listed property. Enter the amount from line 297
88 Total elected cost of section 179 property. Add amounts in column (c), lines 6 and 7
9Tentative deduction. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 89
10Carryover of disallowed deduction from line 13 of your 2002 Form 456210
11Business income limitation. Enter the smaller of business income (not less than zero) or line 5 (see instructions)11
12Section 179 expense deduction. Add lines 9 and 10, but do not enter more than line 1112
13 Carryover of disallowed deduction to 2004. Add lines 9 and 10, less line 12 /H1707513
Note: Do not use Part II or Part III below for listed property. Instead, use Part V.
MACRS Depreciation (Do not include listed property.) (See page 4 of the instructions.)
(b) Month and
year placed in
service
(c) Basis for depreciation
(business/investment use
only—see instructions)
(d) Recovery
period(a) (e) Convention (f) Method (g) Depreciation deduction
Section B—Assets Placed in Service During 2003 Tax Year Using the General Depreciation System
3-year property19a
5-year propertyb
7-year propertyc
10-year propertyd
15-year propertye
20-year propertyf
S/LMM27.5 yrs.Residential rental
property
h
S/LMM27.5 yrs.
S/LMMNonresidential real
property
i
S/LMM
Section C—Assets Placed in Service During 2003 Tax Year Using the Alternative Depreciation System
S/L20a Class life
12 yrs. S/Lb 12-year
40 yrs. MM S/Lc 40-year
Special Depreciation Allowance and Other Depreciation (Do not include listed property.)
MACRS deductions for assets placed in service in tax years beginning before 200317 17
15Property subject to section 168(f)(1) election (see page 4 of the instructions)15
Other depreciation (including ACRS) (see page 4 of the instructions)16 16
Summary (see page 6 of the instructions)
2121 Listed property. Enter amount from line 28
Total. Add amounts from line 12, lines 14 through 17, lines 19 and 20 in column (g), and line 21.
Enter here and on the appropriate lines of your return. Partnerships and S corporations—see instr.
22
22
23 For assets shown above and placed in service during the current year,
enter the portion of the basis attributable to section 263A costs 23
Form 4562 (2003)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see separate instructions. Cat. No. 12906N
Part IV
Part I
Part II
Part III
/H17075Attach to your tax return.
39 yrs.
Section A
18 If you are electing under section 168(i)(4) to group any assets placed in service during the tax
year into one or more general asset accounts, check here /H17075
Classification of property
25-year propertyg 25 yrs. S/L
Special depreciation allowance for qualified property (other than listed property) placed in
service during the tax year (see page 3 of the instructions)
14
14
2003
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 49

Page 50 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
7,500
2,025
475
10,000
USA 280 VAN 3-20-03 75 18,667 14,000 5 yr 200 DB/HY 2,800 - 0 -
- 0 -
2,800
Page 2Form 4562 (2003)
Listed Property (Include automobiles, certain other vehicles, cellular telephones, certain computers, and
property used for entertainment, recreation, or amusement.)
Note: For any vehicle for which you are using the standard mileage rate or deducting lease expense, complete only
24a, 24b, columns (a) through (c) of Section A, all of Section B, and Section C if applicable.
Section A—Depreciation and Other Information (Caution: See page 7 of the instructions for limits for passenger automobiles. )
24b24a NoYesIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?NoYesDo you have evidence to support the business/investment use claimed?
(i)
Elected
section 179
cost
(h)
Depreciation
deduction
(g)
Method/
Convention
(f)
Recovery
period
(e)
Basis for depreciation
(business/investment
use only)
(d)
Cost or other
basis
(c)
Business/
investment
use
percentage
(b)
Date placed in
service
(a)
Type of property (list
vehicles first)
Property used more than 50% in a qualified business use (see page 6 of the instructions):26
%
%
%
Property used 50% or less in a qualified business use (see page 6 of the instructions):27
% S/L –
% S/L –
S/L –%
28 Add amounts in column (h), lines 25 through 27. Enter here and on line 21, page 1 28
Add amounts in column (i), line 26. Enter here and on line 7, page 129 29
Section B—Information on Use of Vehicles
(f)
Vehicle 6
(e)
Vehicle 5
(d)
Vehicle 4
(c)
Vehicle 3
(b)
Vehicle 2
(a)
Vehicle 1Total business/investment miles driven during
the year ( do not include commuting miles—
see page 2 of the instructions)
30
Total commuting miles driven during the year31
Total other personal (noncommuting)
miles driven
32
Total miles driven during the year.
Add lines 30 through 32
33
NoYes NoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesWas the vehicle available for personal
use during off-duty hours?
34
Was the vehicle used primarily by a
more than 5% owner or related person?
35
Is another vehicle available for
personal use?
36
Section C—Questions for Employers Who Provide Vehicles for Use by Their Employees
NoYesDo you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits all personal use of vehicles, including commuting,
by your employees?
37
Do you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits personal use of vehicles, except commuting, by your employees?
See page 8 of the instructions for vehicles used by corporate officers, directors, or 1% or more owners
38
Do you treat all use of vehicles by employees as personal use?39
Do you provide more than five vehicles to your employees, obtain information from your employees about
the use of the vehicles, and retain the information received?
40
Do you meet the requirements concerning qualified automobile demonstration use? (See page 9 of the instructions.)41
Note: If your answer to 37, 38, 39, 40, or 41 is “Yes,” do not complete Section B for the covered vehicles.
Amortization
(e)
Amortization
period or
percentage
(b)
Date amortization
begins
(c)
Amortizable
amount
(d)
Code
section
(f)
Amortization for
this year
(a)
Description of costs
42 Amortization of costs that begins during your 2003 tax year (see page 9 of the instructions):
43 Amortization of costs that began before your 2003 tax year 43
44 Total. Add amounts in column (f). See page 9 of the instructions for where to report 44
Complete this section for vehicles used by a sole proprietor, partner, or other “more than 5% owner,” or related person.
If you provided vehicles to your employees, first answer the questions in Section C to see if you meet an exception to completi ng this section for those vehicles.
Part VI
Part V
Answer these questions to determine if you meet an exception to completing Section B for vehicles used by employees who
are not more than 5% owners or related persons (see page 8 of the instructions).
Form 4562 (2003)
Special depreciation allowance for qualified listed property placed in service during the tax
year and used more than 50% in a qualified business use (see page 6 of the instructions)
25
25
Page 50 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 51 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part III–Information on Your Vehicle
Preparing the Return
Stanley leaves this part blank because he is not deducting
car or truck expenses.for Stanley Price
Stanley Price owns and operates Stan’s Barber Shop. HeSchedule SE—Self-Employment Taxhas been in business for 32 years. Stanley uses the cash
method of accounting and files his return on a calendarAfter Stanley prepares Schedule C–EZ, he fills out Sched-
year basis. ule SE. He starts by entering his name and social security
number at the top of the schedule. Then he reads the chart
on page 1 of the schedule, which tells him he can use
Schedule C–EZ
Section A—Short Schedule SE to figure his self-employ-
Stanley uses Schedule C–EZ to report the net profit from ment tax. He fills out the following lines in Section A.
his business because he meets all of the requirementsLines 2 and 3.He enters $24,500. This is his net profitlisted in Part I of the schedule. Stanley enters his name andfrom line 3 of Schedule C–EZ.social security number at the top of the schedule.
Line 4.He multiplies $24,500 by 92.35% (.9235) to get his
net earnings from self-employment ($22,626). This is his
Part I–General Information net profit subject to self-employment tax.
Stanley fills out Part I as follows: Line 5. Because the amount on line 4 is less than
$87,000, Stanley multiplies the amount on line 4 ($22,626)Line A.He enters his principal business. by 15.3% (.153) to get his self-employment tax of $3,462.
Line B.He enters 812111, which is the 6-digit businessHe enters that amount here and on line 55 of Form 1040.
code for a barber shop. He found the code on page C–8 ofLine 6.He multiplies the amount on line 5 by 50% (.5) tothe instructions for Schedule C. Stanley locates the majorget his deduction for one-half of self-employment tax ofbusiness category that describes his business. He reads$1,731. He enters that amount here and on line 28 of Formdown the items under “Other Services” to find 812111—1040.“Barber shops.”
Line C. He enters the name of his business—“Stan’sForm 1040Barber Shop.”
Stanley fills out Form 1040 as follows:Line D.Stanley leaves this line blank. He does not have
an employer identification number (EIN) because he is notName, address, and social security number.Stanley
required to have one. For information about EINs, seeenters his name, home address, and social security num-
Identification Numbers in chapter 1. ber.
Line E.He enters his business address. Presidential election campaign fund.Stanley chooses
to have $3 go to this fund. He checks the box under “Yes.”
Part II–Figure Your Net Profit Line 1.Stanley checks the box on this line because he is
filing as single.
Stanley fills out Part II as follows:
Lines 6a and 6d.Stanley claims an exemption for him-
Line 1–Gross receipts.Stanley enters his gross receiptsself. He checks the box next to “Yourself” and enters “1” in
from cutting hair. They include the amounts he charged forthe far right-hand entry space. He also enters “1” in the box
haircuts and all the tips received from his customers. Theon line 6d.
total for the year was $27,000.
Line 8a.Stanley enters $440 of taxable interest credited
Line 2–Total expenses.Stanley enters his expenses forto his personal savings account for the year.
the year. They total $2,500 and consist of the following:
Line 12.He enters his business net profit of $24,500 from
• Advertising in the local newspaper—$145 line 3 of Schedule C–EZ.
• Supplies—$775 Line 22.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 7 through 21
and enters the total, $24,940.• Business licenses—$50
Line 24.Stanley enters the $2,000 contribution he made• Utilities (electricity and water)—$1,530
for the year to his individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
According to the Form 1040 instructions, he can deductLine 3–Net profit.Stanley subtracts his total expensesthis amount.($2,500) from his gross receipts ($27,000) to get his net
profit of $24,500. He enters his net profit here, on line 12 ofLine 28.Stanley enters one-half of his self-employment
Form 1040, and on line 2, Section A, of Schedule SE (Form tax ($1,731.). He got this amount from line 6 in Section A of
1040). Schedule SE.
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 51

Page 52 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 33.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 23 throughLine 55.He enters $3,462 from line 5 in Section A of
32a and enters the total, $3,731. Schedule SE.    
Line 34.Stanley subtracts the amount on line 33 from theLine 60.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 54 through 59amount on line 22 to arrive at his adjusted gross income,and enters the total, $5,126.$21,209. He also enters this amount on line 35.
Line 37.He enters $4,750. This is the standard deductionLine 62.He enters $6,000 of estimated tax payments he
for a single filer. made for the year.
Line 38.Stanley subtracts line 37 from line 35 to getLine 68.He enters $6,000.$16,459.
Lines 69 and 70a.Stanley subtracts line 60 from line 68Line 39.He multiplies $3,050 by the number of exemp-
to arrive at the amount he overpaid, $874. He wants thistions claimed on line 6d to get his total exemptions, $3,050.
amount refunded to him so he enters it on line 70a. TheLine 40.Stanley subtracts line 39 from line 38 to get hisIRS will send him a check for this amount provided hetaxable income, $13,409. owes no other taxes, child support, spousal support, or
Line 41.Stanley uses the Tax Table in the Form 1040 certain other federal nontax debt. If Stanley wanted the
instructions to figure his income tax. In the Tax Table he refund deposited directly into his checking or savings ac-
looks for the income bracket that includes $13,409. He count, he would have had to complete lines 70b, c, and d.
finds the bracket for incomes of at least $13,400, but less
Signing and assembling the return.He checks the “No”than $13,450 and sees that the tax for a person filing as
block under Third Party Designee since he does not wantsingle is $1,664. He enters this amount here.
to designate anyone, signs his name and enters the dateLines 42 and 43.Because he does not owe alternativesigned, his occupation, and a daytime telephone number.minimum tax, he leaves line 42 blank and enters $1,664 onHe assembles his original Form 1040 and Schedulesline 43. C–EZ and SE in that order. (See “Attachment Sequence
Lines 53 and 54.Because Stanley does not have any of No.” in the upper right corner of each schedule or form.)
the credits listed on lines 44 through 52, he enters -0- on Then he makes a copy of the return for his records. Finally,
line 53 and $1,664 on line 54. he mails it to the IRS.
Page 52 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 53 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department of the Treasury—Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1–Dec. 31, 2003, or other tax year beginning , 2003, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 19.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 19. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 19.
Presidential
Election Campaign
1 Single
Filing Status Married filing jointly (even if only one had income)2
Check only
one box.
3
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child. (See page 20.)
6a Yourself. If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent on his or her tax
return, do not check box 6aExemptions
Spouseb
(4) if qualifying
child for child tax
credit (see page 21)
Dependents:c (2) Dependent’s
social security number
(3) Dependent’s
relationship to
you(1) First name Last name
If more than five
dependents,
see page 21.
d Total number of exemptions claimed
7Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Attach Form(s) W-27
8a8a Taxable interest. Attach Schedule B if requiredIncome
8bb Tax-exempt interest. Do not include on line 8aAttach 
Forms W-2 and
W-2G here.
Also attach
Form(s) 1099-R
if tax was
withheld.
9a9a Ordinary dividends. Attach Schedule B if required
1010 Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes (see page 23)
1111 Alimony received
1212 Business income or (loss). Attach Schedule C or C-EZ
Enclose, but do
not attach, any
payment. Also,
please use
Form 1040-V.
13a
13a Capital gain or (loss). Attach Schedule D if required. If not required, check here /H17075
1414 Other gains or (losses). Attach Form 4797
15a 15bIRA distributions b Taxable amount (see page 25)15a
16b16aPensions and annuities b Taxable amount (see page 25)16a
1717 Rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Attach Schedule E
1818 Farm income or (loss). Attach Schedule F
1919 Unemployment compensation
20b20a b Taxable amount (see page 27)20a Social security benefits
2121
22 Add the amounts in the far right column for lines 7 through 21. This is your total income /H1707522
24IRA deduction (see page 29)
23
26
25
One-half of self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
27
Self-employed health insurance deduction (see page 33)
26
28
27
Self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans
29
28
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings
30
29
Alimony paid  b Recipient’s SSN /H17075
33Add lines 23 through 32a
30
Subtract line 33 from line 22. This is your adjusted gross income /H17075
31
Adjusted
Gross
Income
34
If you did not
get a W-2,
see page 22. Form
Married filing separately. Enter spouse’s SSN above
and full name here. /H17075
Cat. No. 11320B
/H17075
/H20854
Label
Form 1040 (2003)
IRS Use Only—Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 20.) If
the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent, enter
this child’s name here. 
/H17075
Other income. List type and amount (see page 27)
Moving expenses. Attach Form 3903
24
25
For Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 77.
No. of boxes
checked on
6a and 6b
No. of children
on 6c who:
Dependents on 6c
not entered above
Add numbers
on lines
above
/H17075
● lived with you
● did not live with
you due to divorce
or separation
(see page 21)
32a 32a
Student loan interest deduction (see page 31)
31
33
/H17073/H17073Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
(See page 19.)
(99)
Tuition and fees deduction (see page 32)
34
4
5
23Educator expenses (see page 29)
2003
9bb Qualified dividends (see page 23)
13bb If box on 13a is checked, enter post-May 5 capital gain distributions
STANLEY PRICE
99 OAK ST
ANYTOWN, TX 70000
000 00 0000
1
1
440 00
24,500
24,940
1,731
2,000
3,731
21,209
00
00
00
00
00
00
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 53

Page 54 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Itemized deductions (from Schedule A) or your standard deduction (see left margin)
Add lines 61 through 67. These are your total payments /H17075
Page 2Form 1040 (2003)
Amount from line 34 (adjusted gross income)35 35
Check
if:
36aTax and
Credits 36a
Single or
Married filing
separately,
$4,750
If you are married filing separately and your spouse itemizes deductions, or
you were a dual-status alien, see page 34 and check here /H17075
b
36b
37 37
38Subtract line 37 from line 3538
39
If line 35 is $104,625 or less, multiply $3,050 by the total number of exemptions claimed on
line 6d. If line 35 is over $104,625, see the worksheet on page 35
39
40Taxable income. Subtract line 39 from line 38. If line 39 is more than line 38, enter -0-40
41 41
45
46
51
Education credits. Attach Form 8863
44
49
Other credits. Check applicable box(es):
48
53
54
Add lines 44 through 52. These are your total credits
48
Subtract line 53 from line 43. If line 53 is more than line 43, enter -0- /H17075
53
Self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
54
Other
Taxes
55
69
Social security and Medicare tax on tip income not reported to employer. Attach Form 4137
57Tax on qualified plans, including IRAs, and other tax-favored accounts. Attach Form 5329 if required
56
58
Add lines 54 through 59. This is your total tax /H17075
59 59
Federal income tax withheld from Forms W-2 and 109961 61
622003 estimated tax payments and amount applied from 2002 return62
Payments
63
66Amount paid with request for extension to file (see page 56)
65
64Excess social security and tier 1 RRTA tax withheld (see page 56)
66
68
Other payments from:67
70a70a
71 71
If line 68 is more than line 60, subtract line 60 from line 68. This is the amount you overpaid
72 72
Amount of line 69 you want refunded to you /H17075
Refund
73
Amount of line 69 you want applied to your 2004 estimated tax /H17075
Estimated tax penalty (see page 58)
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
73
You were born before January 2, 1939, Blind.
Spouse was born before January 2, 1939, Blind.
a Form 3800
b Form 8801 c Specify
a Form 2439 b Form 4136
57
Household employment taxes. Attach Schedule H
58
67
Amount
You Owe
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
Tax (see page 36). Check if any tax is from:
Amount you owe. Subtract line 68 from line 60. For details on how to pay, see page 57 /H17075
b
Direct deposit?
See page 56
and fill in 70b,
70c, and 70d.
Routing number
Account number
c Checking Savings
a Form(s) 8814 Form 4972
b
d
/H17075
/H17075
68
47
44
Retirement savings contributions credit. Attach Form 8880
55
56
Advance earned income credit payments from Form(s) W-2
69
/H17075
Child tax credit (see page 40)
Credits from:
47
51
49
Additional child tax credit. Attach Form 8812
64
65
Head of
household,
$7,000
Married filing
jointly or
Qualifying
widow(er),
$9,500
Standard
Deduction
for—
Joint return?
See page 20.
Daytime phone number
()
Earned income credit (EIC)
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Attach Schedule R
42
43
45
Alternative minimum tax (see page 38). Attach Form 6251
Add lines 41 and 42 /H17075
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Attach Form 2441
46
If you have a
qualifying
child, attach
Schedule EIC.
42
43
63
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2003)
● People who
checked any
box on line
36a or 36b or
who can be
claimed as a
dependent,
see page 34.
● All others:
Designee’s
name /H17075
Do you want to allow another person to discuss this return with the IRS (see page 58)?Third Party
Designee Phone
no. /H17075()
Yes. Complete the following. No
Personal identification
number (PIN) /H17075
52
Foreign tax credit. Attach Form 1116 if required
52
a Form 8396 b Form 8859
5050 Adoption credit. Attach Form 8839
60 60
Type:
c Form 8885
Total boxes
checked /H17075/H20853/H20854
21,209 00
4,750
16,459
3,050
13,409
1,664
1,664
3,462
5,126
6,000
874
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
3/15/04 Barber
874 00
6,000
Stanley Price 735-0002555
1,664 00
- 0 -
Page 54 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 55 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Stanley Price 000 00 0000
2 111Barber Shop
Stan’s Barber Shop
1001 Maple Ave.
Anytown, TX 70000
27,000
2,500
24,500
00
00
00
18
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE C-EZ
(Form 1040) Net Profit From Business
(Sole Proprietorship)
/H17075Partnerships, joint ventures, etc., must file Form 1065 or 1065-B.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 09A/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or 1041. /H17075See instructions on back.
Business name. If no separate business name, leave blank. D Employer ID number (EIN), if any
Business address (including suite or room no.). Address not required if same as on Form 1040, page 1.
C
E
Gross receipts. Caution. If this income was reported to you on Form W-2 and the “Statutory
employee” box on that form was checked, see Statutory Employees in the instructions for
Schedule C, line 1, on page C-3 and check here /H170751
22 Total expenses (see instructions). If more than $2,500, you must use Schedule C
3
3 Net profit. Subtract line 2 from line 1. If less than zero, you must use Schedule C. Enter on
Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2. (Statutory employees do not report this
amount on Schedule SE, line 2. Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.)
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) 2003For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Cat. No. 14374D
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code
You May Use
Schedule C-EZ
Instead of
Schedule C
Only If You:
And You:
● Use the cash method of accounting.
● Had only one business as a sole
proprietor.
● Had business expenses of $2,500 or
less. ● Are not required to file Form 4562,
Depreciation and Amortization, for
this business. See the instructions
for Schedule C, line 13, on page
C-4 to find out if you must file.
● Do not deduct expenses for
business use of your home.
● Do not have prior year unallowed
passive activity losses from this
business.
/H17075 /H17075
Name of proprietor Social security number (SSN)
General Information
A Principal business or profession, including product or service B Enter code from pages C-7, 8, & 9
/H17075
Figure Your Net Profit
Part I
Part II
● Did not have a net loss from your
business.
● Had no employees during the year.
1
● Did not have an inventory at any
time during the year.
Yes NoDo you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?6
Yes NoDo you have evidence to support your deduction?8a
Yes NoIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Yes NoWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?7
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2003, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:5
Business b Commuting c Other
4
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming car or truck expenses on line 2.Part III
a
b
(99)
When did you place your vehicle in service for business purposes? (month, day, year) /H17075 .//
2003
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 55

Page 56 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE SE
Self-Employment Tax(Form 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 17/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Name of person with self-employment income (as shown on Form 1040) Social security number of person
with self-employment income /H17075
Who Must File Schedule SE
You must file Schedule SE if:
● You had net earnings from self-employment from other than church employee income (line 4 of Short Schedule SE or line 4c of
Long Schedule SE) of $400 or more or
Exception. If your only self-employment income was from earnings as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian Science
practitioner and you filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval not to be taxed on those earnings, do not file Schedule SE. Instead,
write “Exempt–Form 4361” on Form 1040, line 55.
Section A—Short Schedule SE. Caution. Read above to see if you can use Short Schedule SE.
Net farm profit or (loss) from Schedule F , line 36, and farm partnerships, Schedule K-1 (Form
1065), line 15a
1
1
Net profit or (loss) from Schedule C, line 31; Schedule C-EZ, line 3; Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),
line 15a (other than farming); and Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 9. Ministers and members
of religious orders, see page SE-1 for amounts to report on this line. See page SE-2 for other
income to report
2
2
3Combine lines 1 and 23
Net earnings from self-employment. Multiply line 3 by 92.35% (.9235). If less than $400,
do not file this schedule; you do not owe self-employment tax /H17075
4
4
5 Self-employment tax. If the amount on line 4 is: 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule SE (Form 1040) 2003
● You had church employee income of $108.28 or more. Income from services you performed as a minister or a member of a
religious order is not church employee income (see page SE-1).
Cat. No. 11358Z
Deduction for one-half of self-employment tax. Multiply line 5 by
50% (.5). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 28
● $87,000 or less, multiply line 4 by 15.3% (.153). Enter the result here and on 
Form 1040, line 55.
● More than $87,000, multiply line 4 by 2.9% (.029). Then, add $10,788.00 to the
result. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 55.
May I Use Short Schedule SE or Must I Use Long Schedule SE?
Did You Receive Wages or Tips in 2003?
Was the total of your wages and tips subject to social security
or railroad retirement tax plus your net earnings from
self-employment more than $87,000?
Did you receive tips subject to social security or Medicare tax
that you did not report to your employer?
Are you using one of the optional methods to figure your net
earnings (see page SE-3)?
Are you a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian
Science practitioner who received IRS approval not to be taxed
on earnings from these sources, but you owe self-employment
tax on other earnings?
Did you receive church employee income reported on Form
W-2 of $108.28 or more?
You May Use Short Schedule SE Below You Must Use Long Schedule SE on page 2
/H17074 /H17074Yes
/H17074YesNo
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
No
No
Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074
/H17074 /H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Note. Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE and
use either “optional method” in Part II of Long Schedule SE (see page SE-3).
6
5
6
/H20854
(99)
2003
Stanley Price 000 00 0000
24,500
22,626
3,462
1,731
00
00
00
00
24,500 00
Page 56 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 57 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appeals and judicial review.If you disagree with us
about the amount of your tax liability or certain collection
11. actions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office to
review your case. You may also ask a court to review your
case.
Your Rights
Relief from certain penalties and interest.The IRS will
waive penalties when allowed by law if you can show youas a Taxpayer
acted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor-
rect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest thatThe first part of this chapter explains some of your most
is the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRSimportant rights as a taxpayer. The second part explains
employee.the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.
Examinations, Appeals,Declaration of
Collections, and RefundsTaxpayer Rights
Examinations (audits).We accept most taxpayers’ re-Protection of your rights.IRS employees will explain
turns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it forand protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout your
examination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest.contact with us.
The inquiry or examination may or may not result in more
tax. We may close your case without change; or, you mayPrivacy and confidentiality.The IRS will not disclose to
receive a refund.anyone the information you give us, except as authorized
The process of selecting a return for examination usu-by law. You have the right to know why we are asking you
ally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computerfor information, how we will use it, and what happens if you
programs to identify returns that may have incorrectdo not provide requested information.
amounts. These programs may be based on information
Professional and courteous service.If you believe thatreturns, such as Forms 1099 and W–2, on studies of past
an IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli-
fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that ance projects. Second, we use information from outside
employee’s supervisor. If the supervisor’s response is notsources that indicates that a return may have incorrect
satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for youramounts. These sources may include newspapers, public
area or the center where you filed your return. records, and individuals. If we determine that the informa-
tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a
Representation.You may either represent yourself or,return for examination.
with proper written authorization, have someone else rep-Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
resent you in your place. Your representative must be aRights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and
person allowed to practice before the IRS, such as anprocedures that we follow in examinations. The following
attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. Ifsections give an overview of how we conduct examina-
you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,tions.
then we must stop and reschedule the interview in most
By mail.We handle many examinations and inquiriescases.
by mail. We will send you a letter with either a request forYou can have someone accompany you at an interview.more information or a reason why we believe a change toYou may make sound recordings of any meetings with ouryour return may be needed. You can respond by mail orexamination or collection personnel, provided you tell us inyou can request a personal interview with an examiner. Ifwriting 10 days before the meeting. you mail us the requested information or provide an expla-
nation, we may or may not agree with you, and we willPayment of only the correct amount of tax.You are
explain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi-responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax due
tate to write to us about anything you do not understand.under the law—no more, no less. If you cannot pay all of
your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthlyBy interview.If we notify you that we will conduct yourinstallment payments. examination through a personal interview, or you request
such an interview, you have the right to ask that theHelp with unresolved tax problems.The Taxpayer Ad- examination take place at a reasonable time and place thatvocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess-is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examinerfully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayerproposes any changes to your return, he or she will explainAdvocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi-the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with thesecant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For morechanges, you can meet with the examiner’s supervisor.information, call toll free 1–877–777–4778
(1–800–829–4059 for TTY/TDD) or write to the TaxpayerRepeat examinations.If we examined your return for
Advocate at the IRS office that last contacted you. the same items in either of the 2 previous years and
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Page 57

Page 58 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact us If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you
as soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinue must file within 3 years from the date the return was
the examination. originally due to get that refund.
Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner’s pro-
posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Office
of IRS. Most differences can be settled without expensive
and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights are
12.explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appeal
Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don’t Agree,
and Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
How To Get MoreRights, and Claims for Refund.
If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagreeInformationwith its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.This section describes the help the IRS and other federalDistrict Court where you live. If you take your case to court,agencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi-the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if younesses.kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-
ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If the
court agrees with you on most issues in your case and
finds that our position was largely unjustified, you may be
Internal Revenue Service
able to recover some of your administrative and litigation
costs. You will not be eligible to recover these costs unlessYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
you tried to resolve your case administratively, includingpublications and forms, ask tax questions, and get more
going through the appeals system, and you gave us theinformation from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the
information necessary to resolve the case. method that is best for you, you will have quick and easy
access to tax help.Collections.Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro-
cess, explains your rights and responsibilities regardingContacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you have at-
payment of federal taxes. It describes: tempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully, you
should contact your Taxpayer Advocate.
• What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what to
The Taxpayer Advocate independently represents yourdo if you get a tax bill and what to do if you think
interests and concerns within the IRS by protecting youryour bill is wrong. It also covers making installment
rights and resolving problems that have not been fixedpayments, delaying collection action, and submitting
through normal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-an offer in compromise.
not change the tax law or make a technical tax decision,
• IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing athey can clear up problems that resulted from previous
lien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, andcontacts and ensure that your case is given a complete
release of property. and impartial review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail in
• Call the Taxpayer Advocate at 1–877–777–4778.Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office inInnocent spouse relief.Generally, both you and your
your area.spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for paying
the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on your• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a TTY/TDD user.
joint return. However, if you qualify for innocent spouse
• Visit the website at www.irs.gov/advocate.relief, you may not have to pay the tax, interest, and
penalties related to your spouse (or former spouse). For
For more information, see Publication 1546, The Tax-information on innocent spouse relief and two other ways
payer Advocate Service of the IRS.to get relief, see Publication 971, Innocent Spouse Relief,
and Form 8857,Request for Innocent Spouse Relief (AndSmall Business Tax Education Program.Small busi-Separation of Liability and Equitable Relief). ness owners and other self-employed individuals can learn
about business taxes through a unique partnership be-Refunds. You may file a claim for refund if you think you
tween the IRS and local organizations. Through work-paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim within
shops or in-depth tax courses, instructors provide training3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2
on starting a business, recordkeeping, preparing businessyears from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.
tax returns, self-employment tax issues, and employmentThe law generally provides for interest on your refund if it is
taxes.not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return or
claim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Some courses are offered free as a community service.
Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa- Courses given by an educational facility may include costs
tion on refunds. for materials and tuition. Other courses may have a nomi-
Page 58 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 59 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nal fee to offset administrative costs of sponsoring organi-Phone. Many services are available by phone.
zations.
For more information about this program, call the IRS
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. CallMonday through Friday during regular business hours.
1–800–829–3676 to order current and prior-yearCheck your telephone book for the local number of the IRS
forms and instructions. You should receive your or-office closest to you or you can call 1–800–829–1040.
der within 10 days.
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your taxFree tax services.To find out what services are avail-
questions at 1–800–829–1040.able, get Publication 910, Guide to Free Tax Services. It
contains a list of free tax publications and an index of tax• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help
topics. It also describes other free tax information services,solving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax-
payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explainincluding tax education and assistance programs and a list
IRS letters, request adjustment to your account, orof TeleTax topics.
help you set up a payment plan. Call your localInternet. You can access the IRS website 24 Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. Tohours a day, 7 days a week, at www.irs.gov to: find the number, go to www.irs.gov or look in the
phone book under “United States Government, Inter-
nal Revenue Service”.• E-file. Access commercial tax preparation and e-file
services available for free to eligible taxpayers.• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/
TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–4059 to ask tax• Check the amount of advance child tax credit pay-
or account questions or to order forms and publica-ments you received in 2003.
tions.
• Check the status of your 2003 refund. Click on
• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to listen to“Where’s My Refund.” Be sure to wait at least 6 pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.weeks from the date you filed your return (3 weeks if
• Refund information. If you would like to check theyou filed electronically) and have your 2003 tax re-
status of your 2003 refund, call 1–800–829–4477turn available because you will need to know your
for automated refund information and follow the re-filing status and the exact whole dollar amount of
corded instructions or call 1–800–829–1954 . Beyour refund.
sure to wait at least 6 weeks from the date you filed
• Download forms, instructions, and publications. your return (3 weeks if you filed electronically) and
have your 2003 tax return available because you will• Order IRS products online.
need to know your filing status and the exact whole
• See answers to frequently asked tax questions. dollar amount of your refund.
• Search publications online by topic or keyword.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To• Figure your withholding allowances using our Form
ensure that IRS representatives give accurate, courteous,W–4 calculator.
and professional answers, we use several methods to
• Send us comments or request help by email. evaluate the quality of our telephone services. One method
is for a second IRS representative to sometimes listen in• Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask some callersemail. to complete a short survey at the end of the call.
• Get information on starting and operating a small
business. Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-
able on a walk-in basis.You can also reach us using File Transfer Protocol at
ftp.irs.gov.
• Products. You can walk in to many post offices,
Fax. You can get over 100 of the most requestedlibraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,
forms and instructions 24 hours a day, 7 days ainstructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-
week, by fax. Just call 703–368–9694  from your braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county
fax machine. Follow the directions from the prompts. Whengovernments, credit unions, and office supply stores
have a collection of products available to print from ayou order forms, enter the catalog number for the form you
CD-ROM or photocopy from reproducible proofs.need. The items you request will be faxed to you.
Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter-For help with transmission problems, call nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue703–487–4608. Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re-
Long distance charges may apply. search purposes.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 59

Page 60 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer information, such as how to prepare a business plan,
Assistance Center every business day to ask tax finding financing for your business, and much more. The
questions or get help with a tax problem. An em- design of the CD makes finding information easy and quick
ployee can explain IRS letters, request adjustments and incorporates file formats and browsers that can be run
to your account, or help you set up a payment plan. on virtually any desktop or laptop computer.
You can set up an appointment by calling your localIt is available in April. You can get a free copy by calling
Center and, at the prompt, leaving a message re-1–800–829–3676  or by visiting the website at
questing Everyday Tax Solutions help. A representa-www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
tive will call you back within 2 business days to
schedule an in-person appointment at your conve-Comments on IRS enforcement actions. The Small
nience. To find the number, go to www.irs.gov or Business and Agriculture Regulatory Enforcement
look in the phone book under “United States Govern-Ombudsman and 10 Regional Fairness Boards were es-
ment, Internal Revenue Service”. tablished to receive comments from small business about
federal agency enforcement actions. The Ombudsman will
annually evaluate the enforcement activities of eachMail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
agency and rate its responsiveness to small business. Iftions, and publications to the Distribution Center
you wish to comment on the enforcement actions of thenearest to you and receive a response within 10
IRS, you can:workdays after your request is received. Use the address
that applies to your part of the country. • Call 1–888–REG–FAIR (1–888–734–3247) ,
• Western part of U.S.: • Send an email to ombudsman@sba.gov , orWestern Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001 • Download the appraisal form at www.sba.gov/
ombudsman .• Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
Small Business Administration
• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign addresses:
The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers trainingEastern Area Distribution Center
and educational programs, counseling services, financialP.O. Box 85074
programs, and contract assistance for small business own-Richmond, VA 23261–5074
ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a variety
of business topics. The following briefly describes assis-CD-ROM for tax products. You can order IRS tance provided by the SBA.Publication 1796, Federal Tax Products on
CD-ROM, and obtain: Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs).
SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv-
• Current-year tax forms, instructions, and publica-ices to current and prospective small business owners who
tions. cannot afford the services of a private consultant. Help is
available when beginning, improving, or expanding a small• Prior-year forms and instructions. business.
• Frequently requested tax forms that may be filled in
Business Information Centers (BICs).BICs offer aelectronically, printed out for submission, and saved
small business reference library, management videofor recordkeeping.
tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business.• Internal Revenue Bulletins. BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals who
are in business or are interested in starting a business canBuy the CD-ROM from National Technical Informationuse BICs as often as they wish at no charge.Service (NTIS) on the internet at www.irs.gov/cdorders
for $22 (no handling fee) or call 1–877–233–6767  toll freeService Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).
to buy the CD-ROM for $22 (plus a $5 handling fee). TheSCORE provides small business counseling and training
first release is available in early January and the finalto current and prospective small business owners. SCORE
release is available in late February. is made up of current and former business people who
offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,CD-ROM for small businesses. IRS Publicationmanage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offers3207, Small Business Resource Guide, is a must a variety of small business workshops.for every small business owner or any taxpayer
about to start a business. This handy, interactive CD con-Internet. You can access the SBA website at
tains all the business tax forms, instructions and publica-www.sba.gov. While visiting the SBA website,
tions needed to successfully manage a business. In you can find a variety of information of interest to
addition, the CD provides an abundance of other helpful small business owners.
Page 60 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 61 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Phone.  Call the SBA Answer Desk at Internet. You can access the GPO website at
1–800–UASK-SBA (1–800–827–5722) for www.access.gpo.gov.
general information about programs available to
assist small business owners.
Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Business Phone.  Call the GPO toll-free at
Development Center or Business Information 1–866–512–1800  or at (202) 512–1800 from
Center to request assistance with your small the local DC area.
business. To find the location nearest you, access the SBA
on the Internet or call the SBA Answer Desk.
Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.
Other Federal Agencies
Superintendent of DocumentsOther federal agencies also publish publications and pam-U.S. Government Printing Officephlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-P.O. Box 371954able from the Superintendant of Documents at the Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954Government Printing Office. You can get information and
order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 61

Page 62 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Cost of goods sold...........2 6 Nonbusiness bad debt.......3 0A
Ordinary expense...........3 0Credit:Accounting method:
Principal place of business....3 8Alcohol fuels...............1 9Accrual................ 14, 30
Qualified long-term realClean-fuel vehicle...........3 0Cash .................. 13, 30
property.................2 5Contributions to selectedChange in.................1 7
Qualified real propertycommunity developmentCombination...............1 5
business debt............2 3corporations.............1 9Special...................1 7
Rent .....................3 5Disabled access............2 0Accounting periods..........1 3 Restricted property..........2 4Electric vehicle.............3 0Accrual method of Retail space...............2 5Empowerment zoneaccounting ...............1 4 Self-employment tax..........9employment..............2 0Expenses .................1 5 Sole proprietor..............3Energy ...................2 0Income — general rule.......1 4 Statutory employee...........3Enhanced oil recovery........2 0Income — special rules......1 4 Tax home .................3 1General business...........1 9Related persons, special Tax year..................1 3How to claim...............2 1rule....................1 5 Trade discount.......... 26, 27Indian employment..........2 0Adjusted basis of property....1 8 Travel expenses............3 6Investment................2 0Alcohol fuels credit..........1 9 Depreciation:Liberty zone businessAlternative minimum tax......2 1 Deduction.................3 2employee ...............2 0Appeal rights...............5 8 Listed property.............3 2Low-income housing.........2 0Assistance (See Tax help) Recapture.................2 4Orphan drug...............2 0
Audits .....................5 7 Special allowance...........3 2Reforestation..............2 0
Disabled access credit........2 0Rehabilitation..............2 0
Renewable electricity Disposition of property:B production...............2 0 Business property...........1 7Bad debt ...................3 0 Research .................2 0 Installment sale.......... 18, 19Barter income...............2 1 Taxes paid on certain Like-kind exchange .... 18, 19, 25Basis of property............1 8 employee tips............1 9 Nontaxable exchange........1 8Business credits.............1 9 Sale of a business...........1 8Welfare-to-work............2 0
Business expenses ..........3 0 Work opportunity............2 0 Dividend income.............2 2
Business income ............2 1 Donation of inventory.........2 7
Drawing account ............2 7D
C Damages as income ..........2 4
Calendar tax year defined.....1 3 EDebt:
Canceled debt...............2 3 e-file.......................7B a d......................3 0
Capital gain or loss..........1 8 Canceled .................2 3 Electric vehicle credit.........3 0
Qualified real propertyCar expenses ............ 30, 31 Electronic filing..............7
business................2 3Cash discount ........... 26, 27 Employee benefit programs....3 3
Debts:Cash method of accounting....1 3 Employees’ pay .............3 2
Refund offset against.........7Expenses .................1 4 Employer identification number
Definitions:Income ...................1 4 (EIN)......................6
Accounting method..........1 3Change, accounting method . . . 17 Employment taxes:Accounting periods..........1 3Changing methods ...........1 6 About ....................1 1Bartering..................2 1Claim for refund.............5 8 Deduction for..............3 5Basis ....................1 8Clean-fuel vehicle credit.......3 0 E m powerment zoneBusiness bad debt..........3 0 employment credit.........2 0Collection of tax.............5 8 Cash discount........... 26, 27 Energy credit...............2 0Combination method of Dispositions of property.......1 7accounting ...............1 5 Enhanced oil recoveryDrawing account............2 7 credit....................2 0Comments on publication......3 Entertainment expenses......3 7 Entertainment expenses......3 7Condemned property .........1 9 Fair market value...........1 8
Escrow, payments placed in . . . 26Consignments ..............2 5 Fringe benefit..............3 3
Estimated tax................9Construction allowances......2 5 Local transportation
Examinations (audits)........5 7Contributions to selected expenses................3 0
community development Necessary expense.........3 0 Excise taxes:
corporations, credit for......1 9 Net operating loss...........3 9 About ....................1 1
Page 62

Page 63 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduction for..............3 6 Gross profit: Long-term capital gain or
Accuracy..................2 9 loss .....................1 9Expenses ..................3 0
Additions to................2 9 Lost income ................2 4
Low-income housing credit....2 0F
HFair market value defined......1 8
Health insurance, deductionFiling business taxes..........6 Mfor self-employed..........3 4Fiscal tax year defined........1 3 Meals ......................3 6Help (See Tax help)Form 4797 ..................2 5 Mileage rate for vehicles......3 1Help from Small BusinessForm: More information (See Tax help)Administration............6 01040 ......................7
Home, business use of........3 71040–ES ..................9 NHusband and wife business.....31040–V ................7 ,  4 2
Net operating losses.........3 91099–B ..................2 2
Net profit or loss.............3 91099–MISC ............ 12, 22 I
New York Liberty Zone1128 .....................1 3 Identification numbers.........6 business employee credit....2 02210 ......................9 Income:2290 .....................1 2 Nonbusiness bad debt........3 0Barter....................2 13115 .....................1 7 Nondeductible insuranceBonus ....................2 23468 .....................2 0 premiums ................3 3Cancelled lease payments....2 23800 .....................2 1 NonemployeeDividend..................2 34562 .....................3 2 compensation .............2 1How to account for..........2 54684 .....................1 9 Nontaxable exchanges........1 8Other types................2 44797 .....................1 9 Not-for-profit activities........3 9Paid to a third party....... 22, 264868 ......................8 Prepaid rent...............2 25884 .....................2 0 Rental....................2 26251 .....................2 1 OIncome tax:6252 .....................1 9 Ordinary gain or loss.........1 8About .....................76478 .....................1 9 Orphan drug credit...........2 0Deduction for..............3 56765 .....................2 0 Other deductible expenses....3 8How to pay.................97 2 0......................1 1 Other nondeductibleUnderpayment penalty........98300 .....................1 2 expenses .................3 9Income tax return, who must8586 .....................2 0 file.......................78594 .....................1 8 Independent contractor.......1 1 P8820 .....................2 0
Indian employment credit.....2 08824 .................. 18, 19 Parking fees................3 1
Individual taxpayer8826 .....................2 0 Partners, husband and wife.....3
identification number (ITIN) . . . 68829 .....................3 8 Pay, different kinds of........3 3
Information returns..........1 28830 .....................2 0 Paying:8835 .....................2 0 Innocent spouse relief........5 8 Business taxes..............68844 .....................2 0 Installment sales............1 8 Income tax.................98845 .....................2 0 Insurance: Penalty:8846 .....................1 9 Expense ..................3 3 Failure to file information8847 .....................1 9 Proceeds .................2 6 returns..................1 28857 .....................5 8 Interest:
Failure to furnish correct payee8861 .....................2 0 Expense ..................3 4
statements..............1 28884 .....................2 0 Income ...................2 2
8886 ......................4 Underpayment of tax..........9Inventories.................1 69 8 2......................2 3 Pension plans...............3 5Investment credit............2 0Schedule C.................7 Personal property tax.........3 6IRS mission..................3Schedule C–EZ .............7 Prepaid expense:S S – 4 .....................6 Extends useful life...........3 4KS S – 5 .....................6 Rent .....................3 5Kickbacks ............... 24, 39W – 2.....................1 2
Professional fees............3 4W – 7......................6
Promissory notes............2 4W – 9......................7 L Publications (See Tax help)Fringe benefits..............3 3 Legal fees..................3 4
Fuel taxes..................3 6 Like-kind exchanges......18, 25
QLocal transportation
G expenses .................3 0 Qualified real property
business debt.............2 3General business credit.......1 9 Lodging ....................3 6
Page 63

Page 64 of 64 of Publication 334 10:10 - 25-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Self-employed health Employment ............ 11, 35R
insurance deduction........3 4 Excise................. 11, 36Real estate rents.............2 2
Fuel .....................3 6Self-employment tax:Real estate taxes............3 6 Income .................7 ,  3 5About .....................9Recovery of deductions.......2 4 Paid on certain employeeDeduction for..............3 5Reforestation credit..........2 0 tips....................1 9Tax rate..................1 0Refund: Personal property...........3 6Time limit for posting income....9Offset against debts..........7 Real estate................3 6Short-term capital gain orRehabilitation credit..........2 0 Sales ....................3 6loss .....................1 9Related persons: Self-employment..........9 ,  3 5Small BusinessSpecial rule................1 5 Taxpayer Advocate...........5 8Administration............6 0Unreasonable rent..........3 5 Taxpayer rights..............5 7Social security coverage.......9Renewable electricity Tolls ......................3 1Social security number (SSN) . . . 6production credit..........2 0 Trade discount........... 26, 27Sole proprietor, defined........3Rent expense ...............3 5 Transportation expenses......3 0Standard mileage rate........3 1Rental income...............2 2 Travel expenses.............3 6Statutory employee...........3Repayment of income ........1 4 Truck expenses .......... 30, 31Suggestions for publication.....3Reportable transactions........4 TTY/TDD information.........5 8Research credit.............2 0
TRestricted property..........2 4 UTax help ...................5 8Retirement plans............3 5 Underpayment of tax penalty....9Tax home ............... 31, 36
Uniform capitalization rules....1 6Tax preparation fees.........3 5S Tax refund:Salaries....................3 2 Claim for..................5 8 WSale of a business...........1 8 Offset against debts..........7 Wages .....................3 2Sales of assets..............1 7 Tax return: Welfare-to-work credit........2 0Sales tax...................3 6 How to file..................7 Work opportunity credit.......2 0Sample returns..............4 0 Who must file...............7
Schedule C ..................7 ■Tax year ...................1 3
Schedule C–EZ ..............7 Taxes:
Section 179 deduction........3 2 Deduction for..............3 5
Page 64