Userid: DXWOLF00 DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\xcgcb\documents\2009 Publications\463\09p463.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
What's New .................... . 2Department
of the Reminder ..................... . 2Treasury Travel,
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue 1. Travel ...................... . 2Entertainment,Service Traveling Away From Home ........ . 3
Tax Home ................. . 3
Tax Home Different FromGift, and Car Family Home ........... . 3
Temporary Assignment or Job ...... . 4
What Travel Expenses AreExpenses Deductible? ............... . 4
Meals .................... . 5
Travel in the United States ...... . 6
Travel Outside the UnitedFor use in preparing States ................ . 7
Luxury Water Travel .......... . 8
Conventions ............... . 92009 Returns
2. Entertainment ................. . 9
Directly-Related Test ............ . 9
Associated Test ............... . 10
50% Limit ................... . 10
Exceptions to the 50% Limit .... . 11
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Deductible? ............ . 12
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Not Deductible? ......... . 13
3. Gifts ....................... . 13
4. Transportation ................ . 14
Car Expenses ................ . 15
Standard Mileage Rate ....... . 15
Actual Car Expenses ........ . 16
Leasing a Car ............. . 24
Disposition of a Car ............ . 24
5. Recordkeeping ................ . 25
How To Prove Expenses ......... . 25
What Are Adequate
Records? ............. . 25
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? ............. . 26
Separating and Combining
Expenses ............. . 27
How Long To Keep Records
and Receipts ........... . 27
Examples of Records ........ . 27
6. How To Report ................ . 27
Where To Report .............. . 28
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer ............. . 28
Reimbursements .............. . 28
Accountable Plans .......... . 29
Nonaccountable Plans ....... . 32
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients .... . 32
Completing Forms 2106 and
2106-EZ ................. . 32
Special Rules ............. . 33
Illustrated Examples ......... . 35
7. How To Get Tax Help ........... . 41Get forms and other information
Appendices .................... . 42faster and easier by:
Index ......................... . 57
Internet www.irs.gov
Jan 21, 2010

Page 2 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
qualifies as a working condition fringe benefit You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (TheWhat's New (such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal use asterisk must be included in the address.)
vehicle). Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-
Standard mileage rate. For 2009, the stan- A working condition fringe benefit is any ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your property or service provided to you by your em- ally to each email, we do appreciate your
car for business use is 55 cents per mile. ployer for which you could deduct the cost as an feedback and will consider your comments as
Car expenses and use of the standard mile- employee business expense if you had paid for we revise our tax products.
age rate are explained in chapter 4. it. Ordering forms and publications. VisitA qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is one www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andDepreciation limits on cars, trucks, and that is not likely to be used more than minimally publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to thevans. For 2009, the first-year limit on the total for personal purposes because of its design. address below and receive a response within 10section 179 deduction, special depreciation al- See Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles  under days after your request is received.lowance, and depreciation deduction for most Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4.
cars remains $10,960 ($2,960 if you elect not to For information on how to report your car
claim the special depreciation allowance). For Internal Revenue Serviceexpenses that your employer did not provide or
trucks and vans, the first-year limit has de- 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayreimburse you for (such as when you pay for gas
creased to $11,060 ($3,060 if you elect not to Bloomington, IL 61705-6613and maintenance for a car your employer pro-
claim the special depreciation allowance). De- vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employer
preciation limits are explained in chapter 4. in chapter 6. Tax questions. If you have a tax question,
check the information available on www.irs.govWho does not need to use this publication.
or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxPartnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ-
questions sent to either of the above addresses.ers who reimburse their employees for businessReminder expenses should refer to their tax form instruc-
tions and chapter 11 of Publication 535, Busi- Useful Items
Photographs of missing children. The Inter- ness Expenses, for information on deducting You may want to see:nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the travel, meals, and entertainment expenses.
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- If you are an employee, you will not need to Publicationdren. Photographs of missing children selected read this publication if all of the following are ❏ 225 Farmer's Tax Guideby the Center may appear in this publication on true.
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions• You fully accounted to your employer forhelp bring these children home by looking at the
your work-related expenses. ❏ 535 Business Expensesphotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. • You received full reimbursement for your ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
expenses. ❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates
• Your employer required you to return any
excess reimbursement and you did so. Form (and Instructions)Introduction
• There is no amount shown with a code ªLº ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) ItemizedYou may be able to deduct the ordinary and in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and Deductionsnecessary business-related expenses you have Tax Statement.for: ❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss
If you meet all of these conditions, there is no From Business• Travel, need to show the expenses or the reimburse- ❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profitments on your return. If you would like more• Entertainment, From Businessinformation on reimbursements and accounting• Gifts, or to your employer, see chapter 6. ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss
• Transportation. From Farming
If you meet these conditions and yourAn ordinary expense is one that is common and ❏ 2106 Employee Business Expensesemployer included reimbursements onaccepted in your trade or business. A necessary your Form W-2 in error, ask your em- ❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee
TIPexpense is one that is helpful and appropriate for ployer for a corrected Form W-2. Business Expensesyour business. An expense does not have to be
required to be considered necessary. ❏ 4562 Depreciation and AmortizationVolunteers. If you perform services as a
See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help , forvolunteer worker for a qualified charity, you mayThis publication explains: information about getting these publications andbe able to deduct some of your costs as a
• What expenses are deductible, forms.charitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex-
penses in Giving Services in Publication 526,• How to report them on your return, Charitable Contributions, for information on the
• What records you need to prove your ex- expenses you can deduct.
penses, and
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
• How to treat any expense reimbursements your comments about this publication and your
you may receive. suggestions for future editions. 1.
You can write to us at the following address:
Who should use this publication. You
should read this publication if you are an em- Internal Revenue Serviceployee or a sole proprietor who has busi- TravelIndividual Forms and Publications Branchness-related travel, entertainment, gift, or SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Itransportation expenses. 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526 If you temporarily travel away from your tax
Washington, DC 20224 home, you can use this chapter to determine ifUsers of employer-provided vehicles. If
you have deductible travel expenses.an employer-provided vehicle was available for
your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener- We respond to many letters by telephone. This chapter discusses:
ally, your employer must include the value of the Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in- • Traveling away from home,use or availability in your income. However, clude your daytime phone number, including the
there are exceptions if the use of the vehicle area code, in your correspondence. • Temporary assignment or job, and
Page 2 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 3 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• What travel expenses are deductible. satisfy only two factors, you may have a taxTax Home
home depending on all the facts and circum-It also discusses the standard meal allowance, stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are anTo determine whether you are traveling awayrules for travel inside and outside the United itinerant; your tax home is wherever you workfrom home, you must first determine the locationStates, luxury water travel, and deductible con- and you cannot deduct travel expenses.of your tax home.vention expenses. Generally, your tax home is your regular
Example 1. You are single and live in Bos-place of business or post of duty, regardless ofTravel expenses defined. For tax purposes, ton in an apartment you rent. You have workedwhere you maintain your family home. It in-travel expenses are the ordinary and necessary for your employer in Boston for a number ofcludes the entire city or general area in whichexpenses of traveling away from home for your years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-monthyour business or work is located.business, profession, or job. executive training program. You do not expect toIf you have more than one regular place of
An ordinary expense is one that is common return to work in Boston after you complete yourbusiness, your tax home is your main place of
and accepted in your trade or business. A nec- training.business. See Main place of business or work ,
essary expense is one that is helpful and appro- later. During your training, you do not do any work
priate for your business. An expense does not If you do not have a regular or a main place in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and
have to be required to be considered necessary. of business because of the nature of your work, on-the-job training throughout the United States.
You will find examples of deductible travel then your tax home may be the place where you You keep your apartment in Boston and return to
regularly live. See No main place of business orexpenses in Table 1-1, later. it frequently. You use your apartment to conduct
work, later. your personal business. You also keep up your
 If you do not have a regular or main place of community contacts in Boston. When you com-
business or post of duty and there is no place plete your training, you are transferred to Los
where you regularly live, you are considered an Angeles.Traveling Away From itinerant (a transient) and your tax home is wher- You do not satisfy factor (1) because you did
ever you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claimHome not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-
a travel expense deduction because you are cause you had duplicate living expenses. You
never considered to be traveling away fromYou are traveling away from home if: also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-
home. don your apartment in Boston as your main• Your duties require you to be away from home, you kept your community contacts, andMain place of business or work. If you havethe general area of your tax home (defined you frequently returned to live in your apartment.more than one place of work, consider the fol-later) substantially longer than an ordinary You have a tax home in Boston.lowing when determining which one is your mainday's work, and
place of business or work. Example 2. You are an outside salesperson• You need to sleep or rest to meet the
• The total time you ordinarily spend in each with a sales territory covering several states.demands of your work while away from
place. Your employer's main office is in Newark, buthome.
you do not conduct any business there. Your• The level of your business activity in eachThis rest requirement is not satisfied by merely work assignments are temporary, and you haveplace.napping in your car. You do not have to be away no way of knowing where your future assign-from your tax home for a whole day or from dusk • Whether your income from each place is ments will be located. You have a room in yourto dawn as long as your relief from duty is long significant or insignificant. married sister's house in Dayton. You stay thereenough to get necessary sleep or rest. for one or two weekends a year, but you do no
work in the area. You do not pay your sister forExample. You live in Cincinnati where youExample 1. You are a railroad conductor. the use of the room.have a seasonal job for 8 months each year andYou leave your home terminal on a regularly You do not satisfy any of the three factorsearn $40,000. You work the other 4 months inscheduled round-trip run between two cities and listed earlier. You are an itinerant and have noMiami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000.return home 16 hours later. During the run, you tax home.Cincinnati is your main place of work becausehave 6 hours off at your turnaround point where you spend most of your time there and earnyou eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get most of your income there. Tax Home Different Fromnecessary sleep before starting the return trip.
Family HomeYou are considered to be away from home. No main place of business or work. You
may have a tax home even if you do not have a If you (and your family) do not live at your taxExample 2. You are a truck driver. You regular or main place of work. Your tax home home (defined earlier), you cannot deduct theleave your terminal and return to it later the may be the home where you regularly live. cost of traveling between your tax home andsame day. You get an hour off at your turn- Factors used to determine tax home. If your family home. You also cannot deduct thearound point to eat. Because you are not off to you do not have a regular or main place of cost of meals and lodging while at your taxget necessary sleep and the brief time off is not business or work, use the following three factors home. See Example 1 that follows.an adequate rest period, you are not traveling to determine where your tax home is. If you are working temporarily in the sameaway from home.
city where you and your family live, you may be1. You perform part of your business in the considered as traveling away from home. SeeMembers of the Armed Forces. If you are a area of your main home and use that Example 2, below.member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma- home for lodging while doing business in
nent duty assignment overseas, you are not the area. Example 1. You are a truck driver and youtraveling away from home. You cannot deduct 2. You have living expenses at your main and your family live in Tucson. You are em-your expenses for meals and lodging. You can- home that you duplicate because your ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal innot deduct these expenses even if you have to business requires you to be away from that Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you returnmaintain a home in the United States for your home. to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend onefamily members who are not allowed to accom- night there before returning home. You cannot3. You have not abandoned the area in whichpany you overseas. If you are transferred from deduct any expenses you have for meals andboth your historical place of lodging andone permanent duty station to another, you may lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling fromyour claimed main home are located; youhave deductible moving expenses, which are Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix ishave a member or members of your familyexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses. your tax home.living at your main home; or you often useA naval officer assigned to permanent duty that home for lodging.aboard a ship that has regular eating and living Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-
facilities has a tax home (explained next) aboard burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. TheIf you satisfy all three factors, your tax home
ship for travel expense purposes. rest of the year you work for the same employeris the home where you regularly live. If you
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants Determining temporary or indefinite. You Probationary work period. If you take a job
and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the must determine whether your assignment is that requires you to move, with the understand-
same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti- temporary or indefinite when you start work. If ing that you will keep the job if your work is
more. you expect an assignment or job to last for 1 satisfactory during a probationary period, the job
year or less, it is temporary unless there are is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourBecause you spend most of your working
facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise. expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,
An assignment or job that is initially temporary bationary period.that city is your tax home. You cannot deduct
may become indefinite due to changed circum-any expenses you have for meals and lodging
stances. A series of assignments to the samethere. However, when you return to work in
location, all for short periods but that togetherPittsburgh, you are away from your tax home
cover a long period, may be considered an in-even though you stay at your family home. You What Travel Expensesdefinite assignment.can deduct the cost of your roundtrip between
Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct Are Deductible?The following examples illustrate whether an
your part of your family's living expenses for assignment or job is temporary or indefinite.
meals and lodging while you are living and work- Once you have determined that you are travel-
ing in Pittsburgh. ing away from your tax home, you can determineExample 1. You are a construction worker.
what travel expenses are deductible.You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. You
are a member of a trade union in Los Angeles You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-
that helps you get work in the Los Angeles area. penses you have when you travel away from
Because of a shortage of work, you took a job on home on business. The type of expense you canTemporary 
a construction project in Fresno. Your job was deduct depends on the facts and your circum-
scheduled to end in 8 months. The job actually stances.Assignment or Job
lasted 10 months. Table 1-1 summarizes travel expenses you
You may regularly work at your tax home and may be able to deduct. You may have otherYou realistically expected the job in Fresno
also work at another location. It may not be deductible travel expenses that are not coveredto last 8 months. The job actually did last less
practical to return to your tax home from this there, depending on the facts and your circum-than 1 year. The job is temporary and your tax
other location at the end of each work day. stances.home is still in Los Angeles.
When you travel away from home onTemporary assignment vs. indefinite assign- Example 2. The facts are the same as in business, you should keep records ofment. If your assignment or job away from Example 1, except that you realistically ex- all the expenses you have and any
RECORDSyour main place of work is temporary, your tax pected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. The advances you receive from your employer. Youhome does not change. You are considered to job actually was completed in 10 months. can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherbe away from home for the whole period you are Your job in Fresno is indefinite because you written record to keep track of your expenses.away from your main place of work. You can realistically expected the work to last longer than The types of expenses you need to record,deduct your travel expenses if they otherwise 1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1 along with supporting documentation, are de-qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary year. You cannot deduct any travel expenses scribed in Table 5-1 (see chapter 5).assignment in a single location is one that is you had in Fresno because Fresno became yourrealistically expected to last (and does in fact tax home. Separating costs. If you have one expenselast) for 1 year or less.
that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,However, if your assignment or job is indefi- Example 3. The facts are the same as in and other services (such as lodging or transpor-nite, the location of the assignment or job be- Example 1, except that you realistically ex- tation), you must allocate that expense betweencomes your new tax home and you cannot pected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. After the cost of meals and entertainment and the costdeduct your travel expenses while there. An 8 months, however, you were asked to remain of other services. You must have a reasonableassignment or job in a single location is consid- for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15 basis for making this allocation. For example,ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last months). you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-for more than 1 year, whether or not it actually Initially, you realistically expected the job in cludes one or more meals in its room charge.lasts for more than 1 year. Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, due
If your assignment is indefinite, you must to changed circumstances occurring after 8 Travel expenses for another individual. If ainclude in your income any amounts you receive months, it was no longer realistic for you to spouse, dependent, or other individual goes withfrom your employer for living expenses, even if expect that the job in Fresno would last for 1 you (or your employee) on a business trip or to athey are called travel allowances and you ac- year or less. You can only deduct your travel business convention, you generally cannot de-count to your employer for them. You may be expenses for the first 8 months. You cannot duct his or her travel expenses.able to deduct the cost of relocating to your new deduct any travel expenses you had after that
tax home as a moving expense. See Publication Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-time because Fresno became your tax home
521 for more information. penses of someone who goes with you if thatwhen the job became indefinite.
person:
Exception for federal crime investigations or Going home on days off. If you go back to 1. Is your employee,prosecutions. If you are a federal employee your tax home from a temporary assignment onparticipating in a federal crime investigation or 2. Has a bona fide business purpose for theyour days off, you are not considered away fromprosecution, you are not subject to the 1-year travel, andhome while you are in your hometown. Yourule. This means you may be able to deduct cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg- 3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct thetravel expenses even if you are away from your ing there. However, you can deduct your travel travel expenses.tax home for more than 1 year provided you expenses, including meals and lodging, whilemeet the other requirements for deductibility. traveling between your temporary place of work Business associate. If a business associ-For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or and your tax home. You can claim these ex- ate travels with you and meets the conditions inhis or her designee) must certify that you are penses up to the amount it would have cost you (2) and (3) above, you can deduct the traveltraveling: to stay at your temporary place of work. expenses you have for that person. A business
If you keep your hotel room during your visit associate is someone with whom you could rea-• For the federal government,
home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel sonably expect to actively conduct business. A• In a temporary duty status, and room. In addition, you can deduct your ex- business associate can be a current or prospec-
• To investigate or prosecute, or provide penses of returning home up to the amount you tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier,
support services for the investigation or would have spent for meals had you stayed at employee, agent, partner, or professional advi-
prosecution of a federal crime. your temporary place of work. sor.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
travel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-Table 1-1.  Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
cusses the 50% Limit in more detail, and chapter
6 discusses accountable and nonaccountableThis chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home
plans.for business purposes.
IF you have
Actual Costexpenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of...
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your You can use the actual cost of your meals to
business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are figure the amount of your expense before reim-
riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your bursement and application of the 50% deduction
cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise limit. If you use this method, you must keepShips (under Conventions) for additional rules and limits. records of your actual cost.
taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you between:
bus, and airport • The airport or station and your hotel, and Standard Meal Allowancelimousine • The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, your
business meeting place, or your temporary work location. Generally, you can use the ªstandard meal al-
lowanceº method as an alternative to the actualbaggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your regular
cost method. It allows you to use a set amountshipping and temporary work locations.
for your daily meals and incidental expenses
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home on (M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-
business. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileage tual costs. The set amount varies depending on
rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car where and when you travel. In this publication,while away from home on business, you can deduct only the ªstandard meal allowanceº refers to the federalbusiness-use portion of the expenses. rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount of
standard meal allowance . If you use the stan-lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long
dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform your
ords to prove the time, place, and businessduties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, and
purpose of your travel. See the recordkeepingrelated tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits.
rules for travel in chapter 5.cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
Incidental expenses. The term ªincidental ex-
telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes business pensesº means:communication by fax machine or other communication devices.
• Fees and tips given to porters, baggage
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewards
or stewardesses and others on ships, andother other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
hotel servants in foreign countries,business travel. These expenses might include transportation to or
from a business meal, public stenographer's fees, computer rental • Transportation between places of lodgingfees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer. or business and places where meals are
taken, if suitable meals can be obtained at
the temporary duty site, and
Bona fide business purpose. A bona fide • The meal is business-related entertain-
• Mailing costs associated with filing travelment.business purpose exists if you can prove a real
vouchers and payment of em-business purpose for the individual's presence. Business-related entertainment is discussed in ployer-sponsored charge card billings.Incidental services, such as typing notes or as- chapter 2. The following discussion deals only
Incidental expenses do not include expenses forsisting in entertaining customers, are not with meals that are not business-related enter-
laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg-enough to make the expenses deductible. tainment.
ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone
calls.Lavish or extravagant. You cannot deductExample. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi-
expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is Incidental expenses only method. You cangant. An expense is not considered lavish ornot Jerry's employee. Linda occasionally types use an optional method (instead of actual cost)extravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsnotes, performs similar services, and accompa- for deducting incidental expenses only. Theand circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per- amount of the deduction is $3 a day for thelowed merely because they are more than aformance of these services does not establish period from January 1 through September 30,fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-that her presence on the trip is necessary to the 2009, and $5 a day for the period October 1,taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.conduct of Jerry's business. Her expenses are through December 31, 2009. You can use this
not deductible. method only if you did not pay or incur any meal50% limit on meals. You can figure your
expenses. You cannot use this method on anyJerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A meals expense using either of the following
day that you use the standard meal allowance.single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the methods.
This method is subject to the proration rules fortotal cost of driving his car to and from Chicago, • Actual cost. partial days. See Travel for days you depart andbut only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he uses return, later in this chapter.• The standard meal allowance.public transportation, he can deduct only his
fare. Federal employees should refer to theBoth of these methods are explained below. But,
Federal Travel Regulations at www.regardless of the method you use, you generally
gsa.gov. Find the ªMost RequestedMeals can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost
CAUTION
!
Linksº on the upper left and click on ªRegula-of your meals.
tions: FAR, FMR, FTRº for Federal Travel Regu-You can deduct the cost of meals in either of the
If you are reimbursed for the cost of your lation (FTR) for changes affecting claims forfollowing situations. meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on reimbursement.• It is necessary for you to stop for substan- whether your employer's reimbursement plan
tial sleep or rest to properly perform your was accountable or nonaccountable. If you are 50% limit may apply. If you use the standard
duties while traveling away from home on not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether meal allowance method for meal expenses and
business. the unreimbursed meal expense is for business you are not reimbursed or you are reimbursed
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
under a nonaccountable plan, you can generally You can access per diem rates for employee would have to use Method 1 and be
deduct only 50% of the standard meal allow- non-foreign areas outside the conti- limited to only 21/2 days.
ance. If you are reimbursed under an accounta- nental United States at:
ble plan and you are deducting amounts that are http://perdiem.hqda.pentagon.mil/perdiem/ Travel in the United States
more than your reimbursements, you can de- perdiemrates.html. You can access all other for-
duct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50% eign per diem rates at: www.state.gov/travel/. The following discussion applies to travel in the
limit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and Click on ªTravel,º and click on ªForeign Per Diem United States. For this purpose, the United
accountable and nonaccountable plans are dis- Rates,º to obtain the latest foreign per diem States includes the 50 states and the District of
cussed in chapter 6. rates. Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-
penses depends on how much of your trip wasThere is no optional standard lodging Special rate for transportation workers. business related and on how much of your tripamount similar to the standard meal You can use a special standard meal allowance occurred within the United States. See Part ofallowance. Your allowable lodging ex- if you work in the transportation industry. You
CAUTION
! Trip Outside the United States, later.pense deduction is your actual cost. are in the transportation industry if your work:
Who can use the standard meal allowance. • Directly involves moving people or goods
Trip Primarily for BusinessYou can use the standard meal allowance by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or
whether you are an employee or self-employed, truck, and You can deduct all of your travel expenses ifand whether or not you are reimbursed for your • Regularly requires you to travel away from your trip was entirely business related. If yourtraveling expenses. home and, during any single trip, usually trip was primarily for business and, while at your
Use of the standard meal allowance for other involves travel to areas eligible for differ- business destination, you extended your stay for
travel. You can use the standard meal allow- ent standard meal allowance rates. a vacation, made a personal side trip, or had
ance to figure your meal expenses when you other personal activities, you can deduct yourIf this applies to you, you can claim a standardtravel in connection with investment and other business-related travel expenses. These ex-meal allowance of $52 a day ($58 for travelincome-producing property. You can also use it penses include the travel costs of getting to andoutside the continental United States) from Jan-to figure your meal expenses when you travel for from your business destination and any busi-uary 1 through September 30, 2009, and $59 aqualifying educational purposes. You cannot ness-related expenses at your business desti-day ($65 for travel outside the continental Uniteduse the standard meal allowance to figure the nation.States) from October 1 through December 31,cost of your meals when you travel for medical 2009.or charitable purposes. Example. You work in Atlanta and take a
Using the special rate for transportation work- business trip to New Orleans. On your wayAmount of standard meal allowance. The ers eliminates the need for you to determine the home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE standard meal allowance for every area where You spend $2,012 for the 9 days you are awayrate. For travel in 2009, the rate for most small you stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to use from home for travel, meals, lodging, and otherlocalities in the United States is $39 a day for the the special rate for any trip, you must use the travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-period January 1 through September 30, 2009, special rate (and not use the regular standard bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, andand $46 a day for the period October 1 through meal allowance rates) for all trips you take that your total cost would have been $1,712. You canDecember 31, 2009. year. deduct $1,712 for your trip, including the cost ofMost major cities and many other localities in round-trip transportation to and from New Orle-the United States are designated as high-cost Travel for days you depart and return. For ans. The deduction for your meals is subject toareas, qualifying for higher standard meal al- both the day you depart for and the day you the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.lowances. These rates are listed in Publication return from a business trip, you must prorate the1542, which is available on the Internet at www. standard meal allowance (figure a reducedirs.gov. amount for each day). You can do so by one of Trip Primarily for
You can also find this information (or- two methods. Personal Reasons
ganized by state) on the Internet at • Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan- If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,www.gsa.gov . Click on ªPer Diem
 dard meal allowance. such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is aRates,º then select ª2009º for the period January
nondeductible personal expense. However, you1, 2009 ± September 30, 2009, and select • Method 2: You can prorate using any
can deduct any expenses you have while at yourª2010º for the period October 1, 2009 ± Decem- method that you consistently apply and
destination that are directly related to your busi-ber 31, 2009. However, you can apply the rates that is in accordance with reasonable busi-
ness.in effect before October 1, 2009, for expenses of ness practice.
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be aall travel within the United States for 2009 in-
vacation even if the promoter advertises that it isstead of the updated rates. You must consist- Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-ently use either the rates for the first 9 months of as a convention planner. In March, her employer dental business activities during a trip, such as2009 or the updated rates for the period of Octo- sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingber 1, 2009, through December 31, 2009. attend a planning seminar. She left her home in with general subjects, will not change what isIf you travel to more than one location in one New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and really a vacation into a business trip.day, use the rate in effect for the area where you arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After
stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor- spending two nights there, she flew back to New
tation industry, however, see Special rate for Orleans on Friday and arrived back home at Part of Trip Outsidetransportation workers, later. 8:00 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat amount the United Statesto cover her expenses and included it with herStandard meal allowance for areas outside
wages.the continental United States. The standard If part of your trip is outside the United States,
Under Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days ofmeal allowance rates above do not apply to use the rules described later in this chapter
the standard meal allowance for Washington,travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other location under Travel Outside the United States  for that
DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andoutside the continental United States. The De- part of the trip. For the part of your trip that is
Friday (the days she departed and returned),partment of Defense establishes per diem rates inside the United States, use the rules for travel
and the full daily rate for Thursday.for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American Sa- in the United States. Travel outside the United
Under Method 2 , Jen could also use anymoa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana Is- States does not include travel from one point in
method that she applies consistently and that islands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island, and the United States to another point in the United
in accordance with reasonable business prac-other non-foreign areas outside the continental States. The following discussion can help you
tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of theUnited States. The Department of State estab- determine whether your trip was entirely within
standard meal allowance even though a federallishes per diem rates for all other foreign areas. the United States.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Public transportation. If you travel by public • Are not a managing executive. Travel Primarily for Business
transportation, any place in the United States
If you travel outside the United States primarilyªRelated to your employerº is defined later inwhere that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a
for business but spend some of your time onchapter 6 under Per Diem and Car Allowances.point in the United States. Once the vehicle
other activities, you generally cannot deduct allleaves the last scheduled stop in the United A ªmanaging executiveº is an employee who
of your travel expenses. You can only deduct theStates on its way to a point outside the United has the authority and responsibility, without be-
business portion of your cost of getting to andStates, you apply the rules under Travel Outside ing subject to the veto of another, to decide on
from your destination. You must allocate thethe United States. the need for the business travel.
costs between your business and other activitiesA self-employed person generally has sub- to determine your deductible amount. SeeExample. You fly from New York to Puerto stantial control over arranging business trips. Travel allocation rules, later.Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return Exception 2 - Outside United States noto New York nonstop. The flight from New York You do not have to allocate your travelmore than a week. Your trip is consideredto Miami is in the United States, so only the flight expenses if you meet one of the fourentirely for business if you were outside thefrom Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United exceptions listed earlier under Travel
TIPUnited States for a week or less, combiningStates. Because there are no scheduled stops considered entirely for business. In those cases,business and nonbusiness activities. One weekbetween Puerto Rico and New York, all of the you can deduct the total cost of getting to andmeans 7 consecutive days. In counting thereturn trip is outside the United States. from your destination.days, do not count the day you leave the United
Private car. Travel by private car in the United States, but do count the day you return to the
Travel allocation rules. If your trip outside theStates is travel between points in the United United States.
United States was primarily for business, youStates, even though you are on your way to a
must allocate your travel time on a day-to-daydestination outside the United States. Example. You traveled to Brussels primarily
basis between business days and nonbusinessfor business. You left Denver on Tuesday and
days. The days you depart from and return to theExample. You travel by car from Denver to flew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew from
United States are both counted as days outsideMexico City and return. Your travel from Denver New York to Brussels, arriving the next morning.
the United States.to the border and from the border back to Den- On Thursday and Friday, you had business dis-
To figure the deductible amount of yourver is travel in the United States, and the rules in cussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, you
round-trip travel expenses, use the followingthis section apply. The rules under Travel were sightseeing. You flew back to New York,
fraction. The numerator (top number) is the totalOutside the United States apply to your trip from arriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday,
number of business days outside the Unitedthe border to Mexico City and back to the border. you flew back to Denver.
States. The denominator (bottom number) is theAlthough you were away from your home in
total number of travel days outside the UnitedDenver for more than a week, you were notTravel Outside States.outside the United States for more than a week.the United States This is because the day you depart does not Counting business days. Your businesscount as a day outside the United States.If any part of your business travel is outside the days include transportation days, days yourYou can deduct your cost of the round-tripUnited States, some of your deductions for the presence was required, days you spent on busi-flight between Denver and Brussels. You cancost of getting to and from your destination may ness, and certain weekends and holidays.also deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels forbe limited. For this purpose, the United States
Transportation day. Count as a businessThursday and Friday while you conducted busi-includes the 50 states and the District of Colum-
day any day you spend traveling to or from aness. However, you cannot deduct the cost ofbia.
business destination. However, if because of ayour stay in Brussels from Saturday throughHow much of your travel expenses you can
nonbusiness activity you do not travel by a directTuesday because those days were spent ondeduct depends in part upon how much of your
route, your business days are the days it wouldnonbusiness activities.trip outside the United States was business re-
take you to travel a reasonably direct route tolated. Exception 3 - Less than 25% of time on your business destination. Extra days for sidepersonal activities. Your trip is considered trips or nonbusiness activities cannot beentirely for business if: counted as business days.Travel Entirely for Business or
• You were outside the United States forConsidered Entirely for Business Presence required. Count as a businessmore than a week, and day any day your presence is required at aYou can deduct all your travel expenses of get- • You spent less than 25% of the total time particular place for a specific business purpose.ting to and from your business destination if your you were outside the United States on Count it as a business day even if you spendtrip is entirely for business or considered entirely nonbusiness activities. most of the day on nonbusiness activities.for business.
For this purpose, count both the day your trip Day spent on business. If your principalTravel entirely for business. If you travel began and the day it ended. activity during working hours is pursuit of youroutside the United States and you spend the trade or business, count the day as a businessentire time on business activities, you can de- Example. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo, day. Also, count as a business day any day youduct all of your travel expenses. where you spent 14 days on business and 5 are prevented from working because of circum-
days on personal matters. You then flew back to stances beyond your control.Travel considered entirely for business.
Seattle. You spent 1 day flying in each direction.Even if you did not spend your entire time on Certain weekends and holidays. CountBecause only 5/21 (less than 25%) of yourbusiness activities, your trip is considered en- weekends, holidays, and other necessarytotal time abroad was for nonbusiness activities,tirely for business if you meet at least one of the standby days as business days if they fall be-you can deduct as travel expenses what it wouldfollowing four exceptions. tween business days. But if they follow yourhave cost you to make the trip if you had notException 1 - No substantial control. business meetings or activity and you remain atengaged in any nonbusiness activity. TheYour trip is considered entirely for business if your business destination for nonbusiness oramount you can deduct is the cost of theyou did not have substantial control over arrang- personal reasons, do not count them as busi-round-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals (sub-ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing of ness days.ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other relatedyour trip does not, by itself, mean that you have expenses. Example 1. Your tax home is New Yorksubstantial control over arranging your trip.
Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid- City. You travel to Quebec, where you have aYou do not have substantial control over
eration. Your trip is considered entirely for business appointment on Friday. You have an-your trip if you:
business if you can establish that a personal other appointment on the following Monday. Be-• Are an employee who was reimbursed or vacation was not a major consideration, even if cause your presence was required on bothpaid a travel expense allowance, you have substantial control over arranging the Friday and Monday, they are business days.
• Are not related to your employer, and trip. Because the weekend is between business
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
days, Saturday and Sunday are counted as The part you must allocate is the amount it workshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-
business days. This is true even though you use would have cost you to travel between the point velopment, and exercises. Professional confer-
the weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or where travel outside the United States begins ence directors schedule and conduct the
other nonbusiness activity. and your business destination and a return to sessions. Participants can choose those ses-
the point where travel outside the United States sions they wish to attend.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you had no ends. You can participate in this program since youbusiness in Quebec after Friday, but stayed until You determine the nonbusiness portion of are a member of the alumni association. YouMonday before starting home, Saturday and that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The and your family take one of the trips. You spendSunday would be nonbusiness days. numerator of the fraction is the number of non- about 2 hours at each of the planned sessions.
business days during your travel outside the The rest of the time you go touring and sightsee-Nonbusiness activity on the way to or from
United States and the denominator is the totalyour business destination. If you stopped ing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1
number of days you spend outside the Unitedfor a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei- week.
States.ther on the way from the United States to your Your travel expenses for the trip are not
None of your travel expenses for nonbusi-business destination, or on the way back to the deductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-ness activities at, near, or beyond your businessUnited States from your business destination, tion. However, registration fees and any otherdestination are deductible.you must allocate part of your travel expenses to incidental expenses you have for the fivethe nonbusiness activity. planned sessions you attended that are directlyExample. Assume that the dates are theThe part you must allocate is the amount it related and beneficial to your business are de-same as in the previous example but that in-would have cost you to travel between the point ductible business expenses. These expensesstead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you flywhere travel outside the United States begins should be specifically stated in your records toto Venice, Italy, for a vacation.and your nonbusiness destination and a return ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-to the point where travel outside the United You cannot deduct any part of the cost of ness expenses.States ends. your trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris.
You determine the nonbusiness portion of In addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfare
Luxury Water Travelthat expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The and other expenses from New York to Paris and
numerator of the fraction is the number of non- back to New York. If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or otherbusiness days during your travel outside the You can deduct 11/18 of the round-trip plane form of luxury water transportation for businessUnited States and the denominator is the total fare and other travel expenses from New York to purposes, there is a daily limit on the amountnumber of days you spend outside the United Paris, plus your meals (subject to the 50% limit), you can deduct. The limit is twice the highestStates. lodging, and any other business expenses you federal per diem rate allowable at the time ofhad in Paris. (Assume these expenses total your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem isExample. You live in New York. On May 4 $4,994). If the round-trip plane fare and other the amount paid to federal government employ-you flew to Paris to attend a business confer- travel-related expenses (such as food during theence that began on May 5. The conference ees for daily living expenses when they traveltrip) are $1,750, you can deduct travel costs ofended at noon on May 14. That evening you flew away from home, but in the United States, for$1,069 (11/18 ×  $1,750), plus the full $4,994 forto Dublin where you visited with friends until the business purposes.)the expenses you had in Paris.afternoon of May 21, when you flew directly
home to New York. The primary purpose for the Daily limit on luxury water travel. The high-Other methods. You can use another methodtrip was to attend the conference. est federal per diem rate allowed and the dailyof counting business days if you establish that itIf you had not stopped in Dublin, you would limit for luxury water travel in 2009 is shown inmore clearly reflects the time spent on otherhave arrived home the evening of May 14. You the following table.than business activities outside the Uniteddid not meet any of the exceptions that would States.allow you to consider your travel entirely for Highest Daily Limit
business. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are 2009 Federal on Luxury
Dates Per Diem Water Travelbusiness days and May 15 through May 21 (7 Travel Primarily for Personaldays) are nonbusiness days. Jan. 1 ± June 30 $349 $698ReasonsYou can deduct the cost of your meals (sub- July 1 ± Aug. 31 323 646ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other busi- If you travel outside the United States primarily
Sept. 1 ± Sept. 30 424 848ness-related travel expenses while in Paris. for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-You cannot deduct your expenses while in Oct. 1 ± Dec. 31 411 822tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personalDublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it expense. If you spend some time attending briefwould have cost you to travel round-trip between professional seminars or a continuing education Example. Caroline, a travel agent, traveledNew York and Dublin. program, you can deduct your registration fees by ocean liner from New York to London, Eng-You paid $750 to fly from New York to Paris, and other expenses you have that are directly land, on business in May. Her expense for the$400 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $700 to fly related to your business.from Dublin back to New York. Round trip airfare 6-day cruise was $5,200. Caroline's deduction
from New York to Dublin would have been for the cruise cannot exceed $4,188 (6 days ×Example. The university from which you$1,250. $698 daily limit).graduated has a continuing education programYou figure the deductible part of your air for members of its alumni association. This pro-travel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of the Meals and entertainment. If your expensesgram consists of trips to various foreign coun-round-trip fare and other expenses you would for luxury water travel include separately statedtries where academic exercises andhave had in traveling directly between New York amounts for meals or entertainment, thoseconferences are set up to acquaint individuals inand Dublin ($1,250 ×  7/18 = $486) from your total amounts are subject to the 50% limit on mealsmost occupations with selected facilities in sev-expenses in traveling from New York to Paris to and entertainment before you apply the dailyeral regions of the world. However, none of theDublin and back to New York ($750 + $400 + conferences are directed toward specific occu- limit. For a discussion of the 50% Limit , see$700 = $1,850). pations or professions. It is up to each partici- chapter 2.Your deductible air travel expense is $1,364 pant to seek out specialists and organizational($1,850 − $486). Example. In the previous example, Caro-settings appropriate to his or her occupational
interests. line's luxury water travel had a total cost ofNonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond
$5,200. Of that amount, $2,350 was separatelyThree-hour sessions are held each day overbusiness destination. If you had a vacation
stated as meals and entertainment. Caroline,a 5-day period at each of the selected overseasor other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond
who is self-employed, is not reimbursed for anyfacilities where participants can meet with indi-your business destination, you must allocate
of her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de-vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-part of your travel expenses to the nonbusiness
posed of a variety of activities including ductible travel expenses as follows.activity.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Meals and entertainment ..... . $2,350 North American area. The North American 5. You attach to your return a written state-
50% limit ............... . ×  .50 ment signed by an officer of the organiza-area includes the following locations.Allowable meals & entertainment $1,175 tion or group sponsoring the meeting thatOther travel expenses ...... . + 2,850 American Samoa Jarvis Island includes:Allowable cost before the daily limit ... . $4,025 Antigua and Barbuda Johnston Island
Aruba Kingman ReefDaily limit for May 2009 ..... . $ 698 a. A schedule of the business activities of
Bahamas Marshall IslandsTimes number of days ...... . ×  6 each day of the meeting, andBaker Island MexicoMaximum luxury water travel deduction $4,188
Barbados Micronesia b. The number of hours you attended theAmount of allowable deduction .... . $4,025 Bermuda Midway Islands scheduled business activities.
Canada Netherlands AntillesCaroline's deduction for her cruise is limited to Costa Rica Northern Mariana$4,025, even though the limit on luxury water Dominica Islands
travel is higher. Dominican Republic Palau
Grenada Palmyra AtollNot separately stated. If your meal or en- Guam Puerto Ricotertainment charges are not separately stated or Guyana Trinidad and Tobagoare not clearly identifiable, you do not have to Honduras USA
allocate any portion of the total charge to meals Howland Island U.S. Virgin Islands 2.or entertainment. Jamaica Wake Island
The North American area also includes U.S.
Exceptions islands, cays, and reefs that are possessions of Entertainment
the United States and not part of the fifty statesThe daily limit on luxury water travel (discussed
or the District of Columbia.earlier) does not apply to expenses you have to You may be able to deduct business-relatedattend a convention, seminar, or meeting on entertainment expenses you have for entertain-board a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships  under Reasonableness test. The following factors ing a client, customer, or employee. The rulesConventions Held Outside the North American are taken into account to determine if it was and definitions are summarized in Table 2-1.Area. reasonable to hold the meeting outside the You can deduct entertainment expenses
North American area. only if they are both ordinary and necessary andConventions meet one of the following tests.• The purpose of the meeting and the activi-
You can deduct your travel expenses when you ties taking place at the meeting. • Directly-related test.
attend a convention if you can show that your • The purposes and activities of the spon- • Associated test.attendance benefits your trade or business. You
soring organizations or groups.cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam- Both of these tests are explained later.
ily. • The homes of the active members of the An ordinary expense is one that is commonIf the convention is for investment, political, sponsoring organizations and the places and accepted in your trade or business. A nec-social, or other purposes unrelated to your trade at which other meetings of the sponsoring essary expense is one that is helpful and appro-or business, you cannot deduct the expenses. organizations or groups have been or will priate for your business. An expense does not
be held.Your appointment or election as a dele- have to be required to be considered necessary.
gate does not, in itself, determine • Other relevant factors you may present. The amount you can deduct for enter-whether you can deduct travel ex-
CAUTION
!
tainment expenses may be limited.penses. You can deduct your travel expenses
Generally, you can deduct only 50% of
CAUTION
!Cruise Shipsonly if your attendance is connected to your own
your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.trade or business.
You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of your This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.
expenses of attending conventions, seminars,Convention agenda. The convention agenda
or similar meetings held on cruise ships. Allor program generally shows the purpose of the
ships that sail are considered cruise ships.convention. You can show your attendance at
the convention benefits your trade or business Directly-Related TestYou can deduct these expenses only if all of
by comparing the agenda with the official duties the following requirements are met.
and responsibilities of your position. The agenda To meet the directly-related test for entertain-
does not have to deal specifically with your offi- 1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is di- ment expenses (including entertainment-related
cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enough rectly related to your trade or business. meals), you must show that:
if the agenda is so related to your position that it 2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered in • The main purpose of the combined busi-shows your attendance was for business pur-
the United States. ness and entertainment was the activeposes.
conduct of business,3. All of the cruise ship's ports of call are in
• You did engage in business with the per-the United States or in possessions of theConventions Held Outside son during the entertainment period, andUnited States.the North American Area
• You had more than a general expectation4. You attach to your return a written state-
You cannot deduct expenses for attending a of getting income or some other specificment signed by you that includes informa-
convention, seminar, or similar meeting held business benefit at some future time.tion about:
outside the North American area unless:
a. The total days of the trip (not including Business is generally not considered to be the• The meeting is directly related to your the days of transportation to and from main purpose when business and entertainmenttrade or business, and
the cruise ship port), are combined on hunting or fishing trips, or on
• It is as reasonable to hold the meeting yachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you showb. The number of hours each day that yououtside the North American area as in it. that business was the main purpose, you gener-devoted to scheduled business activi- ally cannot deduct the expenses for the use ofIf the meeting meets these requirements, you ties, and an entertainment facility. See Entertainment fa-also must satisfy the rules for deducting ex-
c. A program of the scheduled business cilities under What Entertainment Expenses Arepenses for business trips in general, discussed
activities of the meeting.earlier under Travel Outside the United States. Not Deductible? later in this chapter.
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2-1.  When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible? show that you had a clear business purpose for
having the expense. The purpose may be to get
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, new business or to encourage the continuation
customer, or employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or of an existing business relationship.
the associated test.
Substantial business discussion. WhetherDefinitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide a business discussion is substantial depends on
entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes meals the facts of each case. A business discussion
provided to a customer or client. will not be considered substantial unless you
• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your can show that you actively engaged in the dis-
trade or business. cussion, meeting, negotiation, or other business
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate. transaction to get income or some other specific
business benefit.Tests to be met Directly-related test The meeting does not have to be for any• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or specified length of time, but you must show that
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, the business discussion was substantial in rela-and tion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment sary that you devote more time to business thanperiod, and to entertainment. You do not have to discussYou had more than a general expectation of getting income or some business during the meal or entertainment.other specific business benefit.
Meetings at conventions. You are consid-Associated test ered to have a substantial business discussion if
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and you attend meetings at a convention or similar
• Entertainment directly before or after a substantial business event, or at a trade or business meeting spon-
discussion. sored and conducted by a business or profes-
sional organization. However, your reason forOther rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment attending the convention or meeting must be to
expense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense. further your trade or business. The organization
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the that sponsors the convention or meeting must
circumstances. schedule a program of business activities that is
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed the main activity of the convention or meeting.
entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
Directly before or after business discussion.
If the entertainment is held on the same day as
the business discussion, it is considered to beExpenses not considered directly related.You must consider all the facts, including the
held directly before or after the business discus-Entertainment expenses generally are not con-nature of the business transacted and the rea-
sion.sidered directly related if you are not there or insons for conducting business during the enter-
If the entertainment and the business discus-situations where there are substantial distrac-tainment. It is not necessary to devote more time
sion are not held on the same day, you musttions that generally prevent you from activelyto business than to entertainment. However, if
consider the facts of each case to see if theconducting business. The following are exam-the business discussion is only incidental to the
associated test is met. Among the facts to con-ples of situations where there are substantialentertainment, the entertainment expenses do sider are the place, date, and duration of thedistractions.not meet the directly-related test. business discussion. If you or your business• A meeting or discussion at a nightclub, associates are from out of town, you must alsotheater, or sporting event.You do not have to show that business consider the dates of arrival and departure, andincome or other business benefit actu- the reasons the entertainment and the discus-• A meeting or discussion during what isally resulted from each entertainment
TIP sion did not take place on the same day.essentially a social gathering, such as aexpense. cocktail party.
Example. A group of business associates• A meeting with a group that includes per-Clear business setting. If the entertainment comes from out of town to your place of busi-sons who are not business associates attakes place in a clear business setting and is for ness to hold a substantial business discussion.places such as cocktail lounges, country If you entertain those business guests on theyour business or work, the expenses are consid- clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacation evening before the business discussion, or onered directly related to your business or work. resorts. the evening of the day following the businessThe following situations are examples of enter-
discussion, the entertainment generally is con-tainment in a clear business setting.
sidered to be held directly before or after the• Entertainment in a hospitality room at a discussion. The expense meets the associatedconvention where business goodwill is test. Associated Testcreated through the display or discussion
of business products.
Even if your expenses do not meet the di-
• Entertainment that is mainly a price rebate rectly-related test, they may meet the associ-
50% Limiton the sale of your products (such as a ated test.
restaurant owner providing an occasional To meet the associated test for entertain- In general, you can deduct only 50% of yourfree meal to a loyal customer). ment expenses (including entertainment-related business-related meal and entertainment ex-meals), you must show that the entertainment is:• Entertainment of a clear business nature penses. (If you are subject to the Department of
occurring under circumstances where Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits, you• Associated with the active conduct of your
there is no meaningful personal or social can deduct 80% of your business-related mealtrade or business, and
relationship between you and the persons and entertainment expenses. See Individuals• Directly before or after a substantial busi-entertained. An example is entertainment subject to ªhours of serviceº limits, later.)ness discussion (defined later).of business and civic leaders at the open- The 50% limit applies to employees or their
ing of a new hotel or play when the pur- employers, and to self-employed persons (in-
pose is to get business publicity rather Associated with trade or business. Gener- cluding independent contractors) or their clients,
than to create or maintain the goodwill of ally, an expense is associated with the active depending on whether the expenses are reim-
the persons entertained. conduct of your trade or business if you can bursed.
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction
cannot be more than $80 (50% ×  $160).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
Figure A can help you determine if the 50% limit
applies to you.
Expenses not subject to 50% limit. Your
meal or entertainment expense is not subject to
the 50% limit if the expense meets one of the
following exceptions.
1 - Employee's reimbursed expenses. If
you are an employee, you are not subject to the
50% limit on expenses for which your employer
reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
2 - Self-employed. If you are
self-employed, your deductible meal and enter-
tainment expenses are not subject to the 50%
limit if all of the following requirements are met.
• You have these expenses as an indepen-
dent contractor.
• Your customer or client reimburses you or
gives you an allowance for these ex-
penses in connection with services you
perform.
• You provide adequate records of these ex-
penses to your customer or client. (See
chapter 5.)
In this case, your client or customer is subject
to the 50% limit on the expenses.
Example. You are a self-employed attorney
who adequately accounts for meal and enter-
tainment expenses to a client who reimburses
you for these expenses. You are not subject to
the directly-related or associated test, nor are
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
you subject to the 50% limit. If the client can
deduct the expenses, the client is subject to the  Figure A  summarizes the general rules Application of 50% limit. The 50% limit on
50% limit.explained in this section. meal and entertainment expenses applies if the
If you (the contractor) have expenses forThe 50% limit applies to business meals or expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-
meals and entertainment related to providingentertainment expenses you have while: ered by one of the exceptions discussed later.
services for a client but do not adequately ac-The 50% limit also applies to certain meal• Traveling away from home (whether eat- count for and seek reimbursement from the cli-and entertainment expenses that are not busi-ing alone or with others) on business, ent for those expenses, you are subject to theness related. It applies to meal and entertain-
directly-related or associated test and to the• Entertaining customers at your place of ment expenses you have for the production of
50% limit.business, a restaurant, or other location, income, including rental or royalty income. It
or also applies to the cost of meals included in 3 - Advertising expenses. You are not sub-deductible educational expenses. ject to the 50% limit if you provide meals, enter-• Attending a business convention or recep-
tainment, or recreational facilities to the generaltion, business meeting, or business lunch- When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the
public as a means of advertising or promotingeon at a club. 50% limit after determining the amount that
goodwill in the community. For example, neitherwould otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
the expense of sponsoring a television or radiohave to determine the amount of meal and en-Included expenses. Expenses subject to the show nor the expense of distributing free foodtertainment expenses that would be deductible50% limit include: and beverages to the general public is subject tounder the other rules discussed in this publica-
the 50% limit.• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal tion.
or entertainment activity, 4 - Sale of meals or entertainment. YouExample 1. You spend $200 for a busi- are not subject to the 50% limit if you actually• Cover charges for admission to a night- ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is not sell meals, entertainment, goods and services,club, allowable because it is lavish and extravagant, or use of facilities to the public. For example, if• Rent paid for a room in which you hold a the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit. you run a nightclub, your expense for the enter-dinner or cocktail party, and Your deduction cannot be more than $45 (50% × tainment you furnish to your customers, such as$90).• Amounts paid for parking at a sports a floor show, is not subject to the 50% limit.
arena. Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a 5 - Charitable sports event. You are not
However, the cost of transportation to and from concert and give them to a client. You pur- subject to the 50% limit if you pay for a package
a business meal or a business-related entertain- chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You deal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita-
ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit. paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face ble sports event. For the conditions the sports
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduction may depend on your type of Exception for events that benefit charita-event must meet, see Exception for events that
business. Your kind of business may deter- ble organizations. Different rules apply whenbenefit charitable organizations under What En-
mine if a particular activity is considered enter- the cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits atertainment Expenses Are Deductible?, later.
tainment. For example, if you are a dress charitable organization. You can take into ac-
designer and have a fashion show to introduce count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if itIndividuals subject to ªhours of serviceº lim- your new designs to store buyers, the show is more than the face value, if all of the followingits. You can deduct a higher percentage of generally is not considered entertainment. This conditions apply.
your meal expenses while traveling away from is because fashion shows are typical in your • The event's main purpose is to benefit ayour tax home if the meals take place during or business. But, if you are an appliance distributor qualified charitable organization.incident to any period subject to the Department and hold a fashion show for the spouses of your
of Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. The • The entire net proceeds go to the charity.retailers, the show generally is considered en-
percentage is 80%. tertainment. • The event uses volunteers to perform sub-
Individuals subject to the Department of stantially all the event's work.Separating costs. If you have one expenseTransportation's ªhours of serviceº limits include that includes the costs of entertainment, andthe following persons. other services (such as lodging or transporta- The 50% limit on entertainment does
• Certain air transportation workers (such as tion), you must allocate that expense between not apply to any expense for a package
pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and the cost of entertainment and the cost of other deal that includes a ticket to such a
TIP
control tower operators) who are under services. You must have a reasonable basis for charitable sports event.
Federal Aviation Administration regula- making this allocation. For example, you must
allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-tions. Example 1. You purchase tickets to a golf
tainment in its lounge on the same bill with your tournament organized by the local volunteer fire• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers room charge. company. All net proceeds will be used to buywho are under Department of Transporta-
new fire equipment. The volunteers will run thetion regulations. Taking turns paying for meals or entertain- tournament. You can deduct the entire cost ofment. If a group of business acquaintances• Certain railroad employees (such as engi- the tickets as a business expense if they other-take turns picking up each others' meal or enter-neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- wise qualify as an entertainment expense.tainment checks without regard to whether anyers, and control operations personnel) business purposes are served, no member ofwho are under Federal Railroad Adminis- Example 2.  You purchase tickets to a col-the group can deduct any part of the expense.tration regulations. lege football game through a ticket broker. After
having a business discussion, you take a clientLavish or extravagant expenses. You can-• Certain merchant mariners who are under to the game. Net proceeds from the game go tonot deduct expenses for entertainment that areCoast Guard regulations. colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.lavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid- However, since the colleges also pay individualsered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable to perform services, such as coaching andconsidering the facts and circumstances. Ex- recruiting, you can only use the face value of thepenses will not be disallowed just because they tickets in determining your business deduction.are more than a fixed dollar amount or takeWhat Entertainment
place at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs, Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes. IfExpenses or resorts. you rent a skybox or other private luxury box for
more than one event at the same sports arena,Allocating between business and nonbusi-Are Deductible? you generally cannot deduct more than the priceness. If you entertain business and nonbusi-
of a nonluxury box seat ticket.ness individuals at the same event, you mustThis section explains different types of entertain-
divide your entertainment expenses between To determine whether a skybox has beenment expenses that you may be able to deduct.
business and nonbusiness. You can deduct only rented for more than one event, count each
the business part. If you cannot establish the game or other performance as one event. ForEntertainment. Entertainment includes any part of the expense for each person participat- example, renting a skybox for a series of playoffactivity generally considered to provide enter- ing, allocate the expense to each participant on games is considered renting it for more than onetainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples a pro rata basis. event. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena,
include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so- along with any rentals by related parties, are
cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at Example. You entertain a group of individu- considered in making this determination.
sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish- als that includes yourself, three business pros- Related parties include:ing, vacation, and similar trips. pects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of the
• Family members (spouses, ancestors, andexpense qualifies as a business entertainmentEntertainment also may include meeting per- lineal descendants),expense. You cannot deduct the expenses forsonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such
the seven social guests because those costs areas providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to • Parties who have made a reciprocal ar-nonbusiness expenses.customers or their families. rangement involving the sharing of
skyboxes,A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter- Trade association meetings. You can de-
tainment includes the cost of a meal you provide • Related corporations,duct entertainment expenses that are directly
to a customer or client, whether the meal is a related to and necessary for attending business • A partnership and its principal partners,part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal meetings or conventions of certain exempt orga- andexpense includes the cost of food, beverages, nizations if the expenses of your attendance are
• A corporation and a partnership with com-related to your active trade or business. Thesetaxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter-
mon ownership.organizations include business leagues, cham-tainment-related meal, you or your employee
bers of commerce, real estate boards, trademust be present when the food or beverages are
associations, and professional associations.provided. Example. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seat
skybox at Team Stadium for three baseballYou cannot claim the cost of your meal Entertainment tickets. Generally, you cannot games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seatsboth as an entertainment expense and deduct more than the face value of an entertain- at each event is $30 a seat. You can deductas a travel expense.
CAUTION
! ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For (subject to the 50% limit) $900 ((10 seats ×  $30example, you cannot deduct service fees you each) ×  3 events).Meals sold in the normal course of your pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
business are not considered entertain- over the face value of the tickets you pay to Food and beverages in skybox seats. If
ment.
TIP scalpers. expenses for food and beverages are separately
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
stated, you can deduct these expenses in addi- or for the spouse of a customer. However, you If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
tion to the amounts allowable for the skybox, can deduct these costs if you can show that you you are treated as one taxpayer. It does not
subject to the requirements and limits that apply. had a clear business purpose, rather than a matter whether you have separate businesses,
The amounts separately stated for food and personal or social purpose, for providing the are separately employed, or whether each of
beverages must be reasonable. You cannot in- entertainment. you has an independent connection with the
flate the charges for food and beverages to recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
avoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals. Example. You entertain a customer. The ship and the partners are treated as one tax-
cost is an ordinary and necessary business ex- payer.
pense and is allowed under the entertainment
rules. The customer's spouse joins you because Example. Bob Jones sells products to Local
What Entertainment it is impractical to entertain the customer without Company. He and his wife, Jan, gave Local
the spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter- Company three cheese packages to thank themExpenses Are Not taining the customer's spouse. If your spouse for their business. They paid $80 for each pack-
joins the party because the customer's spouse age, or $240 total. Three of Local Company'sDeductible? is present, the cost of the entertainment for your executives took the packages home for their
spouse is also deductible. families' use. Bob and Jan have no independentThis section explains different types of entertain-
business relationship with any of the executives'ment expenses that you generally may not be Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be other family members. They can deduct a totalable to deduct. considered either a gift or entertainment gener- of $75 ($25 limit ×  3) for the cheese packages.
ally will be considered entertainment. However,Club dues and membership fees. You can-
not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for if you give a customer packaged food or bever- Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such asmembership in any club organized for: ages that you intend the customer to use at a engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,later date, treat it as a gift. and mailing, are generally not included in deter-• Business,
If you give a customer tickets to a theater mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25• Pleasure, performance or sporting event and you do not go limit.
with the customer to the performance or event,• Recreation, or A cost is incidental only if it does not addyou have a choice. You can treat the tickets as substantial value to the gift. For example, the• Other social purpose. either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-your advantage.This rule applies to any membership organiza- ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket fortion if one of its principal purposes is either: You can change your treatment of the tickets packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if theat a later date by filing an amended return.• To conduct entertainment activities for value of the basket is substantial compared toGenerally, an amended return must be filedmembers or their guests, or the value of the fruit.within 3 years from the date the original return
• To provide members or their guests with was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax Exceptions. The following items are not con-access to entertainment facilities, dis- was paid, whichever is later. sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. cussed later. If you go with the customer to the event, you
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain- 1. An item that costs $4 or less and:The purposes and activities of a club, not its ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,name, will determine whether or not you can a. Has your name clearly and permanentlyto treat the tickets as a gift.deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid imprinted on the gift, and
to:
b. Is one of a number of identical items
• Country clubs, you widely distribute. Examples include
pens, desk sets, and plastic bags and• Golf and athletic clubs,
cases.• Airline clubs,
3. 2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional• Hotel clubs, and
material to be used on the business prem-• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir- ises of the recipient.cumstances generally considered to be
conducive to business discussions. Gifts
Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be
considered either a gift or entertainment gener-Entertainment facilities. Generally, you can- If you give gifts in the course of your trade or ally will be considered entertainment. However,not deduct any expense for the use of an enter- business, you can deduct all or part of the cost. if you give a customer packaged food or bever-tainment facility. This includes expenses for This chapter explains the limits and rules for ages that you intend the customer to use at adepreciation and operating costs such as rent, deducting the costs of gifts.utilities, maintenance, and protection. later date, treat it as a gift.
An entertainment facility is any property you If you give a customer tickets to a theater$25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples performance or sporting event and you do not gofor business gifts you give directly or indirectly toinclude a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, with the customer to the performance or event,each person during your tax year. A gift to aswimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, you have a choice. You can treat the cost of thecompany that is intended for the eventual per-airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-sonal use or benefit of a particular person or avacation resort. ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.limited class of people will be considered an
Out-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct You can change your treatment of the ticketsindirect gift to that particular person or to the
out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and at a later date by filing an amended return.individuals within that class of people who re-
beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that Generally, an amended return must be filedceive the gift.
you provided during entertainment at a facility. within 3 years from the date the original returnIf you give a gift to a member of a customer'sThese are not expenses for the use of an enter- was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxfamily, the gift is generally considered to be antainment facility. However, these expenses are was paid, whichever is later.indirect gift to the customer. This rule does notsubject to the directly-related and associated  If you go with the customer to the event, youapply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-tests and to the 50% limit, all discussed earlier. must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-ness connection with that family member and
ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,the gift is not intended for the customer's even-Expenses for spouses. You generally cannot
to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.tual use.deduct the cost of entertainment for your spouse
Chapter 3 Gifts Page 13

Page 14 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Temporary work location. If you have one or
more regular work locations away from your
home and you commute to a temporary work
location in the same trade or business, you can
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo-
rary unless there are facts and circumstances
that would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
or if there is no realistic expectation that the
employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
ployment is not temporary, regardless of
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,
but at some later date the employment is realisti-
cally expected to last more than 1 year, that
employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that
would indicate otherwise) until your expectation
changes. It will not be treated as temporary after
the date you determine it will last more than 1
year.
If the temporary work location is beyond the
general area of your regular place of work and
you stay overnight, you are traveling away from
home. You may have deductible travel ex-
penses as discussed in chapter 1.
No regular place of work. If you have no
regular place of work but ordinarily work in the
metropolitan area where you live, you can de-
duct daily transportation costs between home
and a temporary work site outside that metropol-
itan area.
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the
area within the city limits and the suburbs that
are considered part of that metropolitan area.
You cannot deduct daily transportation costs
between your home and temporary work sites
within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
ductible commuting expenses.
Two places of work. If you work at two places
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home.)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. If you do not go directly from your first job to your second
job, you can only deduct the transportation expenses of going directly from your first
job to your second job. You cannot deduct your transportation expenses between
your home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
in one day, whether or not for the same em-
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
• Going to a business meeting away from from one workplace to the other. However, if for
your regular workplace. some personal reason you do not go directly
from one location to the other, you cannot de-• Getting from your home to a temporary4. duct more than the amount it would have costworkplace when you have one or more you to go directly from the first location to theregular places of work. These temporary second.workplaces can be either within the area Transportation expenses you have in goingTransportation of your tax home or outside that area. between home and a part-time job on a day off
from your main job are commuting expenses.Transportation expenses do not include ex-
This chapter discusses expenses you can de- You cannot deduct them.penses you have while traveling away from
duct for business transportation when you are home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-not traveling away from home  as defined in Armed Forces reservists. A meeting of anpenses which are discussed in chapter 1. How-chapter 1. These expenses include the cost of Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place ofever, if you use your car while traveling awaytransportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the business if the meeting is held on a day on whichfrom home overnight, use the rules in this chap-cost of driving and maintaining your car. you work at your regular job. You can deduct theter to figure your car expense deduction. See expense of getting from one workplace to theTransportation expenses include the ordi- Car Expenses, later. other as just discussed under Two places ofnary and necessary costs of all of the following.
work.• Getting from one workplace to another in Illustration of transportation expenses. You usually cannot deduct the expense if thethe course of your business or profession Figure B illustrates the rules that apply for de- reserve meeting is held on a day on which youwhen you are traveling within the city or ducting transportation expenses when you have do not work at your regular job. In this case, yourgeneral area that is your tax home. Tax a regular or main job away from your home. You transportation generally is a nondeductible com-home is defined in chapter 1. may want to refer to it when deciding whether muting expense. However, you can deduct your
• Visiting clients or customers. you can deduct your transportation expenses. transportation expenses if the location of the
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
meeting is temporary and you have one or more assignments, you are employed where you  For more information on alternative motor vehi-
work, not where the union hall is located. cles, see Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehicleregular places of work.
Credit.If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-
Office in the home. If you have an office initan area but not at any specific location and the Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mailyour home that qualifies as a principal place ofreserve meeting is held at a temporary location carrier, you may be able to treat the qualifiedbusiness, you can deduct your daily transporta-outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct reimbursement you received as your allowabletion costs between your home and another workyour transportation expenses. expense. Because the qualified reimbursementlocation in the same trade or business. (SeeIf you travel away from home overnight to is treated as paid under an accountable plan,Publication 587, Business Use of Your Home,attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can your employer should not include the reimburse-for information on determining if your home of-deduct your travel expenses. These expenses ment in your income.fice qualifies as a principal place of business.)are discussed in chapter 1. If your vehicle expenses are more than theIf you travel more than 100 miles away from Examples of deductible transportation. The amount of your reimbursement, you can deducthome in connection with your performance of following examples show when you can deduct the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-services as a member of the reserves, you may transportation expenses based on the location duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You mustbe able to deduct some of your reserve-related of your work and your home. complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Form
travel costs as an adjustment to gross income 1040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.
rather than as an itemized deduction. For more Example 1. You regularly work in an office A ªqualified reimbursementº is the reim-
information, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav- in the city where you live. Your employer sends bursement you receive that meets both of the
eling More Than 100 Miles From Home  under you to a 1-week training session at a different following conditions.
Special Rules, in chapter 6. office in the same city. You travel directly from
• It is given as an equipment maintenanceyour home to the training location and return
allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily
Postal Service.the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, round-trip transportation between your home
or of driving a car between your home and your and the training location. • It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-main or regular place of work. These costs are lective bargaining agreement. Any laterpersonal commuting expenses. You cannot de- Example 2. Your principal place of business agreement cannot increase the qualified
duct commuting expenses no matter how far is in your home. You can deduct the cost of reimbursement amount by more than the
your home is from your regular place of work. round-trip transportation between your qualify- rate of inflation.
You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if ing home office and your client's or customer's
See your employer for information on your reim-you work during the commuting trip. place of business.
bursement.
Example. You sometimes use your cell Example 3. You have no regular office, and
If you are a rural mail carrier and re-phone to make business calls while commuting you do not have an office in your home. In this
ceived a qualified reimbursement, youto and from work. Sometimes business associ- case, the location of your first business contact
cannot use the standard mileage rate.ates ride with you to and from work, and you is considered your office. Transportation ex-
CAUTION
!
have a business discussion in the car. These penses between your home and this first contact
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-activities do not change the trip from personal to Standard Mileage Rateportation expenses between your last businessbusiness. You cannot deduct your commuting
contact and your home are also nondeductibleexpenses. You may be able to use the standard mileagecommuting expenses. Although you cannot de- rate to figure the deductible costs of operatingParking fees. Fees you pay to park your car duct the costs of these trips, you can deduct the your car for business purposes. For 2009, theat your place of business are nondeductible costs of going from one client or customer to standard mileage rate for the cost of operatingcommuting expenses. You can, however, de- another. your car for business use is 55 cents per mile.duct business-related parking fees when visiting
a customer or client. If you use the standard mileage rate for
a year, you cannot deduct your actualAdvertising display on car. Putting display
car expenses for that year. You cannotmaterial that advertises your business on your
CAUTION
! Car Expenses
deduct depreciation, lease payments, mainte-car does not change the use of your car from
nance and repairs, gasoline (including gasolinepersonal use to business use. If you use this car If you use your car for business purposes, you
taxes), oil, insurance, or vehicle registrationfor commuting or other personal uses, you still ordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener-
fees. See Choosing the standard mileage ratecannot deduct your expenses for those uses. ally can use one of the two following methods to
and Standard mileage rate not allowed, later.figure your deductible expenses.Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of You generally can use the standard mileageusing your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not • Standard mileage rate. rate whether or not you are reimbursed andinclude payments you receive from the passen- whether or not any reimbursement is more or• Actual car expenses.gers in your income. These payments are con- less than the amount figured using the standardsidered reimbursements of your expenses. mileage rate. See chapter 6 for more informationIf you use actual expenses to figure your de-However, if you operate a car pool for a profit, on reimbursements.duction for a car you lease, there are rules thatyou must include payments from passengers in affect the amount of your lease payments thatyour income. You can then deduct your car Choosing the standard mileage rate. If youyou can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later.expenses (using the rules in this publication). want to use the standard mileage rate for a carIn this publication, ªcarº includes a van, you own, you must choose to use it in the firstHauling tools or instruments. Hauling pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of ªcarº year the car is available for use in your business.tools or instruments in your car while commuting for depreciation purposes, see Car defined Then in later years, you can choose to use eitherto and from work does not make your car ex- under Actual Car Expenses, later. the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.penses deductible. However, you can deduct You may be entitled to a tax credit for If you want to use the standard mileage rateany additional costs you have for hauling tools or an alternative motor vehicle that you for a car you lease, you must use it for the entireinstruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow place in service during the year. The lease period. For leases that began on or before
TIPwith your car). vehicle must meet certain requirements, and December 31, 1997, the standard mileage rate
Union members' trips from a union hall. If you do not have to use it in your business to must be used for the entire portion of the lease
you get your work assignments at a union hall qualify for the credit. However, you must reduce period (including renewals) that is after 1997.
and then go to your place of work, the costs of your basis for depreciation of the alternative You must make the choice to use the stan-
getting from the union hall to your place of work motor vehicle by the amount of the credit you dard mileage rate by the due date (including
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al- claim. See Depreciation Deduction, later, under extensions) of your return. You cannot revoke
though you need the union to get your work Actual Car Expenses. the choice. However, in later years, you can
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
switch from the standard mileage rate to the Example 4. Maureen owns a car and four Business and personal use. If you use your
vans that are used in her housecleaning busi- car for both business and personal purposes,actual expenses method. If you change to the
ness. Her employees use the vans and she uses you must divide your expenses between busi-actual expenses method in a later year, but
the car to travel to various customers. Maureen ness and personal use. You can divide yourbefore your car is fully depreciated, you have to
cannot use the standard mileage rate for the car expense based on the miles driven for eachestimate the remaining useful life of the car and
or the vans. This is because all five vehicles are purpose.use straight line depreciation.
used in Maureen's business at the same time.For more information about depreciation in- Example. You are a sales representativeShe must use actual expenses for all vehicles.cluded in the standard mileage rate, see Excep- for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000tion under Methods of depreciation  under Interest. If you are an employee, you cannot miles during the year: 12,000 miles for businessDepreciation Deduction, later. deduct any interest paid on a car loan. This and 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claim
applies even if you use the car 100% for busi- only 60% (12,000 ÷  20,000) of the cost of oper-
Standard mileage rate not allowed. You ness as an employee. ating your car as a business expense.
cannot use the standard mileage rate if you: However, if you are self-employed and use Employer-provided vehicle. If you use a ve-your car in your business, you can deduct that• Use the car for hire (such as a taxi), hicle provided by your employer for businesspart of the interest expense that represents your purposes, you can deduct your actual un-• Use five or more cars at the same time (as business use of the car. For example, if you use reimbursed car expenses. You cannot use thein fleet operations), your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60% standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided byof the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). You• Claimed a depreciation deduction for the Your Employer in chapter 6.cannot deduct the part of the interest expensecar using any method other than straight that represents your personal use of the car. Interest on car loans. If you are an employee,line, for example, MACRS (as discussed
you cannot deduct any interest paid on a carlater under Depreciation Deduction), If you use a home equity loan to
loan. This interest is treated as personal interestpurchase your car, you may be able to• Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis- and is not deductible. If you are self-employeddeduct the interest. See Publication
TIPcussed later) on the car, and use your car in that business, see Interest,936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, for
earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate.more information.• Claimed the special depreciation allow-
ance on the car, Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em-
Personal property taxes. If you itemize your ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enterfor a car you leased, or deduct on line 7 state and local personal prop- the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Form
• Are a rural mail carrier who received a erty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take this 1040).
qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail deduction even if you use the standard mileage
Sales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on yourrate or if you do not use the car for business.carriers, earlier.) car are part of your car's basis and are recov-If you are self-employed and use your car in
ered through depreciation, discussed later.your business, you can deduct the business partFive or more cars. If you own or lease five
However, if you purchased a new motor vehicleof state and local personal property taxes onor more cars that are used for business at the after February 16, 2009, and to the extent themotor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ,same time, you cannot use the standard mile- car is not used in your trade or business, youor Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize yourage rate for the business use of any car. How- can choose to deduct the nonbusiness part ofdeductions, you can include the remainder ofever, you may be able to deduct your actual the qualified vehicle state or local sales or exciseyour state and local personal property taxes onexpenses for operating each of the cars in your tax on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 7, or onthe car on Schedule A (Form 1040).business. See Actual Car Expenses , later, for Schedule L (Form 1040A or Form 1040), as aninformation on how to figure your deduction. addition to your standard deduction if you do notParking fees and tolls. In addition to usingYou are not using five or more cars for busi- itemize your deductions.the standard mileage rate, you can deduct anyness at the same time if you alternate using (use business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parking Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct finesat different times) the cars for business. fees that you pay to park your car at your place you pay or collateral you forfeit for traffic viola-The following examples illustrate the rules of work are nondeductible commuting ex- tions.for when you can and cannot use the standard penses.)
mileage rate for five or more cars. Casualty and theft losses. If your car is dam-
Sale, trade-in, or other disposition. If you aged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able to
Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car, deduct part of the loss that is not covered by
you may have a gain or loss on the transactionthree cars and two vans that she alternates insurance. See Publication 547, Casualties, Di-
or an adjustment to the basis of your new car.using for calling on her customers. She can use sasters, and Thefts, for information on deducting
See Disposition of a Car, later.the standard mileage rate for the business mile- a loss on your car.
age of the three cars and the two vans because Depreciation and section 179 deductions.she does not use them at the same time. Actual Car Expenses Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and
improvements, is a capital expense. BecauseIf you do not use the standard mileage rate, youExample 2. Tony and his employees use the benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener-may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.his four pickup trucks in his landscaping busi- ally cannot deduct a capital expense. However,ness. During the year, he traded in two of his old If you qualify to use both methods, you you can recover this cost through the sectiontrucks for two newer ones. Tony can use the may want to figure your deduction both 179 deduction (the deduction allowed by sectionstandard mileage rate for the business mileage ways to see which gives you a larger 179 of the Internal Revenue Code), special de-
TIPof all six of the trucks he owned during the year. deduction. preciation allowance, and depreciation deduc-
tions. Depreciation allows you to recover theActual car expenses include:Example 3. Chris owns a repair shop and cost over more than 1 year by deducting part of itan insurance business. He and his employees Depreciation Lease Registration each year. The section 179 deduction , special
use his two pickup trucks and van for the repair Licenses payments fees depreciation allowance , and depreciation de-
Gas Insurance Repairsshop. Chris alternates using his two cars for the ductions are discussed later.Oil Garage rent Tiresinsurance business. No one else uses the cars Generally, there are limits on these deduc-Tolls Parking feesfor business purposes. Chris can use the stan- tions. Special rules apply if you use your car
dard mileage rate for the business use of the If you have fully depreciated a car that you 50% or less in your work or business.
pickup trucks, van, and the cars because he still use in your business, you can continue to You can claim a section 179 deduction and
never has more than four vehicles used for busi- claim your other actual car expenses. Continue use a depreciation method other than straight
ness at the same time. to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5. line only if you do not use the standard mileage
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
rate to figure your business-related car ex- business use does not qualify the cost of your gross vehicle weight. However, the $25,000 limit
penses in the year you first place a car in serv- car for a section 179 deduction in 2009. How- does not apply to any vehicle:
ice. ever, you can claim a depreciation deduction for • Designed to have a seating capacity ofIf you claim either a section 179 deduction or the business use of the car starting in 2009. See more than nine persons behind theuse a depreciation method other than straight Depreciation Deduction, later. driver's seat,line in the year you first place a car in service,
More than 50% business use requirement. • Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6you cannot use the standard mileage rate on
You must use the property more than 50% for feet in interior length that is an open areathat car in any future year.
business to claim any section 179 deduction. If or is designed for use as an open area but
Car defined. For depreciation purposes, a car you used the property more than 50% for busi- is enclosed by a cap and is not readily
is any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck or ness, multiply the cost of the property by the accessible directly from the passenger
van) that is made primarily for use on public percentage of business use. The result is the compartment, or
streets, roads, and highways. Its unloaded gross cost of the property that can qualify for the sec- • That has an integral enclosure, fully en-vehicle weight must not be more than 6,000 tion 179 deduction. closing the driver compartment and loadpounds. A car includes any part, component, or
carrying device, does not have seatingother item that is physically attached to it or is Example. Peter purchased a car in April
rearward of the driver's seat, and has nousually included in the purchase price. 2009 for $19,500 and he used it 60% for busi-
body section protruding more than 30 in-A car does not include: ness. The total cost of Peter's car that qualifies
ches ahead of the leading edge of thefor the section 179 deduction is $11,700• An ambulance, hearse, or combination windshield.($19,500 cost ×  60% business use). But seeambulance-hearse used directly in a busi- Limit on total section 179, special depreciationness, Limit on total section 179, special depreci-allowance, and depreciation deduction , dis- ation allowance, and depreciation deduc-• A vehicle used directly in the business of cussed later. tion. Generally, the total amount of sectiontransporting persons or property for pay or 179, special depreciation allowance, and depre-Limits. There are limits on:hire, or ciation deduction that you can claim for a quali-
• The amount of the section 179 deduction,• A truck or van that is a qualified nonper- fied car that you placed in service in 2009 is
sonal use vehicle. $10,960. The limit is reduced if your business• The section 179 deduction for sport utility
use of the car is less than 100%. See Deprecia-and certain other vehicles, andQualified nonpersonal use vehicles. tion Limits, later, for more information.
These are vehicles that by their nature are not • The total amount of the section 179 de-
likely to be used more than a minimal amount for duction, special depreciation allowance, Example. In the earlier example  under
personal purposes. They include trucks and and depreciation deduction (discussed More than 50% business use requirement, Peter
vans that have been specially modified so that later) you can claim for a qualified prop- had a car with a qualifying cost (for purposes of
they are not likely to be used more than a mini- erty. the section 179 deduction) of $11,700. How-
mal amount for personal purposes, such as by ever, Peter's total section 179, special deprecia-
Limit on the amount of the section 179installation of permanent shelving and painting tion allowance, and depreciation deduction is
deduction. For 2009, the total amount youthe vehicle to display advertising or the com- limited to $6,576 ($10,960 limit x 60% business
can choose to deduct under section 179 gener-pany's name. Delivery trucks with seating only use).
ally cannot be more than $250,000.for the driver, or only for the driver plus a folding
Cost of car. For purposes of the section 179jump seat are qualified nonpersonal use vehi- If the cost of your qualifying section 179
deduction, the cost of the car does not includecles. property placed in service in 2009 is over
any amount figured by reference to any other$800,000, you must reduce the $250,000 dollarMore information. See Depreciation De- property held by you at any time. For example, iflimit (but not below zero) by the amount of costduction, later, for more information on how to you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car toover $800,000. If the cost of your section 179depreciate your vehicle. use in your business, your cost for purposes ofproperty placed in service during 2009 is
the section 179 deduction does not include your$1,050,000 or more, you cannot take a section
adjusted basis in the car you trade in for the new179 deduction.Section 179 Deduction car. Your cost includes only the cash you paid.The total amount you can deduct under sec-
tion 179 each year after you apply the limitsThe section 179 deduction allows you to treat a Basis of car for depreciation. The amount
listed above cannot be more than the taxableportion or all of the business cost of a car as a of the section 179 deduction reduces your basis
income from the active conduct of any trade orcurrent expense instead of taking depreciation in your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc-
business during the year.deductions over a number of years. tion, you must subtract the amount of the deduc-
If you are married and file a joint return, you tion from the cost of your car. The resultingThere is a limit on the total section 179 and your spouse are treated as one taxpayer in amount is the basis in your car that you use todeduction, special depreciation allow- determining any reduction to the dollar limit, figure your depreciation deduction.ance, and depreciation deduction for
TIP regardless of which of you purchased the prop-cars, trucks, and vans, that may reduce or elimi- When to choose. If you want to take the sec-erty or placed it in service.nate any benefit from claiming the section 179 tion 179 deduction, you must make the choice inIf you and your spouse file separate returns,deduction. See Depreciation Limits, later. the tax year you both purchase the car and placeyou are treated as one taxpayer for the dollarYou can claim the section 179 deduction it in service for business or work.limit. You must allocate the dollar limit (after anyonly in the year you place the car in service. For reduction) between you. How to choose. Employees use Form 2106 tothis purpose, a car is placed in service when it is For more information on the above section make this choice and report the section 179ready and available for a specific use, whether in 179 deduction limits, see Publication 946. deduction. All others use Form 4562.a trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, a
Limit for sport utility and certain other ve- File the appropriate form with either of thepersonal activity, or for the production of in-
hicles. For sport utility and certain other vehi- following.come. Even if you are not using the property, it is
cles placed in service in 2009, the portion of thein service when it is ready and available for its • Your original tax return filed for the yearvehicle's cost taken into account in figuring yourspecific use. the property was placed in servicesection 179 deduction is limited to $25,000. ThisA car first used for personal purposes cannot (whether or not you file it timely).rule applies to any four-wheeled vehicle prima-qualify for the deduction in a later year when its
rily designed or used to carry passengers over • An amended return filed within the timeuse changes to business.
public streets, roads, or highways, that is not prescribed by law. An election made on an
subject to any of the passenger automobile lim-Example. In 2008 you bought a new car and amended return must specify the item of
its explained under Depreciation Limits , later,used it for personal purposes. In 2009, you be- section 179 property to which the election
and that is rated at no more than 14,000 poundsgan to use it for business. Changing its use to applies and the part of the cost of each
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
such item to be taken into account. The • You purchased the car new on or after situations you will use your adjusted basis (your
January 1, 2008, but only if no binding basis reduced by depreciation allowed or allow-amended return must also include any re-
written contract to acquire the car existed able in earlier years). For one of these situationssulting adjustments to taxable income.
before January 1, 2008, see Exception under Methods of depreciation,
later.• You placed the car in service in your tradeYou must keep records that show the If you change the use of a car from personalor business before January 1, 2010,specific identification of each piece of to business, your basis for depreciation is thequalifying section 179 property. These
CAUTION
! • You used the car more than 50% in a lesser of the fair market value or your adjustedrecords must show how you acquired the prop- qualified business use. basis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi-erty, the person you acquired it from, and when tional rules concerning basis are discussed lateryou placed it in service. in this chapter under Unadjusted basis.Example. Dan purchased a new car for
Revoking an election. An election (or any $20,500 in June 2009, and used it 100% in his Placed in service. You generally place a carspecification made in the election) to take a business. The car is qualified property. Dan's in service when it is available for use in yoursection 179 deduction for 2009 can be revoked unadjusted basis is $20,500. Dan chooses not work or business, in an income-producing activ-without IRS approval by filing an amended re- to claim any section 179 deduction but he does ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation beginsturn. The amended return must be filed within choose to claim the special depreciation allow- when the car is placed in service for use in yourthe time prescribed by law. The amended return ance. Dan figures his special allowance to be work or business or for the production of income.must also include any resulting adjustment to $10,250 ($20,500 x 50%). For purposes of computing depreciation, iftaxable income. Once made, the revocation is Dan chooses the MACRS 200% declining you first start using the car only for personal useirrevocable. balance method and figures his regular depreci- and later convert it to business use, you placeation deduction under MACRS (discussed later) the car in service on the date of conversion.Recapture of section 179 deduction. To be to be $2,050 (($20,500 − $10,250) x 20%). The
eligible to claim the section 179 deduction, you Car placed in service and disposed of intotal section 179, special depreciation allow-
must use your car more than 50% for business the same year. If you place a car in serviceance, and MACRS depreciation deduction is
or work in the year you acquired it. If your busi- and dispose of it in the same tax year, you$12,300 ($10,250 + $2,050). However, Dan's
ness use of the car is 50% or less in a later tax cannot claim any depreciation deduction for thatdepreciation deduction is limited to $10,960.
year during the recovery period, you have to car.Therefore, Dan reports $10,960 as depreciation
recapture (include in income) in that later year for his car in 2009. See Depreciation Limits ,
Methods of depreciation. Generally, you fig-any excess depreciation. Any section 179 de- later.
ure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac-duction claimed on the car is included in calcu-
celerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS).lating the excess depreciation. For information Election not to claim the special depreciation
MACRS is discussed later in this chapter.on this calculation, see Excess depreciation , allowance. You can elect not to claim the spe-
later in this chapter under Car Used 50% or Less cial depreciation allowance for your car, truck, or Exception. If you used the standard mile-for Business. van, that is qualified property. If you make this age rate in the first year of business use andelection, it applies to all 5-year property placed change to the actual expenses method in a laterDispositions. If you dispose of a car on which in service during the year. year, you cannot depreciate your car under theyou had claimed the section 179 deduction, the To make the election, attach a statement to MACRS rules. You must use straight line depre-amount of that deduction is treated as a depreci- your timely filed return (including extensions) ciation over the estimated remaining useful lifeation deduction for recapture purposes. You indicating the class of property (5-year for cars) of the car.treat any gain on the disposition of the property for which you are making the election and that To figure depreciation under the straight lineas ordinary income up to the amount of the you are electing not to claim the special depreci- method, you must reduce your basis in the carsection 179 deduction and any allowable depre- ation allowance for qualified property acquired (but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for allciation (unless you establish the amount actually after December 31, 2008. miles for which you used the standard mileageallowed). For information on the disposition of a rate. The rate per mile varies depending on theUnless you elect not to claim the spe-car, see Disposition of a Car, later. year(s) you used the standard mileage rate. Forcial depreciation allowance, you must
the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustmentreduce the car's adjusted basis by the
CAUTION
!
when you used the standard mileage rate underamount of the allowance, even if the allowanceSpecial Depreciation Allowance Disposition of a Car, later.was not claimed.
This reduction of basis is in addition to thoseYou may be able to claim the special deprecia-
basis adjustments described later under Unad-tion allowance for your car, truck, or van, if it is
justed basis. You must use your adjusted basisqualified property and was placed in service in Depreciation Deduction in your car to figure your depreciation deduction.2009. The allowance is an additional deprecia-
For additional information on the straight lineIf you use actual car expenses to figure yourtion deduction of 50% of the car's depreciable
method of depreciation, see Publication 946.deduction for a car you own and use in yourbasis (after any section 179 deduction, but
business, you can claim a depreciation deduc-before figuring your regular depreciation deduc- More-than-50%-use test. Generally, yoution: that is, you can deduct a certain amounttion under MACRS). The special depreciation must use your car more than 50% for qualifiedeach year as a recovery of your cost or otherallowance applies only for the first year the car is business use (defined next) during the year tobasis in your car.placed in service. To qualify for the allowance use MACRS. You must meet thismore than 50% of the use of the car must be in a You generally need to know the following more-than-50%-use test each year of the recov-qualified business use (as defined under Depre- things about the car you intend to depreciate. ery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car.ciation Deduction, later. • Your basis in the car. If your business use is 50% or less, you mustYour combined section 179 deduction, spe- use the straight line method to depreciate your• The date you place the car in service.cial depreciation allowance, and regular car. This is explained later under Car Used 50%MACRS depreciation deduction is limited to the • The method of depreciation and recovery or Less for Business.maximum allowable depreciation deduction for period you will use.cars of $10,960 ($2,960 if you elect not to claim Qualified business use. A qualified businessthe special depreciation allowance). For trucks use is any use in your trade or business. It doesBasis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci-and vans the limit is $11,060 ($3,060 if you elect not include use for the production of incomeation is generally its cost. This includes anynot to claim the special depreciation allowance). (investment use). However, you do combineamount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-See Depreciation Limits, later in this chapter. your business and investment use to computeerty, or services. your depreciation deduction for the tax year.Qualified car. To be a qualified car (including Generally, you figure depreciation on your
trucks and vans), the car must meet all of the car, truck, or van, using your unadjusted basis Use of your car by another person. Do not
following tests. (see Unadjusted basis, later). However, in some treat any use of your car by another person as
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
use in your trade or business unless that use basis for figuring depreciation is your original for the tax year, reduced by the deprecia-
meets one of the following conditions. basis increased or decreased by certain tion allowance for the remaining basis of
amounts. the old car. You must use Form 4562 to• It is directly connected with your business. compute your depreciation deduction. YouTo figure your unadjusted basis, begin with
• It is properly reported by you as income to cannot use Form 2106, Part II, Section D.your car's original basis, which generally is its
the other person (and, if you have to, you This method is explained in Publicationcost. Cost includes sales taxes (see Sales taxes
withhold tax on the income). 946.earlier), destination charges, and dealer prepa-
ration. Increase your basis by any substantial• It results in a payment of fair market rent. If you elect to use the method described inimprovements you make to your car, such asThis includes any payment to you for the (1), you must do so on a timely filed tax returnadding air conditioning or a new engine. De-use of your car. (including extensions). Otherwise, you must usecrease your basis by any section 179 deduction, the method described in (2).special depreciation allowance, gas guzzler tax,
Business use changes. If you used your car Effect of trade-in on basis. The discussionclean fuel vehicle deduction, and alternative mo-
more than 50% in qualified business use in the that follows applies to trade-ins of cars in 2009,tor vehicle credit.
year you placed it in service, but 50% or less in a where the election was made to treat the trans-See Form 8910 for information on the alter-later year (including the year of disposition), you action as a tax-free disposition of the old car andnative motor vehicle credit.have to change to the straight line method of the purchase of the new car. For information on
If your business use later falls to 50%depreciation. See Qualified business use 50% how to figure depreciation for cars involved in a
or less, you may have to recaptureor less in a later year  under Car Used 50% or like-kind exchange (trade-in) in 2009, for which
(include in your income) any excessLess for Business, later.
CAUTION
! the election was not made, see Publication 946
depreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for and Regulations section 1.168(i)-6(d)(3).Property does not cease to be used Business, later, for more information.more than 50% in qualified business Traded car used only for business. If youIf you acquired the car by gift or inheritance,use by reason of a transfer at death.
TIP trade in a car that you used only in your businesssee Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor- for another car that will be used only in yourmation on your basis in the car.Use for more than one purpose. If you use business, your original basis in the new car is
your car for more than one purpose during the Improvements. A major improvement to a your adjusted basis in the old car, plus any
tax year, you must allocate the use to the vari- car is treated as a new item of 5-year recovery additional amount you pay for the new car.
ous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile- property. It is treated as placed in service in the
age. Figure the percentage of qualified business year the improvement is made. It does not mat- Example 1. Paul trades in a car that has an
use by dividing the number of miles you drive ter how old the car is when the improvement is adjusted basis of $5,000 for a new car. In addi-
your car for business purposes during the year added. Follow the same steps for depreciating tion, he pays cash of $20,000 for the new car.
by the total number of miles you drive the car the improvement as you would for depreciating His original basis of the new car is $25,000 (his
during the year for any purpose. the original cost of the car. However, you must $5,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus the
treat the improvement and the car as a whole $20,000 cash paid). Paul's unadjusted basis isChange from personal to business use. If when applying the limits on the depreciation $25,000 unless he claims the section 179 de-you change the use of a car from 100% personal deductions. Your car's depreciation deduction duction, special depreciation allowance, or hasuse to business use during the tax year, you for the year (plus any section 179 deduction, other increases or decreases to his original ba-may not have mileage records for the time special depreciation allowance, and deprecia- sis, discussed under Unadjusted basis, earlier.before the change to business use. In this case, tion on any improvements) cannot be more thanyou figure the percentage of business use for Example 2. In September 2006, Marcia pur-the depreciation limit that applies for that year.the year as follows. chased a car for $26,000 and placed it in serviceSee Depreciation Limits, later.
for 100% use in her business. Marcia did not1. Determine the percentage of business use
Car trade-in. If you traded one car (the ªold claim a section 179 deduction. Marcia's unad-for the period following the change. Do this
carº) in on another car (the ªnew carº) in 2009, justed basis for the car was $26,000. For 2006by dividing business miles by total miles
there are two ways you can treat the transaction. through 2008, Marcia figured her depreciationdriven during that period.
deduction using the MACRS depreciation chart2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction. 1. You can elect to treat the transaction as a for those years.The numerator (top number) is the number tax-free disposition of the old car and the In September 2009, Marcia traded that car inof months the car is used for business and purchase of the new car. If you make this and paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be usedthe denominator (bottom number) is 12. election, you treat the old car as disposed 100% in her business. Marcia is allowedof at the time of the trade-in. The deprecia- one-half of the MACRS depreciation amountble basis of the new car is the adjustedExample. You use a car only for personal figured for 2009 for her old car. (See Dispositionbasis of the old car (figured as if 100% ofpurposes during the first 6 months of the year. of a Car, later.)the car's use had been for business pur-During the last 6 months of the year, you drive Marcia figures her basis in the new car asposes) plus any additional amount youthe car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000 follows.paid for the new car. You then figure yourmiles are for business. This gives you a busi-
depreciation deduction for the new car be-ness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷  15,000) Cost of old car $26,000ginning with the date you placed it in serv-for that period. Your business use for the year is Less total depreciation allowed:
ice. You make this election by completing 2009Ð($26,000 ×  .1152) ×  1/240% (80% ×  6/12).
Form 2106, Part II, Section D. This method (Limit: $1,775) $1,498
Limits. The amount you can claim for section is explained later, beginning at Effect of 2008Ð($26,000 ×  .192) 
(Limit: $2,850) 2,850179, the special depreciation allowance, and trade-in on basis.
2007Ð($26,000 ×  .32) depreciation deductions may be limited. The 2. If you do not make the election described (Limit: $4,800) 4,800maximum amount you can claim depends on the in (1), you must figure depreciation sepa- 2006Ð($26,000 ×  .20)year in which you placed your car in service. You rately for the remaining basis of the old car (Limit: $2,960) 2,960have to reduce the maximum amount if you did Total depreciation allowed ±12,108and for any additional amount you paid fornot use the car exclusively for business. See the new car. You must apply two deprecia-Depreciation Limits, later. Adjusted basis of old car and basis oftion limits (see Depreciation Limits, later). part of new car that can be treated asThe limit that applies to the remaining ba-Unadjusted basis. You use your unadjusted newly purchased MACRS property $ 13,892sis of the old car generally is the amountbasis (often referred to as your basis or your
that would have been allowed had you notbasis for depreciation) to figure your deprecia- Additional basis (cash paid) for new
traded in the old car. The limit that appliestion using the MACRS depreciation chart, ex- car that is treated as newly purchased
to the additional amount you paid for theplained later under Modified Accelerated Cost MACRS property +14,200
new car generally is the limit that appliesRecovery System (MACRS) . Your unadjusted
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Total basis of new car $28,092 Depreciation deduction for certain IndianLess: Lesser of excess amount
reservation property. Shorter recovery peri-($3,327) or adjusted basis 
ods are provided under MACRS for qualifiedof old van ($9,519) − 3,327
Traded car used partly in business. If you Indian reservation property placed in service on
Unadjusted basis of part of new van trade in a car that you used partly in your busi- Indian reservations after 1993 and before 2010.
that can be treated as newly ness for a new car that you will use in your The recovery period that applies for a busi-purchased MACRS property $ 6,192business, you must make a ªtrade-inº adjust- ness-use car is 3 years instead of 5 years. How-
ment for the personal use of the old car. This ever, the depreciation limits, discussed later, willAdditional basis (cash paid) for new adjustment has the effect of reducing your basis still apply.van that is treated as newly in your old car, but not below zero, for purposes purchased MACRS property $12,500 For more information on the qualifications forof figuring your depreciation deduction for the this shorter recovery period and the percent-new car. (This adjustment is not used, however, ages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc-when you determine the gain or loss on the later Example 2. Rob paid $21,000 for a new car tion, see chapter 4 of Publication 946.disposition of the new car. See Publication 544, that he placed in service in 2006. He used it
Depreciation methods. You can use oneSales and Other Dispositions of Assets, for in- partly for business in 2006 (9,600 business
formation on how to report the disposition of of the following methods to depreciate your car.miles of 15,000 total miles), 2007 (12,000 busi-
your car.) ness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 2008 • The 200% declining balance method
To figure the unadjusted basis of your new (14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used the (200% DB) over a 5-year recovery period
car for depreciation, first add to your adjusted standard mileage rate in those years to claim the that switches to the straight line methodbasis in the old car any additional amount you business use of his car. (See Depreciation ad- when that method provides an equal orpay for the new car. Then subtract from that total justment when you used the standard mileage greater deduction.the excess, if any, of: rate under Disposition of a Car, later.)
• The 150% declining balance methodOn January 3, 2009, Rob traded in this car1. The total of the amounts that would have (150% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodand paid an additional $10,000 for his new car.been allowable as depreciation during the that switches to the straight line methodRob figures the unadjusted basis for his new cartax years before the trade if 100% of the when that method provides an equal oras shown next.use of the car had been business and in- greater deduction.
vestment use, over
Cost of old car $21,000 • The straight line method (SL) over a
2. The total of the amounts actually allowed Less: Total depreciation allowed: 5-year recovery period.
as depreciation during those years. 2008Ð14,400 mi. ×  .21 $3,024
2007Ð12,000 mi. ×  .19 2,280For information about figuring depreciation, see If you use Table 4-1  (discussed later2006Ð 9,600 mi. ×  .17 1,632 − 6,936
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System Adjusted basis of old car under MACRS depreciation chart ) to
(MACRS), which follows Example 2, later. before trade-in adjustment $14,064 determine your depreciation rate for
TIP
2009, you do not need to determine in what yearTrade-in adjustment:Example 1. In March, Mark traded his 2005 using the straight line method provides an equalDepreciation at 100% business use:van (placed in service in June 2005) for a new or greater deduction. This is because the chart2008Ð18,000 mi. ×  .21 $3,7802009 model. He used the old van 75% for busi- has the switch to the straight line method built2007Ð16,000 mi. ×  .19 3,040ness and he used the new van 75% for business into its rates.2006Ð15,000 mi. ×  .17 2,550in 2009. Mark claimed actual expenses (includ- Total $9,370 Before choosing a method, you may wish toing $9,981 depreciation expense) for the busi- Less: Actual depreciation consider the following facts.ness use of the old van since 2005. He did not allowed − 6,936
claim a section 179 deduction for the old or the Excess of 100% over actual $2,434 • Using the straight line method provides
new van. equal yearly deductions throughout the re-Less: Lesser of excess amount
Mark paid $19,500 for the 2005 van in June covery period.($2,434) or adjusted basis
2005. He paid an additional $12,500 when he  of old car ($14,064) − 2,434 • Using the declining balance methods pro-acquired the 2009 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 of vides greater deductions during the earlierUnadjusted basis of part of new car the depreciation deduction amount (which is in- recovery years with the deductions gener-that can be treated as newly cluded in the $9,981 depreciation expense total)
ally getting smaller each year.purchased MACRS property $11,630for his old van for 2009, the year of disposition,
as explained later under Disposition of a Car. Additional basis (cash paid) for new MACRS depreciation chart. A 2009 MACRSMark figures the unadjusted basis for depre- car that is treated as newly 
Depreciation Chart and instructions are includedciating his new van as shown next. purchased MACRS property  $10,000
in this chapter as Table 4-1. Using this table will
Cost of old van $19,500 make it easy for you to figure the 2009 deprecia-
Less: Total depreciation allowed on tion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap-Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Systemthe business cost of old van pears in the Instructions for Form 2106.(MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re-from 2005±2009 −9,981
Adjusted basis of old van before covery System (MACRS) is the name given to You may have to use the tables in
trade-in adjustment $ 9,519 the tax rules for getting back (recovering) Publication 946 instead of using this
through depreciation deductions the cost of MACRS Depreciation Chart.
CAUTION
!Trade-in adjustment: property used in a trade or business or to pro-Depreciation at 100% business use: You must use the Depreciation Tables  induce income.2009Ð($19,500 ×  .1152) ×  1/2 Publication 946 rather than the 2009 MACRS
(Limit: $1,675) $ 1,123 The maximum amount you can deduct is Depreciation Chart in this publication if any one2008Ð($19,500 ×  .1152) limited, depending on the year you placed your of the following four conditions applies to you.(Limit: $1,675) 1,675 car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.2007Ð($19,500 ×  .192) 1. You file your return on a fiscal year basis.Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are(Limit: $2,850) 2,850
2006Ð($19,500 ×  .32) 2. You file your return for a short tax yearclassified as 5-year property. You actually de-
(Limit: $4,700) 4,700 (less than 12 months).preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a
2005Ð($19,500 ×  .20) period of 6 calendar years. This is because your 3. During the year, all of the following condi-(Limit: $2,960) 2,960 car is generally treated as placed in service in tions apply.Total $13,308 the middle of the year and you claim deprecia-Less: Actual depreciation 
tion for one-half of both the first year and the a. You placed some property in serviceallowed −9,981
sixth year.Excess of 100% over actual $ 3,327 from January through September.
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4-1.  2009 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2009.)
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below to find the For cars placed in service before 2009, you must use the same
depreciation method and percentage to use for your 2009 return. method you used on last year's return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line method. (See
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the car in service. Car Used 50% or Less for Business.)
Then select the depreciation method and percentage from column (a), (b),
or (c) following the rules explained in this chapter. Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in the
chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for 2009. (Also
see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the same
year, you may have to use the Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1ÐDec. 31 percentage for your car.
CAUTION
!
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of that year and 2) the basis
of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in service after September is not more than
40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the entire year, use the percentage for Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30 for
figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2009 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2009, both used 100% in your
business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1ÐSept. 30, 2009, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the $20,000 basis of the
property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in service during the year (40% ×
($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
(a) (b) (c)
200% Declining 150% Declining Straight Line Date Placed In Service Balance (200% DB)1 Balance (150% DB)1 (SL)
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2009 200 DB  5.0% 150 DB  3.75% SL  2.5%
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2009 200 DB 20.0 150 DB 15.0 SL 10.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2008 200 DB 38.0 150 DB 28.88 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2008 200 DB 32.0 150 DB 25.5 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2007 200 DB 22.8 150 DB 20.21 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2007 200 DB 19.2 150 DB 17.85 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2006 200 DB 13.68 150 DB 16.4 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2006 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2005 200 DB 10.94 150 DB 16.41 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2005 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2004 200 DB  9.58 150 DB 14.35 SL 17.5
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2004 200 DB  5.76 150 DB  8.33 SL 10.0
 Prior to 20042
1 You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
2 If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to claim depreciation. See 
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
b. You placed some property in service continue to use the chart if your basis in your car quarter of a year. See Depreciation deduction
is adjusted because of a casualty. In that case, for the year of disposition under Disposition of afrom October through December.
for the year of the adjustment and the remaining Car, later, for information on how to figure thec. Your basis in the property you placed in recovery period, figure the depreciation without depreciation allowed in the year of disposition.service from October through Decem- the chart using your adjusted basis in the car at How to use the 2009 chart. To figure yourber (excluding nonresidential real prop- the end of the year of the adjustment and over
depreciation deduction for 2009, find the per-erty, residential rental property, and the remaining recovery period. See Figuring the
centage in the column of the chart based on theproperty placed in service and disposed Deduction Without Using the Tables in chapter 4
date that you first placed the car in service andof in the same year) was more than of Publication 946.
the depreciation method that you are using. Mul-40% of your total bases in all property In future years, do not use the chart in tiply the unadjusted basis of your car (definedyou placed in service during the year. this edition of the publication. Instead, earlier) by that percentage to determine theuse the chart in the publication or the
TIP4. You placed qualified property in service on amount of your depreciation deduction. If youform instructions for those future years.an Indian reservation. prefer to figure your depreciation deduction with-
out the help of the chart, see Publication 946.Disposition of car during recovery period.
Depreciation in future years. If you use If you dispose of the car before the end of the
Your deduction cannot be more thanthe percentages from the chart, you generally recovery period, you are generally allowed a half
the maximum depreciation limit formust continue to use them for the entire recov- year of depreciation in the year of disposition
cars. See Depreciation Limits, later.ery period of your car. However, you cannot unless you purchased the car during the last
CAUTION
!
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Phil bought a used truck in Febru- before 2003, use the Maximum Depreciation be $9,316 (2009 depreciation limit ($10,960)
Deduction for Cars table. multiplied by the business use percentageary 2008 to use exclusively in his landscape
(85%)). Before Karl can figure his MACRS de-business. He paid $9,200 for the truck with no Maximum preciation, he figures his unadjusted basis to betrade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de- Depreciation Deduction
$14,059 ($27,500 ×  85% − $9,316).duction, the truck did not qualify for the special for Trucks and Vans
depreciation allowance, and he chose to use the Karl figures his MACRS depreciation to be
Date 4th &200% DB method to get the largest depreciation $2,812 ($14,059 (unadjusted basis) x 20%). Karl
 Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Laterdeduction in the early years. figures his total section 179, special deprecia-
In Service Year Year Year Years tion allowance, and MACRS depreciation to bePhil used the MACRS depreciation chart in
$12,128 ($9,316 (special allowance) + $2,8122009 $11,0601 $4,900 $2,950 $1,7752008 to find his percentage. The unadjusted
(MACRS depreciation)). However, Karl's deduc-basis of his truck equals its cost because Phil 2008 11,1601 5,100 3,050 1,875 tion is limited to $9,316. This is the depreciationused it exclusively for business. He multiplied 2007 3,260 5,200 3,050 1,875 limit ($10,960) multiplied by the business usethe unadjusted basis of his truck, $9,200, by the
percentage (85%).2005±2006 3,260 5,200 3,150 1,875percentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2008
Karl continues to use his car 85% for busi-depreciation deduction of $1,840. 2004 10,9101 5,300 3,150 1,875
ness. Depreciation in the next 4 years continuesIn 2009, Phil used the truck for personal 2003 11,0101 2 5,400 3,250 1,975 to be subject to deduction limits. Karl figures hispurposes when he repaired his father's cabin.
1If the special depreciation allowance does not apply or depreciation limits for those years as follows.His records show that the business use of his you make the election not to claim the specialtruck was 90% in 2009. Phil used Table 4-1 to depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,060 for Year Limit x Business Use Depreciationfind his percentage. Reading down the first col- 2009, $3,160 for 2008, $3,260 for 2004, and $3,360 for
2003. 2010 $4,800 ×  85% $4,080umn for the date placed in service and across to
2011 2,850 ×  85% 2,423the 200% DB column, he locates his percent- 2If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/03, the truck
2012, 2013 1,775 ×  85% 1,509or van is qualified property, and you claim the specialage, 32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of
depreciation allowance for the truck or van, thehis truck, $8,280 ($9,200 cost ×  90% business maximum deduction is $7,960. In 2014, using the rate from Table 4-1 , Karl'suse), by 32% to figure his 2009 depreciation MACRS deduction is $810 ($14,059 (unad-deduction of $2,650. justed basis) ×  5.76%). Since that amount is lessCar used less than full year. The deprecia-
than the depreciation limit of $1,509 ($1,775 ×tion limits are not reduced if you use a car for
85%), Karl's depreciation deduction for 2014 isless than a full year. This means that you do notDepreciation Limits $810.reduce the limit when you either place a car in
service or dispose of a car during the year. If Karl continues to use his car for businessThere are limits on the amount you can deduct
However, the depreciation limits are reduced if after 2014, he can continue to claim a deprecia-for depreciation of your car, truck, or van. The
you do not use the car exclusively for business tion deduction for his unrecovered basis. How-section 179 deduction and special depreciation
and investment purposes. See Reduction for ever, he cannot deduct more than $1,775allowance are treated as depreciation for pur- personal use later. multiplied by his business use percentage. Seeposes of the limits. The maximum amount you
Deductions in years after the recovery period ,can deduct each year depends on the year you Example. Marie purchased a car in June later.place the car in service. These limits are shown 2009 for $20,000 to use exclusively in her busi-in the following tables. ness. She does not claim the section 179 deduc- Section 179 deduction. The section 179 de-
Maximum tion, but she does claim the special depreciation duction is treated as a depreciation deduction. If
 Depreciation Deduction allowance, and she chooses the 200% DB you place a car that is not a truck or van in
 for Cars method of depreciation. service in 2009, use it only for business, and
choose the section 179 deduction, the combinedMarie first figures her special depreciationDate 4th & section 179, special depreciation allowance,allowance to be $10,000 ($20,000 x 50%). MariePlaced 1st 2nd 3rd Later and depreciation deduction for that car for 2009next figures her car's unadjusted basis to beIn Service Year Year Year Years
is limited to $10,960.$10,000 ($20,000 ± $10,000).
2008±2009 $10,9601 $4,800 $2,850 $1,775 Marie's MACRS depreciation (using the rate
Example. On September 4, 2009, Jack2007 3,060 4,900 2,850 1,775 from Table 4-1) is $2,000 ($10,000 (unadjusted
bought a used car for $10,000 and placed it inbasis) ×  20%). Marie's total section 179, special2006 2,960 4,800 2,850 1,775 service. He used it 80% for his business and hedepreciation allowance, and MACRS deprecia-2005 2,960 4,700 2,850 1,675 chooses to take a section 179 deduction for thetion deduction is $12,000 ($10,000 + $2,000).
car. The car is not qualified property for pur-2004 10,6101 4,800 2,850 1,675 However, the maximum amount she can deduct
poses of the special depreciation allowance.for depreciation is $10,960. (See the Maximum5/06/2003± 10,7102 4,900 2,950 1,775
Before applying the limit, Jack figures hisDepreciation Deduction for Cars table earlier.)12/31/2003
maximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000.1/01/2003± 7,6603 4,900 2,950 1,775 Reduction for personal use. The deprecia- This is the cost of his qualifying property (up to5/05/2003 tion limits are reduced based on your percent- the maximum $250,000 amount) multiplied by
2001±2002 7,6603 4,900 2,950 1,775 age of personal use. If you use a car less than his business use ($10,000 ×  80%).
100% in your business or work, you must deter- Jack then figures that his section 179 deduc-2000 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775
mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi- tion for 2009 is limited to $2,368 (80% of1$2,960 if the car is not qualified property or if you elect plying the limit amount by the percentage of $2,960). He then figures his unadjusted basis ofnot to claim the special depreciation allowance.
business and investment use during the tax $5,632 (($10,000 ×  80%) − $2,368) for determin-2$7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $3,060 if year. ing his depreciation deduction. Jack hasthe car is not qualified property or if you elect not to
claim any special depreciation allowance. reached his maximum depreciation deduction
Example. In April 2009, Karl purchased a for 2009. For 2010, Jack will use his unadjusted3$3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the car
new car for $27,500 to make sales calls in ais not qualified property, or you elect not to claim the basis of $5,632 to figure his depreciation deduc-
special depreciation allowance. territory that extends 200 miles around his home tion.
base. He uses his car 85% for his business. Karl
does not claim the section 179 deduction, but heTrucks and vans. For 2009, the maximum Deductions in years after the recovery pe-
does claim the special depreciation allowance,depreciation deductions for trucks and vans are riod. If the depreciation deductions for your
and he chooses the 200% DB method to figuregenerally higher than those for cars. A truck or car are reduced under the passenger automo-
his depreciation deduction.van is a passenger automobile that is classified bile limits (discussed earlier), you will have unre-
by the manufacturer as a truck or van, and that is Karl first figures his special depreciation al- covered basis in your car at the end of the
rated at 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or lowance to be $11,688 ($27,500 x 85% x 50%). recovery period. If you continue to use your car
less. For trucks and vans placed in service He then figures his depreciation limit for 2009 to for business, you can deduct that unrecovered
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
basis (subject to depreciation limits) after the would still reduce his original basis by the maxi- Example. In June 2006, you purchased a
mum amount allowable as if the business userecovery period ends. car for exclusive use in your business. You met
had been 100%. For example, if Bob had used the more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 yearsUnrecovered basis. This is your cost or his car 60% for business instead of 100%, his of the recovery period (2006 through 2008) butother basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuel allowable depreciation deductions would have failed to meet it in the fourth year (2009). Youvehicle deduction, alternative motor vehicle been $12,260 ($20,433 ×  60%), but he still determine your depreciation for 2009 using 20%credit, electric vehicle credit, gas guzzler tax, would have to reduce his basis by $20,433 to (from column (c) of Table 4-1 ). You also willand depreciation (including any special depreci- determine his unrecovered basis. have to determine and include in your grossation allowance unless you elect not to claim it) income any excess depreciation, discussedand section 179 deductions that would have next.been allowable if you had used the car 100% for Car Used 50% or Less
business and investment use. Excess depreciation. You must includefor Business
any excess depreciation in your gross incomeThe recovery period. For 5-year property, If you use your car 50% or less for qualified and add it to your car's adjusted basis for theyour recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part business use  (defined earlier under Deprecia- first tax year in which you do not use the caryear's depreciation is allowed in the first calen- tion Deduction ) either in the year the car is more than 50% in qualified business use. Usedar year, a full year's depreciation is allowed in placed in service or in a later year, special rules Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-each of the next 4 calendar years, and a part apply. The rules that apply in these two situa- ure and report the excess depreciation in youryear's depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen- tions are explained in the following paragraphs. gross income.dar year. (For this purpose, ªcarº was defined earlier Excess depreciation is: Under MACRS, your recovery period is the under Actual Car Expenses and includes certain
same whether you use declining balance or trucks and vans.) 1. The amount of the depreciation deductions
straight line depreciation. You determine your allowable for the car (including any sectionQualified business use 50% or less in yearunrecovered basis in the 7th year after you 179 deduction claimed and any special de-placed in service. If you use your car 50% orplaced the car in service. preciation allowance claimed) for tax yearsless for qualified business use, the following in which you used the car more than 50%How to treat unrecovered basis. If you rules apply. in qualified business use, minuscontinue to use your car for business after the
• You cannot take the section 179 deduc-recovery period, you can claim a depreciation 2. The amount of the depreciation deductionstion.deduction in each succeeding tax year until you that would have been allowable for those
recover your basis in the car. The maximum • You cannot take the special depreciation years if you had not used the car more
amount you can deduct each year is determined allowance. than 50% in qualified business use for the
by the date you placed the car in service and year you placed it in service. This means• You must figure depreciation using theyour business-use percentage. For example, no the amount of depreciation figured usingstraight line method over a 5-year recov-deduction is allowed for a year you use your car the straight line method.ery period. You must continue to use the100% for personal purposes. straight line method even if your percent-
age of business use increases to more Example. In September 2005, you bought aExample. In April 2003, Bob bought and than 50% in a later year. car for $20,500 and placed it in service. You didplaced in service a car that he used exclusively
not claim the section 179 deduction. You usedin his business. The car cost $31,500. Bob did Instead of making the computation yourself, the car exclusively in qualified business use fornot claim a section 179 deduction, but he did you can use column (c) of Table 4-1 to find the 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008. For those years,claim the special depreciation allowance, for the percentage to use. you used the appropriate MACRS Depreciationcar. He continued to use the car 100% in his
Chart to figure depreciation deductions totalingbusiness throughout the recovery period (2003 Example. In May 2009, Dan bought a car $12,185 ($2,960 for 2005, $4,700 for 2006,through 2008). For those years, Bob used Table for $17,500. He used it 40% for his consulting $2,850 for 2007, and $1,675 for 2008) under the4-1 and the Maximum Depreciation Deduction business. Because he did not use the car more 200% DB method.for Cars table (as explained earlier) to compute than 50% for business, Dan cannot take anyhis depreciation deductions during the recovery During 2009, you used the car 30% for busi-section 179 deduction or special depreciationperiod. Bob's depreciation deductions were sub- ness and 70% for personal purposes. Since youallowance, and he must use the straight lineject to the depreciation limits so he will have did not meet the more-than-50%-use test, youmethod over a 5-year recovery period to recoverunrecovered basis at the end of the recovery must switch from the 200% DB depreciationthe cost of his car.period as shown in the following table. method to the straight line depreciation methodDan deducts $700 in 2009. This is the lesser
for 2009, and include in gross income for 2009of:MACRS Deprec. your excess depreciation determined as follows.Year % Amount Limit Allowed 1. $700 (($17,500 cost ×  40% business use)
Total depreciation claimed: $12,1852003 30.00* $ 9,450 ×  10% recovery percentage (from column
(MACRS 200% DB method)20.00 4,410 $7,660 $ 7,660 (c), Table 4-1)), or Minus total depreciation allowable:2004 32.00 7,056 4,900 4,900
(Straight line method)2. $1,184 ($2,960 maximum limit ×  40% busi-2005 19.20 4,234 2,950 2,950
2005Ð10% of $20,500 ... . $2,050ness use).2006 11.52 2,540 1,775 1,775
(Limit: $2,960)2007 11.52 2,540 1,775 1,775
2006Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 4,1002008 5.76 1,270 1,775 1,373 Qualified business use 50% or less in a later (Limit: $4,700)Total $31,500 $20,433 year. If you use your car more than 50% in 2007Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 2,850*30-percent special depreciation allowance. qualified business use in the tax year it is placed (Limit: $2,850)
in service but the business use drops to 50% or 2008Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 1,675 10,675At the end of 2008, Bob had an unrecovered less in a later year, you can no longer use an (Limit: $1,675)basis in the car of $11,067 ($31,500 ± $20,433). accelerated depreciation method for that car. Excess depreciation $1,510
If Bob continued to use the car 100% for busi- For the year the business use drops to 50%
ness in 2009 and later years, he can claim a In 2009, using Form 4797, you figure andor less and all later years in the recovery period,
depreciation deduction equal to the lesser of report the $1,510 excess depreciation you mustyou must use the straight line depreciation
$1,775 or his remaining unrecovered basis. include in your gross income. Your adjustedmethod over a 5-year recovery period. In addi-
basis in the car is also increased by $1,510.If Bob's business use of the car was less tion, for the year your business use drops to
Your 2009 depreciation is $1,230 ($20,500 (un-than 100% during any year, his depreciation 50% or less, you must recapture (include in your
adjusted basis) ×  30% (business use percent-deduction would be less than the maximum gross income) any excess depreciation  (dis-
amount allowable for that year. However, in de- age) ×  20% (from column (c) of Table 4-1 on thecussed later). You also increase the adjusted
termining his unrecovered basis in the car, he basis of your car by the same amount. line for Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2005)). However,
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 23

Page 24 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your depreciation deduction is limited to $503 between a buyer and a seller, neither having to the dollar amount for the number of days in the
($1,675 x 30% business use). buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl- lease term that fall within the tax year.
edge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similar
Example. On August 16, 2008, Will leasedproperty around the same date may be helpful inLeasing a Car
a car with a fair market value of $38,500 for 3figuring the fair market value of the property.
years. He used the car exclusively in his ownFigure the fair market value on the first day ofIf you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in
data processing business. On November 5,the lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car isyour business, you can use the standard mile-
2009, Will closed his business and went to workspecified in the lease agreement, use thatage rate or actual expenses to figure your de-
for a company where he is not required to use aamount as the fair market value.ductible expense. This section explains how to
car for business. Using Appendix A-5, Will com-figure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, or Figuring the inclusion amount. Inclusion puted his inclusion amount for 2008 and 2009 asvan. amounts are listed in Appendix A  for cars, in shown in the following table and reduced hisAppendix B for trucks and vans, and in AppendixDeductible payments. If you choose to use deductions for lease payments by thoseC for electric cars leased after August 5, 1997,actual expenses, you can deduct the part of amounts.and before 2007. If the fair market value of theeach lease payment that is for the use of the
vehicle is $100,000 or less, use the appropriatevehicle in your business. You cannot deduct any Tax Dollar Business Inclusion
appendix (depending on the year you firstpart of a lease payment that is for personal use year amount Proration use amount
placed the vehicle in service) to determine theof the vehicle, such as commuting. 2008 $118 138/366 100% $ 44inclusion amount. If the fair market value is moreYou must spread any advance payments 2009 257 309/365 100% 218than $100,000, see the Revenue Procedure(s)over the entire lease period. You cannot deduct
identified in the footnote of the appendices forany payments you make to buy a car, truck, or Leased car changed from personal to busi-the inclusion amount.van even if the payments are called lease pay- ness use. If you lease a car for personal useFor each tax year during which you lease thements. and, in a later year, change it to business use,car for business, determine your inclusionIf you lease a car, truck, or van for 30 days or you must determine the car's fair market valueamount by following these three steps.more, you may have to reduce your lease pay- on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-ment deduction by an ªinclusion amount.º sion amount using the rules explained earlier1. Locate the appendix that applies to you.
under Figuring the inclusion amount . Use theTo find the inclusion amount, do the follow-
fair market value on the date of conversion.ing.Inclusion Amounts
a. Find the line that includes the fair mar- Example. In March 2007, Janice leased aIf you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in ket value of the car on the first day of car for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,your business for a lease term of 30 days or the lease term. 2009, she started working as a self-employedmore, you may have to include an inclusion advertising consultant and started using theamount in your income for each tax year you b. Go across the line to the column for the leased car for business purposes. Her recordslease the vehicle. To do this, you do not add an tax year in which the car is used under show that her business use for June 1 throughamount to income. Instead, you reduce your the lease to find the dollar amount. For December 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusiondeduction for your lease payment. (This reduc- the last tax year of the lease, use the amount for 2009, Janice obtained an appraisaltion has an effect similar to the limit on the dollar amount for the preceding year. from an independent car leasing company thatdepreciation deduction you would have on the showed the fair market value of her 2007 car onvehicle if you owned it.) 2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) for June 1, 2009, was $21,650. Using AppendixThe inclusion amount is a percentage of part the number of days of the lease term in- A-6, Janice computed her inclusion amount forof the fair market value of the leased vehicle cluded in the tax year. 2009 as shown in the following table.multiplied by the percentage of business and 3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) byinvestment use of the vehicle for the tax year. It Tax Dollar Business Inclusionthe percentage of business and investmentis prorated for the number of days of the lease year amount Proration use amountuse for the tax year. This is your inclusionterm in the tax year. amount. 2009 $16 214/365 60% $6The inclusion amount applies to each tax
year that you lease the vehicle if the fair market
Reporting inclusion amounts.    For informa-value (defined next) when the lease began was Example. On January 17, 2009, you leased
tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employeesmore than the amounts shown in the following a car for 3 years and placed it in service for use
should see Car rentals under Completing Formstables. in your business. The car had a fair market value
2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprietorsof $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. You
Cars should see the instructions for Schedule Cuse the car 75% for business and 25% for per-
(Except for Trucks and Vans) (Form 1040) and farmers should see the instruc-sonal purposes during each year of the lease.
tions for Schedule F (Form 1040).Assuming you continue to use the car 75% for
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value business, you use Appendix A-6 to arrive at the
following inclusion amounts for each year of the2008±2009 $18,500
lease:2007 15,500
Disposition of a Car2005±2006 15,200
Tax Dollar Business Inclusion2004 17,500
year amount Proration use amount2003  18,000 If you dispose of your car, you may have a
1999±2002  15,500 taxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion of2009 $ 40 349/365 75% $29
any gain that is due to depreciation (including2010 87 365/365 75% 65
2011 129 365/365 75% 97 any section 179 deduction, clean-fuel vehicleTrucks and Vans 2012 129 16/366 75% 4 deduction, and special depreciation allowance)
that you claimed on the car will be treated asFor each year of the lease that you deduct leaseYear Lease Began Fair Market Value ordinary income. However, you may not have topayments, you must reduce your deduction by
recognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the car2009 $18,500 the inclusion amount computed for that year.
because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in.2008 19,000 Leased car changed from business to per- This section gives some general information2007 16,400
sonal use. If you lease a car for business use2005±2006 16,700 about dispositions of cars. For information on
and, in a later year, change it to personal use,2004 18,000 how to report the disposition of your car, see
2003  18,500 follow the rules explained earlier under Figuring Publication 544.
the inclusion amount. For the tax year in which
Fair market value. Fair market value is the you stop using the car for business, use the Casualty or theft. For a casualty or theft, a
price at which the property would change hands dollar amount for the previous tax year. Prorate gain results when you receive insurance or other
Page 24 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 25 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reimbursement that is more than your adjusted To figure the reduced depreciation deduction You should keep adequate records to prove
basis in your car. If you then spend all of the for a car disposed of in 2009, first determine the your expenses or have sufficient evidence that
proceeds to acquire replacement property (a depreciation deduction for the full year using will support your own statement. You must gen-
new car or repairs to the old car) within a speci- Table 4-1. erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-
fied period of time, you do not recognize any ered adequate. This is because written evidenceIf you used a Date Placed in Service line for
gain. Your basis in the replacement property is is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30, you can deduct one-half of
its cost minus any gain that is not recognized. ever, if you prepare a record on a computer, it isthe depreciation amount figured for the full year.
See Publication 547 for more information. considered an adequate record.Figure your depreciation deduction for the full
year using the rules explained in this chapter
Trade-in. When you trade in an old car for a and deduct 50% of that amount with your other What Are Adequatenew one, the transaction is considered a actual car expenses. Records?like-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is If you used a Date Placed in Service line forrecognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of You should keep the proof you need in an ac-Oct. 1 ÐDec. 31, you can deduct a percentagePublication 544.) In a trade-in situation, your count book, diary, log, statement of expense,of the depreciation amount figured for the fullbasis in the new property is generally your ad- trip sheets, or similar record. You should alsoyear. The percentage you use is determined byjusted basis in the old property plus any addi- keep documentary evidence that, together withthe month you disposed of the car. Figure yourtional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis, your record, will support each element of andepreciation deduction for the full year using theearlier.) expense.rules explained in this chapter and multiply the
result by the percentage from the following tableDepreciation adjustment when you used the Documentary evidence. You generally mustfor the month that you disposed of the car.standard mileage rate. If you used the stan- have documentary evidence, such as receipts,dard mileage rate for the business use of your Month Percentage canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-car, depreciation was included in that rate. The penses.Jan., Feb., March ........... . 12.5%rate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan-
April, May, June ............ . 37.5% Exception. Documentary evidence is notdard mileage rate is shown in the chart that July, Aug., Sept. ............ . 62.5% needed if any of the following conditions apply.follows. You must reduce your basis in your car Oct., Nov., Dec. ............ . 87.5%(but not below zero) by the amount of this depre- • You have meals or lodging expensesciation. while traveling away from home for whichDo not use this table if you are a fiscalIf your basis is reduced to zero (but not below you account to your employer under anyear filer. See Sale or Other Disposi-zero) through the use of the standard mileage accountable plan, and you use a per diemtion Before the Recovery Period Ends
CAUTION
!rate, and you continue to use your car for busi- allowance method that includes mealsin chapter 4 of Publication 946.ness, no adjustment (reduction) to the standard and/or lodging. (Accountable plans andmileage rate is necessary. Use the full standard per diem allowances are discussed inmileage rate (55 cents per mile for 2009) for chapter 6.)business miles driven.
• Your expense, other than lodging, is lessThese rates do not apply for any year in than $75.which the actual expenses method
• You have a transportation expense forwas used.
TIP 5. which a receipt is not readily available.
Depreciation
Year(s) Rate per Mile Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-
dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if it2008±2009 $.21 Recordkeeping shows the amount, date, place, and essential2007 .19
character of the expense.2005±2006 .17
2003±2004 .16 For example, a hotel receipt is enough toIf you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
2001±2002 .15 support expenses for business travel if it has allportation expenses, you must be able to prove2000 .14 of the following information.(substantiate) certain elements of expense. This
chapter discusses the records you need to keep • The name and location of the hotel.to prove these expenses.Example. In 2004, you bought a car for ex- • The dates you stayed there.clusive use in your business. The car cost If you keep timely and accurate rec-
• Separate amounts for charges such as$22,500. From 2004 through 2009, you used the ords, you will have support to show the
lodging, meals, and telephone calls.standard mileage rate to figure your car expense IRS if your tax return is ever examined.
RECORDS
deduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles in You will also have proof of expenses that your
A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an2004, 16,300 miles in 2005, 15,600 miles in employer may require if you are reimbursed
expense for a business meal if it has all of the2006, 16,700 miles in 2007, 15,100 miles in under an accountable plan. These plans are
following information.2008, and 14,900 miles in 2009. Your deprecia- discussed in chapter 6 under Reimbursements.
tion is figured as follows. • The name and location of the restaurant.
Year Miles x Rate Depreciation • The number of people served.
2004 14,100 ×  .16 $ 2,256 • The date and amount of the expense.How To Prove2005 16,300 ×  .17 2,771
If a charge is made for items other than food and2006 15,600 ×  .17 2,652 Expenses beverages, the receipt must show that this is the2007 16,700 ×  .19 3,173
2008 15,100 ×  .21 3,171 case.Table 5-1 is a summary of records you need to2009 14,900 ×  .21 3,129 Canceled check. A canceled check, to-prove each expense discussed in this publica-Total depreciation $17,152
gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-tion. You must be able to prove the elements
tablishes the cost. However, a canceled checkAt the end of 2009, your adjusted basis in the car listed across the top portion of the chart. You
by itself does not prove a business expenseis $5,348 ($22,500 − $17,152). prove them by having the information and re-
without other evidence to show that it was for aceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed in
Depreciation deduction for the year of dispo- business purpose.the first column.
sition. If you deduct actual car expenses and
You cannot deduct amounts that youyou dispose of your car before the end of its Duplicate information. You do not have to
approximate or estimate.recovery period, you are allowed a reduced de- record information in your account book or other
preciation deduction for the year of disposition.
CAUTION
! record that duplicates information shown on a
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 25

Page 26 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
receipt as long as your records and receipts Proving business purpose. You must gener- expense and have it available to fully prove that
ally provide a written statement of the businesscomplement each other in an orderly manner. element of the expense.
purpose of an expense. However, the degree ofYou do not have to record amounts your
proof varies according to the circumstances inemployer pays directly for any ticket or other What If I Have Incomplete
each case. If the business purpose of an ex-travel item. However, if you charge these items Records?pense is clear from the surrounding circum-to your employer, through a credit card or other-
stances, then you do not need to give a writtenwise, you must keep a record of the amounts If you do not have complete records to prove anexplanation.you spend. element of an expense, then you must prove the
element with:Example. If you are a sales representativeTimely-kept records. You should record the • Your own written or oral statement con-who calls on customers on an established saleselements of an expense or of a business use at route, you do not have to give a written explana- taining specific information about the ele-or near the time of the expense or use and tion of the business purpose for traveling that ment, andsupport it with sufficient documentary evidence. route. You can satisfy the requirements by re-A timely-kept record has more value than a • Other supporting evidence that is sufficientcording the length of the delivery route once, thestatement prepared later when generally there is to establish the element.date of each trip at or near the time of the trips,a lack of accurate recall. and the total miles you drove the car during the If the element is the description of a gift, or theYou do not need to write down the elements tax year. You could also establish the date of cost, time, place, or date of an expense, theof every expense on the day of the expense. If each trip with a receipt, record of delivery, or supporting evidence must be either direct evi-you maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac- other documentary evidence. dence or documentary evidence. Direct evi-counts for use during the week, the log is consid-
dence can be written statements, or the oralered a timely-kept record. Confidential information. You do not need to
testimony of your guests or other witnesses set-If you give your employer, client, or customer put confidential information relating to an ele-
ting forth detailed information about the element.an expense account statement, it can also be ment of a deductible expense (such as the
Documentary evidence can be receipts, paidconsidered a timely-kept record. This is true if place, business purpose, or business relation-
bills, or similar evidence.you copy it from your account book, diary, log, ship) in your account book, diary, or other re-
statement of expense, trip sheets, or similar If the element is either the business relation-cord. However, you do have to record the
record. information elsewhere at or near the time of the ship of your guests or the business purpose of
Table 5-1.  How to Prove Certain Business Expenses
If you have THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements . . .
expenses for . .
.
Amount Time Place or Business Purpose
Description Business Relationship
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area of Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the
expense for travel, and returned your travel (name of business benefit gained or expected to be gained.
lodging, and meals. for each trip city, town, or other  
Incidental expenses may and number designation). Relationship: N/A
be totaled in reasonable of days spent
categories such as taxis, on business.
fees and tips, etc.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address or Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the
expense. Incidental entertainment. location of place of business benefit gained or expected to be gained. 
expenses such as taxis, (Also see entertainment. Type of For entertainment, the nature of the business
telephones, etc., may be Business entertainment if not discussion or activity. If the entertainment was directly
totaled on a daily basis. Purpose.) otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the date, place,
(Also see Business nature, and duration of the business discussion, and
Purpose.) the identities of the persons who took part in both the
business discussion and the entertainment activity.
 
Relationship: Occupations or other information (such as
names, titles, or other designations) about the
recipients that shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that you or your
employee was present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Gifts Cost of the gift. Date of the Description of the gift.
gift.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
expense. For car expense. For destination.  
expenses, the cost of the car expenses, Relationship: N/A
car and any the date of
improvements, the date the use of the
you started using it for car.
business, the mileage for
each business use, and
the total miles for the
year.
Page 26 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 27 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the amount spent, the supporting evidence can To determine the cost of individual tickets, divide the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this
be circumstantial, rather than direct. For exam- the total cost (but not more than face value) by means you must keep records that support your
ple, the nature of your work, such as making the number of games or performances in the deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years from
deliveries, provides circumstantial evidence of series. You must keep records to show whether the date you file the income tax return on which
the use of your car for business purposes. In- you use each ticket as a gift or entertainment. the deduction is claimed. A return filed early is
voices of deliveries establish when you used Also, you must be able to prove the cost of considered filed on the due date. For a more
the car for business. nonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox or complete explanation of how long to keep rec-
other private luxury box for more than one event. ords, get Publication 583, Starting a Business
Sampling. You can keep an adequate record See Entertainment tickets in chapter 2. and Keeping Records.
for parts of a tax year and use that record to You must keep records of the business useCombining items. You can make one dailyprove the amount of business or investment use of your car for each year of the recovery period.entry in your record for reasonable categories offor the entire year. You must demonstrate by See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 underexpenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneother evidence that the periods for which an Depreciation Deduction.calls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealsadequate record is kept are representative of
Reimbursed for expenses. Employees whoshould be in a separate category. You can in-the use throughout the tax year.
give their records and documentation to theirclude tips for meal-related services with the
employers and are reimbursed for their ex-costs of the meals.Example. You use your car to visit the of-
penses generally do not have to keep copies ofExpenses of a similar nature occurring dur-fices of clients, meet with suppliers and other
this information. However, you may have toing the course of a single event are considered asubcontractors, and pick up and deliver items to
prove your expenses if any of the following con-single expense. For example, if during entertain-clients. There is no other business use of the
ditions apply.ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately forcar, but you and your family use the car for
each serving of refreshments, the total expensepersonal purposes. You keep adequate records • You claim deductions for expenses thatfor the refreshments is treated as a single ex-during the first week of each month that show are more than reimbursements.pense.that 75% of the use of the car is for business.
• Your expenses are reimbursed under aInvoices and bills show that your business use Car expenses. You can account for several nonaccountable plan.continues at the same rate during the later uses of your car that can be considered part of aweeks of each month. Your weekly records are • Your employer does not use adequate ac-single use, such as a round trip or uninterruptedrepresentative of the use of the car each month counting procedures to verify expense ac-business use, with a single record. Minimal per-and are sufficient evidence to support the per- counts.sonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the waycentage of business use for the year. between two business stops, is not an interrup- • You are related to your employer as de-tion of business use. fined under Per Diem and Car Allowances,Exceptional circumstances. You can satisfy
in chapter 6.the substantiation requirements with other evi- Example. You make deliveries at severaldence if, because of the nature of the situation in Reimbursements, adequate accounting , anddifferent locations on a route that begins andwhich an expense is made, you cannot get a nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapterends at your employer's business premises andreceipt. This applies if all the following are true. 6.that includes a stop at the business premises
• You were unable to obtain evidence for an between two deliveries. You can account for
element of the expense or use that com- these using a single record of miles driven. Examples of Records
pletely satisfies the requirements ex- Gift expenses. You do not always have toplained earlier under What Are Adequate Examples of records that show the informationrecord the name of each recipient of a gift. ARecords. you need to keep for different types of expensesgeneral listing will be enough if it is evident that are included in this publication as Table 6-2 and• You are unable to obtain evidence for an you are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limit Table 6-3. They are part of the illustrated exam-element that completely satisfies the two on the amount you can deduct for gifts to any ples shown at the end of chapter 6.rules listed earlier under What if I Have one person. For example, if you buy a large
Incomplete Records. number of tickets to local high school basketball
games and give one or two tickets to each of• You have presented other evidence for the many customers, it is usually enough to record aelement that is the best proof possible general description of the recipients.under the circumstances.
Allocating total cost. If you can prove the
6.total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a
not prove how much it cost for each person whoreceipt because of reasons beyond your control,
participated in the event, you may have to allo-you can prove a deduction by reconstructing
cate the total cost among you and your guestsyour records or expenses. Reasons beyond How To Reporton a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establishyour control include fire, flood, and other casu-
the number of persons who participated in thealty. This chapter explains where and how to reportevent.
the expenses discussed in this publication. ItAn allocation would be needed, for example,Separating and Combining discusses reimbursements and how to treatif you did not have a business relationship with
Expenses them under accountable and nonaccountableall of your guests. See Allocating between busi-
plans. It also explains rules for independent con-ness and nonbusiness in chapter 2.This section explains when expenses must be tractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certainIf your return is examined. If your return iskept separate and when expenses can be com- performing artists, Armed Forces reservists, andexamined, you may have to provide additionalbined. certain disabled employees. The chapter endsinformation to the IRS. This information could be with illustrations of how to report travel, enter-Separating expenses. Each separate pay- needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or tainment, gift, and car expenses on Forms 2106ment is generally considered a separate ex- reliability of information contained in your rec- and 2106-EZ.pense. For example, if you entertain a customer ords, statements, testimony, or documentary
or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the evidence before a deduction is allowed.
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-
ets are two separate expenses. You must record How Long To Keepthem separately in your records.
Records and Receipts
Season or series tickets. If you buy sea-
son or series tickets for business use, you must You must keep records as long as they may be
treat each ticket in the series as a separate item. needed for the administration of any provision of
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 27

Page 28 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• If you claim car expenses, you use the Full value included in your income. You can
standard mileage rate. deduct the value of the business use of an em-Where To Report ployer-provided car if your employer reported
For more information on how to report your 100% of the value of the car in your income. OnThis section provides general information on expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see your 2009 Form W-2, the amount of the valuewhere to report the expenses discussed in this Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later. will be included in box 1, Wages, tips, otherpublication. compensation, and box 12.Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse- To claim your expenses, complete Part II,ments (or the reimbursements were all includedSelf-employed. You must report your income Sections A and C, of Form 2106. Enter yourin box 1 of your Form W-2), the only businessand expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form actual expenses on line 23 of Section C andexpense you are claiming is for gifts, and the1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- include the entire value of the em-Special Rules  discussed later do not apply toule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not ployer-provided car on line 25. Complete theyou, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ.use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. rest of the form.Instead, claim the amount of your deductibleIf you claim car or truck expenses, you must
gifts directly on line 21 of Schedule A (Formprovide certain information on the use of your Less than full value included in your income.1040).vehicle. You provide this information on Sched- If less than the full annual lease value of the car
ule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Form 4562. was included on your Form W-2, this means thatStatutory employees. If you received a
your Form W-2 only includes the value of yourIf you file Schedule C: Form W-2 and the ªStatutory employeeº box in
personal use of the car. Do not enter this valuebox 13 was checked, report your income and• Report your travel expenses, except on your Form 2106; it is not deductible.expenses related to that income on Schedule Cmeals, on line 24a, If you paid any actual costs (that your em-or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form
ployer did not provide or reimburse you for) to• Report your deductible meals (actual cost 2106 or 2106-EZ.
operate the car, you can deduct the businessor standard meal allowance) and enter- Statutory employees include full-time life in-
portion of those costs. Examples of costs thattainment on line 24b, surance salespersons, certain agent or commis-
you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain• Report your gift expenses and transporta- plete Part II, Sections A and C, of Form 2106.homeworkers.tion expenses, other than car expenses, Enter your actual costs on line 23 of Section Con line 27, and  If you are entitled to a reimbursement and leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of the
from your employer but you do not form.• Report your car expenses on line 9. Com- claim it, you cannot claim a deduction
CAUTION
!plete Part IV of the form unless you have for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-to file Form 4562 for depreciation or amor- bursement applies.tization.
ReimbursementsReimbursement for personal expenses. IfIf you file Schedule C-EZ, report the total of all
your employer reimburses you for nondeduct-business expenses on line 2. You can only in- This section explains what to do when you re-ible personal expenses, such as for vacationclude 50% of your meals and entertainment in ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any oftrips, your employer must report the reimburse-that total. If you include car expenses, you must the employee business expenses discussed inment as wage income in box 1 of your Formalso complete Part III of the form. this publication.W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses. If you received an advance, allowance, orIf you file Schedule F:
reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-Income-producing property. If you have• Report your car expenses on line 12. At- port this amount and your expenses depends ontravel or transportation expenses related to in-tach Form 4562 and provide information whether the reimbursement was paid to youcome-producing property, report your deducti-on the use of your car in Part V of Form under an accountable plan or a nonaccountableble expenses on the form appropriate for that4562. plan.activity. This section explains the two types of plans,• Report all other business expenses dis- For example, if you have rental real estate how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-cussed in this publication on line 34. You income and expenses, report your expenses on ing the amount of your expenses, and the taxcan only include 50% of your meals and Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss. treatment of your reimbursements and ex-entertainment on that line. See Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop- penses. It also covers rules for independentSee your forms instructions for more information erty, for more information on the rental of real contractors.on how to complete your tax return. estate. If you have deductible invest-
ment-related transportation expenses, report No reimbursement. You are not reimbursedBoth self-employed and an employee. If them on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23. or given an allowance for your expenses if youyou are both self-employed and an employee, are paid a salary or commission with the under-you must keep separate records for each busi- Vehicle Provided by standing that you will pay your own expenses. Inness activity. Report your business expenses for this situation, you have no reimbursement orYour Employerself-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F allowance arrangement, and you do not have to
(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your read this section on reimbursements. Instead,If your employer provides you with a car, youbusiness expenses for your work as an em- see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later,may be able to deduct the actual expenses ofployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed for information on completing your tax return.operating that car for business purposes. Thenext. amount you can deduct depends on the amount
Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. Athat your employer included in your income and
Employees. If you are an employee, you gen- reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-the business and personal miles you drove dur-
erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your rangement is a system or plan that an employering the year. You cannot use the standard mile-
travel, transportation, and entertainment ex- uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-age rate.
penses. However, you can use the shorter Form penses, advances, reimbursements, and
2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all of amounts charged to the employer for employeeValue reported on Form W-2. Your employer
the following conditions. business expenses. Arrangements include percan figure and report either the actual value of
diem and car allowances.your personal use of the car or the value of the• You are an employee deducting expenses car as if you used it only for personal purposes A per diem allowance is a fixed amount ofattributable to your job. (100% income inclusion). Your employer must daily reimbursement your employer gives you
• You were not reimbursed by your em- separately state the amount if 100% of the an- for your lodging, meals, and incidental expenses
ployer for your expenses (amounts in- nual lease value was included in your income. If when you are away from home on business.
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not you are unsure of the amount included in your (The term ªincidental expensesº  is defined in
considered reimbursements). Form W-2, ask your employer. chapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance.) A
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 29 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
car allowance is an amount your employer gives If your employer included reimburse- Per Diem and Car Allowances
you for the business use of your car. ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 and
If your employer reimburses you for your ex-you meet all the rules for accountableYour employer should tell you what method
TIP
penses using a per diem or a car allowance, youplans, ask your employer for a corrected Formof reimbursement is used and what records you
can generally use the allowance as proof for theW-2.must provide.
amount of your expenses. A per diem or car
allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-Employers. If you are an employer and you Accountable plan rules not met. Even quirements for the amount of your expensesreimburse employee business expenses, how though you are reimbursed under an accounta- only if all of the following conditions apply.you treat this reimbursement on your em- ble plan, some of your expenses may not meet
ployee's Form W-2 depends in part on whether all the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet all • Your employer reasonably limits payments
you have an accountable plan. Reimburse- the rules for accountable plans are treated as of your expenses to those that are ordi-
ments treated as paid under an accountable having been reimbursed under a nonaccount- nary and necessary in the conduct of the
plan, as explained next, are not reported as pay. able plan (discussed later). trade or business.
Reimbursements treated as paid under nonac- Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- • The allowance is similar in form to and notcountable plans, as explained later, are reported penses. You may be reimbursed under your more than the federal rate (defined later).as pay. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em- employer's accountable plan for expenses re-ployer's Tax Guide, for information on employee • You prove the time (dates), place, andlated to that employer's business, some of whichpay. business purpose of your expenses toare deductible as employee business expenses
your employer (as explained in Table 5-1)and some of which are not deductible. The reim-
Accountable Plans within a reasonable period of time.bursements you receive for the nondeductible
expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountable • You are not related to your employer (asTo be an accountable plan, your employer's plans, and they are treated as paid under a defined next). If you are related to yourreimbursement or allowance arrangement must nonaccountable plan. employer, you must be able to prove yourinclude all of the following rules.
expenses to the IRS even if you have al-Example. Your employer's plan reimburses1. Your expenses must have a business con- ready adequately accounted to your em-you for travel expenses while away from homenection Ð that is, you must have paid or ployer and returned any excesson business and also for meals when you workincurred deductible expenses while per- reimbursement.late at the office, even though you are not awayforming services as an employee of your If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-from home. The part of the arrangement thatemployer. ance practices are not based on reasonablyreimburses you for the nondeductible meals
2. You must adequately account to your em- accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-when you work late at the office is treated as
ployer for these expenses within a reason- ognition of cost differences in different areas forpaid under a nonaccountable plan.
able period of time. per diem amounts), you will not be considered toThe employer makes the decision have accounted to your employer. In this case,3. You must return any excess reimburse- whether to reimburse employees you must be able to prove your expenses to thement or allowance within a reasonable pe- under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP IRS.riod of time. countable plan. If you are an employee who
receives payments under a nonaccountableªAdequate accountingº  and ªreturning ex- Related to employer. You are related to yourplan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-cess reimbursementsº are discussed later. employer if: ments under an accountable plan by voluntarilyAn excess reimbursement or allowance is accounting to your employer for the expenses 1. Your employer is your brother or sister,any amount you are paid that is more than the and voluntarily returning excess reimburse- half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-business-related expenses that you adequately ments to the employer. tor, or lineal descendant,accounted for to your employer.
The definition of reasonable period of time 2. Your employer is a corporation in which
depends on the facts and circumstances of your you own, directly or indirectly, more thanAdequate Accountingsituation. However, regardless of the facts and 10% in value of the outstanding stock, or
circumstances of your situation, actions that One of the rules for an accountable plan is that 3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-take place within the times specified in the fol- you must adequately account to your employer duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,lowing list will be treated as taking place within a for your expenses. You adequately account by a trust, and your employer.reasonable period of time. giving your employer a statement of expense,
You may be considered to indirectly own stock,an account book, a diary, or a similar record in• You receive an advance within 30 days of for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in awhich you entered each expense at or near thethe time you have an expense. corporation, partnership, estate, or trust thattime you had it, along with documentary evi-• You adequately account for your ex- owns the stock or if a member of your family ordence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage,penses within 60 days after they were paid your partner owns the stock.and other employee business expenses. (Seeor incurred. Table 5-1 in chapter 5 for details you need to The federal rate. The federal rate can be fig-enter in your record and documents you need to• You return any excess reimbursement ured using any one of the following methods.prove certain expenses.) A per diem or car al-within 120 days after the expense was
lowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-paid or incurred. 1. For per diem amounts:
quirement under certain conditions. See Per• You are given a periodic statement (at diem and Car Allowances, later. a. The regular federal per diem rate.least quarterly) that asks you to either re- You must account for all amounts you re- b. The standard meal allowance.turn or adequately account for outstanding ceived from your employer during the year asadvances and you comply within 120 days advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This c. The high-low rate.of the statement. includes amounts you charged to your employer
by credit card or other method. You must give 2. For car expenses:
Employee meets accountable plan rules. If your employer the same type of records and
a. The standard mileage rate.you meet the three rules for accountable plans, supporting information that you would have to
your employer should not include any reim- give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deduction b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
bursements in your income in box 1 of your on your return. You must pay back the amount of
Form W-2. If your expenses equal your reim- any reimbursement or other expense allowance
For per diem amounts, use the rate inbursement, you do not complete Form 2106. for which you do not adequately account or that
effect for the area where you stop forYou have no deduction since your expenses is more than the amount for which you ac-
sleep or rest.
TIPand reimbursement are equal. counted.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 6-1.  Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, Effective October 1, 2009, the per diem
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements rate for certain high-cost locations in-
creased to $258 (including $65 for
CAUTION
!
IF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee M&IE). The rate for all other locations increased
other expense allowance) reports on Form W-2: reports on to $163 (including $52 for M&IE). However, an
 arrangement is under:  Form 2106: * employer can continue to use the rates de-
scribed in the preceding paragraph for the re-An accountable plan with:
mainder of 2009 if those rates and locations are
Actual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount. used consistently during October, November,
Adequate accounting made and and December for all employees. Employers
excess returned. who did not use the high-low method during the
first 9 months of 2009 cannot begin to use itActual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as No amount.
before 2010. For more information, see Reve-Adequate accounting and return of wages in box 1.
nue Procedure 2009-47, which can be found onexcess both required but excess not
the Internet at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-42_IRB/returned.
ar09.html. Also see Publication 1542 (available
Per diem or mileage allowance up to No amount. All expenses and on the Internet at www.irs.gov).
the federal rate: Adequate reimbursements only if
accounting made and excess excess expenses are Prorating the standard meal allowance on
returned. claimed. Otherwise, form is partial days of travel. The standard meal al-
not filed. lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If you
travel for part of a day, such as on the days youPer diem or mileage allowance up to The excess amount as No amount. depart and return, you must prorate the full-daythe federal rate: Adequate wages in box 1. The M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-accounting and return of excess both amount up to the federal
ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate orrequired but excess not returned. rate is reported only in box
the high-low rate.12Ðit is not reported in
You can use either of the following methodsbox 1.
to figure the federal M&IE for that day.
Per diem or mileage allowance The excess amount as All expenses (and
exceeds the federal rate:  Adequate wages in box 1. The reimbursements reported on 1. Method 1:
accounting up to the federal rate only amount up to the federal Form W-2, box 12) only if
a. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of theand excess not returned. rate is reported only in box expenses in excess of the
standard meal allowance amount for12Ðit is not reported in federal rate are claimed.
that day.box 1. Otherwise, form is not filed.
b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of theA nonaccountable plan with:
standard meal allowance amount forEither adequate accounting or return The entire amount as All expenses. the preceding day.of excess, or both, not required by wages in box 1.
plan. 2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-
lowance using any method that you con-No reimbursement plan: The entire amount as All expenses.
sistently apply and that is in accordancewages in box 1.
with reasonable business practice. For ex-* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. ample, an employer can treat 2 full days of
per diem (that includes M&IE) paid for
travel away from home from 9 a.m. of oneRegular federal per diem rate. The regular • Reimburses you, based on your receipts, day to 5 p.m. of the next day as being no
federal per diem rate is the highest amount that for the actual cost of your lodging. more than the federal rate. This is true
the federal government will pay to its employees even though a federal employee would be• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for yourfor lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (or limited to a reimbursement of M&IE forlodging.meals and incidental expenses only) while they only 11/2 days of the federal M&IE rate.
are traveling away from home in a particular • Does not have a reasonable belief that
area. The rates are different for different loca- you had (or will have) lodging expenses, The standard mileage rate. This is a set
tions. Your employer should have these rates rate per mile that you can use to compute yoursuch as when you stay with friends or rela-
available. (Employers can get Publication 1542, deductible car expenses. For 2009, the standardtives or sleep in the cab of your truck.
which gives the rates in the continental United mileage rate for the cost of operating your car for
• Figures the allowance on a basis similar toStates for the current year. Publication 1542 is business use is 55 cents per mile.
that used in computing your compensa-available on the Internet at www.irs.gov.) Fixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is antion, such as number of hours worked orThe standard meal allowance. The stan- allowance your employer may use to reimbursemiles traveled.dard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) is your car expenses. Under this method, your
employer pays an allowance that includes athe federal rate for meals and incidental ex- High-low rate. This is a simplified method combination of payments covering fixed and va-penses (M&IE). The rate for most small localities of computing the federal per diem rate for travel riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate toin the United States is $39 a day for the period within the continental United States. It elimi- cover your variable operating costs (such asJanuary 1 through September 30, 2009, and nates the need to keep a current list of the per gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your$46 a day for the period October 1 through
diem rate for each city. fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-December 31, 2009. Most major cities and many
ments), insurance, etc.). If your employerother localities qualify for higher rates. The rates Under the high-low method, the per diem
chooses to use this method, your employer willfor localities within the continental United States amount for travel during January through Sep-
request the necessary records from you.are listed in Publication 1542. You can also find tember of 2009 is $256 (including $58 for M&IE)
this information on the Internet at www.gsa.gov. Reporting your expenses with a per diem orfor certain high-cost locations. All other areas
You receive an allowance only for meals and car allowance. If your reimbursement is in thehave a per diem amount of $158 (including $45
incidental expenses when your employer does form of an allowance received under an ac-for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542
one of the following. countable plan, the following facts affect youron the Internet, which gives the areas eligible for
reporting.the $256 per diem amount under the high-low• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in
kind). method for all or part of this period.) • The federal rate.
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Whether the allowance or your actual ex- your Form W-2. You must report this part of your in box 1 of her Form W-2. This is the reimburse-
allowance as if it were wage income. ment that is more than the standard mileagepenses were more than the federal rate.
rate.If your actual expenses are less than orThe following discussions explain where to re-  If Debbie's expenses are equal to or lessequal to the federal rate, you do not completeport your expenses depending upon how the than the standard mileage rate, she would notForm 2106 or claim any of your expenses onamount of your allowance compares to the fed- complete Form 2106. If her expenses are moreyour return.eral rate. than the standard mileage rate, she would com-However, if your actual expenses are more
Allowance less than or equal to the federal plete Form 2106 and report her total expensesthan the federal rate, you can complete Form
rate. If your allowance is less than or equal to and reimbursement (shown in box 12 of her2106 and deduct those excess expenses. You
the federal rate, the allowance will not be in- Form W-2). She would then claim the excessmust report on Form 2106 your reimbursements
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do not expenses as an itemized deduction.up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of your
need to report the related expenses or the allow- Form W-2) and all your expenses. You should
ance on your return if your expenses are equal be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.
Returning Excessto or less than the allowance.
ReimbursementsExample 1.  Laura lives and works in Aus-However, if your actual expenses are more
tin. In July her employer sent her to Albuquerquethan your allowance, you can complete Form Under an accountable plan, you are required tofor 4 days on business. Laura's employer paid2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched- return any excess reimbursement or other ex-the hotel directly for her lodging and reimbursedule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex- pense allowances for your business expensesLaura $65 a day ($260 total) for meals andpenses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the to the person paying the reimbursement or al-incidental expenses. Laura's actual meal ex-total amount of your expenses and reimburse- lowance. Excess reimbursement means anypenses were not more than the federal rate forments for the entire year. If you are using the amount for which you did not adequately ac-Albuquerque, which is $49 per day.standard meal allowance or the standard mile- count within a reasonable period of time. Forage rate, you do not have to prove that amount. Her employer included the $64 that was example, if you received a travel advance andmore than the federal rate (($65 − $49) ×  4) in you did not spend all the money on busi-Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-day box 1 of Laura's Form W-2. Her employer shows ness-related expenses, or you do not have proofbusiness trip to Denver. The federal rate for $196 ($49 a day ×  4) in box 12 of her Form W-2. of all your expenses, you have an excess reim-Denver is $198 per day. As required by his This amount is not included in Laura's income. bursement.employer's accountable plan, he accounts for Laura does not have to complete Form 2106; ªAdequate accountingº and ªreasonable pe-the time (dates), place, and business purpose of however, she must include the $64 in her gross riod of timeº were discussed earlier in this chap-the trip. His employer reimburses him $198 a income as wages (by reporting the total amount ter.day ($396 total) for living expenses. Jeremy's shown in box 1 of her Form W-2).
living expenses in Denver are not more than Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-Example 2. Joe also lives in Austin and$198 a day. vance if your employer provides you with anworks for the same employer as Laura. In MayJeremy's employer does not include any of expense allowance before you actually have thethe employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 daysthe reimbursement on his Form W-2 and Jeremy expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-and paid the hotel directly for Joe's hotel bill. Thedoes not deduct the expenses on his return. pected to be no more than your expense. Underemployer reimbursed Joe $75 a day for his an accountable plan, you are required to ade-meals and incidental expenses. The federal rateExample 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-day quately account to your employer for this ad-for San Diego is $64 a day.business trip to Boston. Matt's employer uses vance and to return any excess within aJoe can prove that his actual meal expensesthe high-low method to reimburse employees. reasonable period of time.totaled $380. His employer's accountable planSince Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is given If you do not adequately account for or do notwill not pay more than $75 a day for travel to Sanan advance of $256 a day ($512 total) for his return any excess advance within a reasonableDiego, so Joe does not give his employer thelodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt's period of time, the amount you do not accountrecords that prove that he actually spent $380.actual expenses totaled $700. for or return will be treated as having been paidHowever, he does account for the time, place,Since Matt's $700 of expenses are more under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe'sthan his $512 advance, he includes the excess only business trip this year. Unproved amounts. If you do not proveexpenses when he itemizes his deductions. Matt that you actually traveled on each day for whichJoe was reimbursed $300 ($75 ×  4 days),completes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex- you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-which is $44 more than the federal rate of $256penses and reimbursements). He must also al- ing the elements described in Table 5-1 ), you($64 ×  4 days). The employer includes the $44locate his reimbursement between his meals must return this unproved amount of the travelas income on Joe's Form W-2 in box 1. Theand other expenses as discussed later under advance within a reasonable period of time. Ifemployer also enters $256 in box 12 of Joe'sCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. you do not do this, the unproved amount will beForm W-2.
considered paid under a nonaccountable planJoe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-Example 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles in (discussed later).ductible expenses. He enters the total of his2009 for business. Under her employer's ac-
actual expenses for the year ($380) on Form Per diem allowance more than federal rate.countable plan, she accounts for the time
2106. He also enters the reimbursements that If your employer's accountable plan pays you an(dates), place, and business purpose of each
were not included in his income ($256). His total allowance that is higher than the federal rate,trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowance
deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is you do not have to return the difference betweenof 40 cents a mile.
$124. After he figures the 50% limit on his un- the two rates for the period you can prove busi-Since Nicole's $5,500 expense computed reimbursed meals and entertainment, he will ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif-under the standard mileage rate (10,000 ×  55 include the balance, $62, as an itemized deduc- ference will be reported as wages on your Formcents) is more than her $4,000 reimbursement tion. W-2. This excess amount is considered paid(10,000 miles ×  40 cents), she itemizes her
under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).deductions to claim the excess expense. Nicole Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles forcompletes Form 2106 (showing all of her ex- business in 2009. Under her employer's ac- Example.  Your employer sends you on apenses and reimbursements) and enters $1,500 countable plan, she gets reimbursed 60 cents a 5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2009($5,500 − $4,000) as an itemized deduction. mile, which is more than the standard mileage and gives you a $400 ($80 ×  5 days) advance to
rate. Her total reimbursement is $6,000.Allowance more than the federal rate. If cover your meals and incidental expenses. The
your allowance is more than the federal rate, Debbie's employer must include the reim- federal per diem for meals and incidental ex-
your employer must include the allowance bursement amount up to the standard mileage penses for Phoenix is $59. Your trip lasts only 3
amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your rate, $5,500 (10,000 ×  55 cents), in box 12 of her days. Under your employer's accountable plan,
Form W-2. This amount is not taxable. However, Form W-2. That amount is not taxable. Her em- you must return the $160 ($80 ×  2 days) ad-
the excess allowance will be included in box 1 of ployer must also include $500 ($6,000 − $5,500) vance for the 2 days you did not travel. For the 3
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
days you did travel you do not have to return the designated by his employer is treated as paid you for allowances or reimbursements of enter-
$63 difference between the allowance you re- under an accountable plan. tainment expenses, you do not have to keep
ceived and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 − records of these items. You are not subject to
$59) ×  3 days). However, the $63 will be re- the 50% limit on entertainment in this case. YouRules for Independent
ported on your Form W-2 as wages. can deduct the reimbursements or allowancesContractors and Clients
as payment for services if they are ordinary and
necessary business expenses. However, youNonaccountable Plans This section provides rules for independent con-
must file Form 1099-MISC to report amountstractors who incur expenses on behalf of a client
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or or customer. The rules cover the reporting and paid to the independent contractor if the total of
expense allowance arrangement that does not substantiation of certain expenses discussed in the reimbursements and any other fees is $600
meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier this publication, and they affect both indepen- or more during the calendar year.under Accountable Plans. dent contractors and their clients or customers.
In addition, even if your employer has an You are considered an independent contrac-
accountable plan, the following payments will be tor if you are self-employed and you perform
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable services for a customer or client. Completing Formsplan:
• Excess reimbursements you fail to return 2106 and 2106-EZAccounting to Your Clientto your employer, and 
This section briefly describes how employeesIf you received a reimbursement or an allow-• Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 6-1ance for travel, entertainment, or gift expensespenses related to your employer's busi-
explains what the employer reports on Formthat you incurred on behalf of a client, youness. See Reimbursement of
W-2 and what the employee reports on Formshould provide an adequate accounting of thesenondeductible expenses, earlier, under
2106. The instructions for the forms have moreexpenses to your client. If you do not account toAccountable Plans.
information on completing them.your client for these expenses, you must includeAn arrangement that repays you for business any reimbursements or allowances in income. If you are self-employed, do not fileexpenses by reducing the amount reported as You must keep adequate records of these ex- Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report youryour wages, salary, or other pay will be treated penses whether or not you account to your client expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or Fas a nonaccountable plan. This is because you
CAUTION
! for these expenses. (Form 1040). See the instructions for the formare entitled to receive the full amount of your pay If you do not separately account for and seek that you must file.whether or not you have any business ex- reimbursement for meals and entertainment inpenses. connection with providing services for a client,
you are subject to the 50% limit on those ex-If you are not sure if the reimbursement or Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use the
penses. See 50% Limit  in chapter 2.expense allowance arrangement is an account- shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee
able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em- business expenses. You can use this form if youAdequate accounting. As a self-employedployer. meet all of the following conditions.person, you adequately account by reporting
your actual expenses. You should follow the • You are an employee deducting ordinaryReporting your expenses under a nonac-
recordkeeping rules in chapter 5. and necessary expenses attributable tocountable plan. Your employer will combine
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex- your job.How to report. For information on how to
pense allowance paid to you under a nonac- report expenses on your tax return, see • You were not reimbursed by your em-countable plan with your wages, salary, or other Self-employed at the beginning of this chapter. ployer for your expenses (amounts in-pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notof your Form W-2. considered reimbursements).You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ Required Records for
and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex- • If you are claiming car expenses, you areClients or Customers
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en- using the standard mileage rate.
If you are a client or customer, you generally dotertainment. Your meal and entertainment
not have to keep records to prove the reimburse-expenses will be subject to the 50% limit  dis- Car expenses. If you used a car to performments or allowances you give, in the course ofcussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expenses your job as an employee, you may be able toyour business, to an independent contractor forwill be subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-travel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf.gross-income limit that applies to most miscella- ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and thenHowever, you must keep records if:neous itemized deductions.
claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A.• You reimburse the contractor for entertain- Car expenses using the standard mileage rateExample 1. Kim's employer gives her ment expenses incurred on your behalf, can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-$1,000 a month ($12,000 total for the year) for and pleting Part II and Part I, line 1.her business expenses. Kim does not have to
• The contractor adequately accounts to youprovide any proof of her expenses to her em- Information on use of cars. If you claimfor these expenses.ployer, and Kim can keep any funds that she any deduction for the business use of a car, youdoes not spend. must answer certain questions and provide in-Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac- Contractor adequately accounts. If the con- formation about the use of the car. The informa-countable plan. Her employer will include the tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain- tion relates to the following items.$12,000 on Kim's Form W-2 as if it were wages. ment expenses, you (the client or customer) • Date placed in service.If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, must keep records documenting each element
she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. Use • Mileage (total, business, commuting, anditemize her deductions. your records as proof for a deduction on your tax other personal mileage).
return. If entertainment expenses are accounted • Percentage of business use.Example 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month by for separately, you are subject to the 50% limithis employer. On days that he travels away from on entertainment. If the contractor adequately • After-work use.home on business, his employer designates $50 accounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you do • Use of other vehicles.a day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travel not have to report the amounts on an informationexpenses. Because his employer would pay Ke- return. • Whether you have evidence to support thevin his monthly salary whether or not he was deduction.traveling away from home, the arrangement is a Contractor does not adequately account.  If
• Whether or not the evidence is written.nonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a day the contractor does not adequately account to
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Of the amount on line 2, enterEmployees must complete Form 2106, Part II, Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the type
your total expense for mealsSection A, or Form 2106-EZ, Part II, to provide and amount of each expense on the dotted lines
and entertainment ........ . 4,500this information. and include the total on line 21. 4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the
Standard mileage rate. If you claim a de- result as a decimal (rounded to
Meal and entertainment expenses. Show at least three places) ...... .  .529 duction based on the standard mileage rate in-
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enterthe full amount of your expenses for busi-stead of your actual expenses, you must
the result here and in Columnness-related meals and entertainment on Formcomplete Form 2106, Part II, Section B. The B, line 7 .............. . 3,7032106, line 5, Column B. Include meals whileamount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to Form 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enteraway from your tax home overnight and other2106, Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part 1, line 2, the result here and in Columnyou can deduct parking fees and tolls that apply business meals and entertainment. Enter 50% A, line 7 .............. . $3,297
to the business use of the car. If you file Form of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertainment
On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,2972106-EZ, complete Part I, line 1, for the standard expenses on line 9, Column B.
($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) inmileage rate and line 2 for parking fees and tolls. If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full Column A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in ColumnSee Standard Mileage Rate  in chapter 4 for amount of your meals and entertainment on the B.information on using this rate. line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by
50%. Enter the result on line 5.Actual expenses. If you claim a deduction After you complete the form. After you have
based on actual car expenses, you cannot use completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, followHours of service limits. If you are subject
Form 2106-EZ. You must complete Form 2106, the directions on that form to deduct your ex-to the Department of Transportation's ªhours of
Part II, Section C. In addition, unless you lease penses on the appropriate line of your tax return.serviceº limits (as explained earlier under Indi-
your car, you must complete Section D to show For most taxpayers, this is line 21 of Schedule Aviduals subject to ªhours of serviceº limits  inyour depreciation deduction and any section (Form 1040). However, if you are a governmentchapter 2), use 80% instead of 50% for meals179 deduction and special depreciation allow- official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,while away from your tax home.ance you claim. an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-
ployee with impairment-related work expenses,If you are still using a car that is fully depreci- Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7 see Special Rules, later.ated, continue to complete Section C. Since you (you cannot use Form 2106-EZ) the amountshave no depreciation deduction, enter zero on your employer (or third party) reimbursed you Limits on employee business expenses.line 28. In this case, do not complete Section D. that were not reported to you in box 1 of your Your employee business expenses may be sub-
Form W-2. This includes any amount reportedCar rentals. If you claim car rental ex- ject to any of the three limits described next.
under code L in box 12 of Form W-2.penses on Form 2106, line 24a, you may have to They are figured in the following order on the
reduce that expense by an inclusion amount as specified form.Allocating your reimbursement. If youdescribed in chapter 4. If so, you can show your were reimbursed under an accountable plan and 1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer-car expenses and any inclusion amount as fol- want to deduct excess expenses that were not tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-lows. reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim- ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, you
bursement. This is necessary when your em- figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 of1. Compute the inclusion amount without tak-
ployer pays your reimbursement in the following Form 2106-EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.)ing into account your business use per-
manner:centage for the tax year. 2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-
• Pays you a single amount that covers tions. If you are an employee, deduct your2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) on
meals and/or entertainment, as well as employee business expenses (as figured onForm 2106, Part II, line 24b.
other business expenses, and Form 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Schedule A3. Report on line 24c the net amount of car (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de-• Does not clearly identify how much is forrental expenses (total car rental expenses ductions, including employee business ex-deductible meals and/or entertainment.minus the inclusion amount computed in penses, are subject to a 2%-of-adjusted-(1)). gross-income limit. This limit is figured on line 26You must allocate that single payment so that
of Schedule A (Form 1040).you know how much to enter in Form 2106,The net amount of car rental expenses will be
Column A and Column B of line 7.adjusted on Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflect 3. Limit on total itemized deductions. Ifthe percentage of business use for the tax year. your adjusted gross income (line 38 of FormExample. Rob's employer paid him an ex- 1040) is more than $166,800 ($83,400 if you areTransportation expenses. Show your trans- pense allowance of $12,000 this year under an married filing separately), the total of certainportation expenses that did not involve overnight accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con- itemized deductions, including employee busi-travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for meals, ness expenses, may be limited. See your formForm 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on this entertainment, and car expenses. The employer instructions for information on how to figure thisline business expenses you have for parking did not clearly show how much of the $7,000 limit.fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper- was for the cost of deductible meals and enter-
ating your car or expenses of commuting be- tainment. Rob actually spent $14,000 during the Special Rulestween your home and work. year ($5,500 for airfare, $4,500 for meals and
entertainment, and $4,000 for car expenses). This section discusses special rules that applyEmployee business expenses other than Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden- only to Armed Forces reservists, governmentmeals and entertainment. Show your other tified, Rob knows that $5,000 of the payment officials who are paid on a fee basis, performingemployee business expenses on Form 2106, goes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. To artists, and disabled employees with impair-Column A, lines 3 and 4, or Form 2106-EZ, lines allocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses the ment-related work expenses.3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals and worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex- His completed worksheet follows.penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui-
Armed Forces Reservists Travelingtion and books), office-in-the-home expenses, Reimbursement Allocation Worksheet More Than 100 Miles From Homeand trade and professional publications. (Keep for your records)
If line 4 expenses are the only ones you If you are a member of a reserve component of1. Enter the total amount ofare claiming, you received no reim- the Armed Forces of the United States and youreimbursements your employerbursements (or the reimbursements travel more than 100 miles away from home in
TIPgave you that were not reportedwere all included in box 1 of your Form W-2), connection with your performance of services asto you in box 1 of Form W-2 .. . $7,000
and the Special Rules  discussed later do not a member of the reserves, you can deduct your2. Enter the total amount of your
apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or travel expenses as an adjustment to gross in-expenses for the periods
covered by this reimbursement 8,5002106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on come rather than as a miscellaneous itemized
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduction. The amount of expenses you can your impairment-related work expenses fromExpenses of Certain
deduct as an adjustment to gross income is Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, onPerforming Artists
limited to the regular federal per diem rate (for Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28, and identify
If you are a performing artist, you may qualify tolodging, meals, and incidental expenses) and the type and amount of this expense on the
deduct your employee business expenses as anthe standard mileage rate (for car expenses) dotted line next to line 28. Enter your employee
adjustment to gross income rather than as aplus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. See business expenses that are unrelated to yourmiscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,Per Diem and Car Allowances  earlier for more disability from Form 2106, line 10, or Formyou must meet all of the following requirements.information. Any expenses in excess of these 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),
amounts can be claimed only as a miscellane- line 21.1. During the tax year, you perform servicesous itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit. Impairment-related work expenses are yourin the performing arts as an employee for
Member of a reserve component. You are a allowable expenses for attendant care at yourat least two employers.
member of a reserve component of the Armed workplace and other expenses in connection2. You receive at least $200 each from anyForces of the United States if you are in the with your workplace that are necessary for youtwo of these employers.Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast to be able to work.
Guard Reserve; the Army National Guard of the 3. Your related performing-arts business ex- You are disabled if you have:United States; the Air National Guard of the penses are more than 10% of your gross
• A physical or mental disability (for exam-United States; or the Reserve Corps of the Pub- income from the performance of those
ple, blindness or deafness) that function-lic Health Service. services.
ally limits your being employed, orHow to report. If you have reserve-related 4. Your adjusted gross income is not more
• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-travel that takes you more than 100 miles from than $16,000 before deducting these busi-
ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thathome, you should first complete Form 2106 or ness expenses.
Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for substantially limits one or more of your
reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to major life activities, such as performingSpecial rules for married persons. If you are
the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-married, you must file a joint return unless you
Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040, ing, learning, or working.lived apart from your spouse at all times during
line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on the tax year. If you file a joint return, you must
Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, and You can deduct impairment-related expensesfigure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separately
deduct the balance as an itemized deduction on as business expenses if they are:for both you and your spouse. However, require-
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. ment (4) applies to your and your spouse's com- • Necessary for you to do your work satis-You cannot deduct expenses of travel that bined adjusted gross income. factorily,does not take you more than 100 miles from
Where to report. If you meet all of the abovehome as an adjustment to gross income. In- • For goods and services not required or
requirements, you should first complete Formstead, you must complete Form 2106 or used, other than incidentally, in your per-
2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your per-2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an sonal activities, and
forming-arts-related expenses from Form 2106,itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040),
• Not specifically covered under other in-line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total online 21.
come tax laws.Form 1040, line 24.
If you do not meet all of the above require-
Officials Paid on a Fee Basis ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex- Example 1. You are blind. You must use a
penses as an adjustment to gross income. reader to do your work. You use the reader bothCertain fee-basis officials can claim their em- Instead, you must complete Form 2106 or during your regular working hours at your placeployee business expenses whether or not they 2106-EZ and deduct your employee business of work and outside your regular working hoursitemize their other deductions on Schedule A expenses as an itemized deduction on Schedule away from your place of work. The reader's(Form 1040). A (Form 1040), line 21. services are only for your work. You can deductFee-basis officials are persons who are em- your expenses for the reader as business ex-ployed by a state or local government and who
penses.are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They Impairment-Related Work
can deduct their business expenses in perform- Expenses of Disabled Employees Example 2. You are deaf. You must use aing services in that job as an adjustment to gross
sign-language interpreter during meetings whileincome rather than as a miscellaneous itemized If you are an employee with a physical or mental
you are at work. The interpreter's services arededuction. disability, your impairment-related work ex-
used only for your work. You can deduct yourIf you are a fee-basis official, include your penses are not subject to the
expenses for the interpreter as business ex-employee business expenses from Form 2106, 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
penses.line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on to most other employee business expenses. Af-
Form 1040, line 24. ter you complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, enter
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
method (200% DB) to determine his deprecia- amount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it byIllustrated Examples
tion deduction. the 70% business use. He adds this amount
David first figures his special depreciationThe following examples illustrate the reporting of ($3,479) to the depreciation deduction ($7,672)
allowance to be $8,575 ($24,500 x 70% x 50%).travel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex- and reports the total ($11,151) on Part I, line 1.
David's depreciation limit for 2009 is reducedpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Business His other transportation expenses for park-because his business use is less than 100%. Heuse of a car is shown using actual car expenses ing fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,320. He entersfigures his reduced limit to be $7,672 (2009in Example 1 and the standard mileage rate in this amount on Part I, line 2. David's employerdepreciation limit ($10,960 (from the MaximumExample 2. Sample records that prove some of reimbursed him a total of $5,400 for his car andDepreciation Deduction for Cars table shown inthe claimed expenses are also shown.
transportation expenses. This amount was paidchapter 4) ×  70%). David notes that his special
from an accountable plan and was not shown onallowance ($8,575) exceeds his depreciationExample 1. David Pine purchased a new
David's Form W-2. However, since he is claim-limit ($7,672) for 2009. He then figures his unad-car for $24,500 (not including sales tax) on Jan-
ing expenses that are more than his reimburse-justed basis to be $9,478 ($24,500 ×  70% ±uary 5, 2009. In 2009, he used the car 70% for
ments, he must show the entire reimbursement$7,672). David figures his MACRS depreciationbusiness purposes. A sample page from David's
deduction to be $1,896 ($9,478 (unadjusted ba-logbook is illustrated in Table 6-2. He records his amount on Part I, Column A, line 7. Since David
sis) x 20%). David figures his total depreciationbusiness mileage (but not his personal miles) had no meal or entertainment expenses, he en-
deduction to be $9,568 ($7,672 (special allow-and expenses daily. ters his excess deductible expenses ($6,720) on
ance) + $1,896 (MACRS depreciation)). How-David uses Form 2106 to claim actual car Part I, line 10. He can deduct these expenses
ever, David's depreciation deduction is limited toexpenses. He completes Part II, Section A, as (subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
$7,672. He enters the appropriate amounts inshown later on his illustrated form. He does not limit) on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21, if he
Part II, Section D.claim the section 179 deduction but he does itemizes his deductions.claim the special depreciation allowance. He His other car expenses included $4,970 for
uses the MACRS double declining balance gas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters this
Table 6-2.  Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name: David Pine
Odometer Readings Expenses
Destination  Type
 (City, Town, or Business Miles  (Gas, oil, tolls,
Date Area) Purpose  Start  Stop  this trip etc.) Amount
5/31/09
6/1/09 Local Sales calls 8,097 8,188 91 Gas $ 25.50
(St. Louis)
6/2/09 Indianapolis Sales calls 8,211 8,486 275 Parking 6.50
6/3/09 Louisville See Bob Smith 8,486 8,599 113 Gas/Repair flat 30.00
(Pot. Client) tire 105.00
6/4/09 Return to 8,599 8,875 276 Gas 27.50
St. Louis
6/5/09 Local Sales calls 8,914 9,005 91
(St. Louis)
6/6/09
Weekly 8,097 9,005 846 $ 194.50
Total
Total 6,236 $1,935.00
Year-to-Date
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form  2106 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service  (99) 
Employee Business Expenses 
  
/H17075 See separate instructions.        
/H17075 Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
OMB No. 1545-0074 
2009 
Attachment   
Sequence No.    129 
Your name Occupation in which you incurred expenses Social security number 
Part I                     Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements 
Step 1  Enter Your Expenses 
Column A   
Other Than Meals   
and Entertainment 
Column B   
Meals and   
Entertainment 
1 Vehicle expense from line 22 or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See 
instructions.) ..................  1 
2 Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that 
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work . 2 
3 Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, 
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment .  3 
4 Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not 
include meals and entertainment ............  4 
5 Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions) ..... 5 
6 Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the 
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5 ......  6 
         Note:  If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8. 
Step 2  Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1 
7 Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not 
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements 
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see 
instructions) ................... 7 
Step 3  Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR) 
8 Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if  line
7 is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as  income 
on Form 1040, line 7 (or on Form 1040NR, line 8) ......  8 
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct 
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form 2106 to 
your return. 
9 In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply 
line 8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of 
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses 
incurred while away from home on business by 80% (.80) instead of
50%. For details, see instructions.) ........... 9 
10 Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21 (or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 9). (Armed Forces 
reservists,  qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or local government officials, and 
individuals with  disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter the total.)    /H17075 10 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see instructions. Cat. No. 11700N Form  2106  (2009) 
David Pine Sales 559-00-9559
11,151
1,320
12,471
5,400
7,071
7,071
7,071
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2106 (2009) Page  2 
Part II                     Vehicle Expenses 
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you   
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (a)  Vehicle 1 (b)  Vehicle 2 
11 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service ......... 11 / / / / 
12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2009 ......... 12 miles miles 
13 Business miles included on line 12 ............. 13 miles miles 
14 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12 ......... 14 % % 
15 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance .......... 15 miles miles 
16 Commuting miles included on line 12 ............. 16 miles miles 
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 . .  17 miles miles 
18 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours? ............. Yes No
19 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use? ...........  Yes No
20 Do you have evidence to support your deduction? .................. Yes No
21 If “Yes,” is the evidence written? ........................ Yes No
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or Section C.) 
22 Multiply line 13 by 55¢ (.55). Enter the result here and on line 1 ........... .  22 
Section C—Actual Expenses (a)  Vehicle 1 (b)  Vehicle 2 
23 Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle 
insurance, etc. ...... 23 
24 a Vehicle rentals ......  24a 
b Inclusion amount (see instructions) . . 24b 
c Subtract line 24b from line 24a . 24c 
25 Value of employer-provided 
vehicle (applies only if 100% of 
annual lease value was included 
on Form W-2—see instructions)  
25 
26 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25. . . 26 
27 Multiply line 26 by the  percentage 
on line 14 . .......  27 
28 Depreciation (see instructions) . 28 
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total 
here and on line 1 ..... 29 
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles  (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C for the vehicle.) 
(a)  Vehicle 1 (b)  Vehicle 2 
30 Enter cost or other basis (see  
instructions) .......
30 
31 Enter section 179 deduction  and 
special allowance (see  
instructions) .......  
31 
32 Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see  
instructions if you claimed the  
section 179 deduction or  
special allowance) .....  
32 
33 Enter depreciation method and 
percentage (see instructions) .  33 
34 Multiply line 32 by the percentage 
on line 33 (see instructions) 34 
35 Add lines 31 and 34 ....  35 
36 Enter the applicable limit explained
in the line 36 instructions . . . 36 
37 Multiply line 36 by the percentage 
on line 14 . . . .....  37 
38 Enter the smaller of line 35 or 
line 37. If you skipped lines 36 
and 37, enter the amount from 
line 35. Also enter this  amount 
on line 28 above ......
38 
Form 2106 (2009) 
150 9
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
4,970
4,970
3,479
7,672
11,151
24,500
7,672
9,478
200 DB 20%
1,896
9,568
10,960
7,672
7,672
EPS File Name: 11081L23 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 37

Page 38 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Type of Expense AmountExample 2. Bill Wilson is an employee of Bill records his expenses and other pertinent
information in his Weekly Traveling ExpenseFashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a Parking fees and tolls .......... . $  520
and Entertainment Record, shown in Table 6-3.typical travel week, Bill leaves his home on Long Car expenses ............... . 11,000
He obtains receipts for his expenses for lodgingIsland on Monday morning and drives to Albany Meals .................... . 3,861
Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning .... . 18,318and for any other expenses of $75 or more.to exhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospec-
Entertainment ............... . 3,250During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000tive customers. Then he drives to Troy to show
Gifts, education, etc. .......... . 650miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.Fashion's new line of merchandise to Town De-
Total $37,599Following the instructions for Form 2106-EZ,partment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,
Part II, he answers all the questions and figureshe talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for Bill received an allowance of $33,000
his car expense to be $11,000 (20,000 ×  55Town Department Store, to discuss the new line. ($2,750 per month) to help offset his expenses.
cents per mile).He later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to Bill did not have to account to his employer for
His total employee business expenses aredinner to discuss Attire Co.'s buying Fashion's the reimbursement and the $33,000 was in-
shown in the following table.new line of clothing. cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.
Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2006. Because Bill's reimbursement was included
He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex- in his income and he is using the standard mile-
pense purposes. He records his total mileage, age rate for his car expenses, he files Form
business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the 2106-EZ with his tax return.
year.
Page 38 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 39 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
Table 6-3.  Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
From: August 2, 2009 To: August 8, 2009 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
1. Travel Expenses:
Airlines
Excess Baggage
Bus ±  Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
2.  Meals and Lodging: 
Breakfast 8 75 8 00 8 25 9 00 34 00
 Lunch 9 75 10 00 10 25 10 25 10 50 50 75
 Dinner 22 00 20 25 21 50 63 75
 Hotel and Motel 111 00 111 00 111 00 97 00 430 00(Detail in Schedule B)
3.  Entertainment 130 00 130 00
(Detail in Schedule C)
4. Other Expenses: 
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph 5 50 4 00 9 50
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room 75 00 75 00 150 00
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s) 150 00 150 00 300 00
Trade Shows
5. Car Expenses:  (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls 8 00 6 00 6 00 20 00
6. Other (Identify)
Total 156 25 375 00 375 75 251 50 29 50 1,158 50
Note:  Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A ±  Car
Mileage: End 57,600 57,620 57,650 57,660 57,840
Start 57,445 57,600 57,620 57,650 57,660
Total 155 20 30 10 180 395
Business Mileage 155 20 30 10 170 385
Schedule B ±  Lodging
Name Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern HotelHotel 
or
City Albany Albany Albany TroyMotel
Schedule C ±  Entertainment
Date Item Place Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
August 6, 2009 Bar John's Steak House 55 00 Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.
Dinner Troy 75 00
 WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Travel and transportation expenses ... . N/A
Other reimbursements ........... .
TOTAL .................... .
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 39

Page 40 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form    2106-EZ
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service   (99)
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses
/H17075 Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
OMB No. 1545-0074
2009
Attachment 
Sequence No.  129A
Your name Occupation in which you incurred expenses Social security number
You Can Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is 
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for 
your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not 
considered reimbursements for this purpose).
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2009.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2009 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year you placed the 
vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
Part I Figure Your Expenses
1 Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multiply line 8a by 55¢ 
(.55) .............................. 1 
2 Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight 
travel or commuting to and from work ................... 2 
3 Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc. Do 
not include meals and entertainment .................... 3 
4 Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and 
entertainment ........................... 4 
5 Meals and entertainment expenses:   $ ×  50% (.50). (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred 
while away from home on business by 80% (.80) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.) 5 
6 Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21 (or 
on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 9). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local 
government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the
instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.) ............ 6 
Part II Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7 When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075
8 Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2009, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
a Business b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
9 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours? .............. Yes No
10 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use? ............ Yes No
11a Do you have evidence to support your deduction? ................... Yes No
b If “Yes,” is the evidence written? ......................... Yes No
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4. Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2009)
Bill Wilson Sales 555-00-5555
11,000
520
18,318
650
7,111
3,556
34,044
1/3/2006
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
Page 40 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 41 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Free Tax Services. It contains lists of free tax • Get information on starting and operating
a small business.information sources, including publications,How To Get Tax Help
services, and free tax education and assistance
programs. It also has an index of over 100You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) youorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques- Phone. Many services are available by
can listen to on your telephone.tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- phone. 
Accessible versions of IRS published prod-eral ways. By selecting the method that is best
ucts are available on request in a variety offor you, you will have quick and easy access to • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-tax help. alternative formats for people with disabilities. tions. Call 1-800-TAX FORM
(1-800-829-3676) to order current-yearContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The Free help with your return. Free help in pre- forms, instructions, and publications, andTaxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- paring your return is available nationwide from prior-year forms and instructions. Youpendent organization within the IRS whose em- IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income should receive your order within 10 days.ployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed toeconomic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withhelp low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun-ing tax problems that have not been resolved your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designedthrough normal channels, or who believe that an to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their • Solving problems. You can getIRS system or procedure is not working as it tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronic face-to-face help solving tax problemsshould. Here are seven things every taxpayer filing and all volunteers will let you know about every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-should know about TAS: credits and deductions you may be entitled to sistance Centers. An employee can ex-• TAS is your voice at the IRS. claim. To find the nearest Vita or TCE site, call plain IRS letters, request adjustments to
1-800-829-1040. your account, or help you set up a pay-• Our service is free, confidential, and tai-
As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-lored to meet your needs.
Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near- tance Center for an appointment. To find• You may be eligible for TAS help if you est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-have tried to resolve your tax problem visit AARP's website at tacts or look in the phone book underthrough normal IRS channels and have www.aarp.org/money/taxaide. United States Government, Internal Reve-gotten nowhere, or you believe an IRS nue Service.For more information on these programs, goprocedure just isn't working as it should. to • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accesswww.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the• TAS helps taxpayers whose problems are to TTY/TDD equipment, callupper right-hand corner.causing financial difficulty or significant 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or tocost, including the cost of professional order forms and publications.Internet. You can access the IRS web-representation. This includes businesses site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-as well as individuals. days a week to:
 ten to pre-recorded messages covering• TAS employees know the IRS and how to various tax topics.• E-file your return. Find out about commer-navigate it. We will listen to your problem, cial tax preparation and e-file services • Refund information. To check the status ofhelp you understand what needs to be available free to eligible taxpayers. your 2009 refund, call 1-800-829-1954done to resolve it, and stay with you every
during business hours or 1-800-829-4477• Check the status of your 2009 refund. Gostep of the way until your problem is re-
(automated refund information 24 hours asolved. to 
day, 7 days a week). Wait at least 72www.irs.gov and click on Where's My Re-• TAS has at least one local taxpayer advo- hours after the IRS acknowledges receiptfund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRScate in every state, the District of Colum- of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks afteracknowledges receipt of your e-filed re-bia, and Puerto Rico. You can call your mailing a paper return. If you filed Formturn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paperlocal advocate, whose number is in your 8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11return. If you filed Form 8379 with yourphone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer Ad- weeks if you filed electronically). Havereturn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if youvocate ServiceÐYour Voice at the IRS, your 2009 tax return available so you canfiled electronically). Have your 2009 taxand on our website at www.irs.gov/advo- provide your social security number, yourreturn available so you can provide yourcate. You can also call our toll-free line at filing status, and the exact whole dollarsocial security number, your filing status,1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD amount of your refund. Refunds are sentand the exact whole dollar amount of your1-800-829-4059. out weekly on Fridays. If you check therefund.
status of your refund and are not given the• You can learn about your rights and re- • Download forms, instructions, and publica- date it will be issued, please wait until thesponsibilities as a taxpayer by visiting our tions. next week before checking back.online tax toolkit at www.taxtoolkit.irs.gov.
• Order IRS products online. • Other refund information. To check theLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). status of a prior year refund or amended• Research your tax questions online.The Low Income Taxpayer Clinic program return refund, call 1-800-829-1954.serves individuals who have a problem with the • Search publications online by topic or
IRS and whose income is below a certain level. keyword. Evaluating the quality of our telephoneLITCs are independent from the IRS. Most services. To ensure IRS representatives give• Use the online Internal Revenue Code,LITCs can provide representation before the accurate, courteous, and professional answers,Regulations, or other official guidance.IRS or in court on audits, tax collection disputes, we use several methods to evaluate the qualityand other issues for free or a small fee. If an • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) of our telephone services. One method is for aindividual's native language is not English, some published in the last few years. second IRS representative to listen in on orclinics can provide multilingual information record random telephone calls. Another is to ask• Figure your withholding allowances usingabout taxpayer rights and responsibilities. For some callers to complete a short survey at thethe withholding calculator online at www.more information, see Publication 4134, Low end of the call.irs.gov/individuals.Income Taxpayer Clinic List. This publication is
available at www.irs.gov , by calling • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by Walk-in. Many products and services
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or at your using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) are available on a walk-in basis.
local IRS office. Assistant.
• Sign up to receive local and national taxFree tax services. To find out what services • Products. You can walk in to many post
news by email.are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 41

Page 42 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
certain forms, instructions, and publica- office, go to • Toll-free and email technical support.
tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the • Two releases during the year.stores, copy centers, city and county gov- phone book under United States Govern- ± The first release will ship the beginningernment offices, credit unions, and office ment, Internal Revenue Service. of January 2010.supply stores have a collection of products
± The final release will ship the beginningavailable to print from a CD or photocopy Mail. You can send your order for of March 2010.from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS forms, instructions, and publications tooffices and libraries have the Internal Rev- the address below. You should receive
 Purchase the DVD from National Technicalenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue a response within 10 days after your request is Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail- received.able for research purposes. cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or call
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30• Services. You can walk in to your local Internal Revenue Service (plus a $6 handling fee).Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayness day for personal, face-to-face tax
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613help. An employee can explain IRS letters,
request adjustments to your tax account, DVD for tax products. You can orderor help you set up a payment plan. If you Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products Appendicesneed to resolve a tax problem, have ques- DVD, and obtain:
tions about how the tax law applies to your There are fifteen appendices.• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-individual tax return, or you are more com-
Appendices A-1 through A-6 show the leasefortable talking with someone in person, lications.
inclusion amounts that you may need to report ifvisit your local Taxpayer Assistance • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica- you leased a car (other than a truck or van, or anCenter where you can spread out your tions.records and talk with an IRS representa- electric car) for 30 days or more. The tables are
tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec- • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and numbered.
essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you finding aid. Appendices B-1 through B-6 show the leasecan call your local Center and leave a inclusion amounts that you may need to report if• Tax law frequently asked questions.message requesting an appointment to re- you leased a truck or van.solve a tax account issue. A representa- • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-
Appendices C-1 through C-3 show the leasetive will call you back within 2 business sponse system.days to schedule an in-person appoint- inclusion amounts that you may need to report if
• Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of thement at your convenience. If you have an you leased an electric car before 2007.
U.S. Code.ongoing, complex tax account problem or If any of these apply to you, use the appendixa special need, such as a disability, an • Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax for the year you first leased the car. (See chapterappointment can be requested. All other forms. 4.)issues will be handled without an appoint-
ment. To find the number of your local • Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Page 42 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 43 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 2000 through 2004
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 2000 Beginning in 2001 Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003 Beginning in 2004
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 15,500 $ 15,800 $  12 $  11 $  6 $  0 $  0
15,800 16,100 23 22 13 0 0
16,100 16,400 34 33 19 0 0
16,400 16,700 45 44 26 0 0
16,700 17,000 57 56 31 0 0
17,000 17,500 72 70 40 0 0
17,500 18,000 91 89 50 0 48
18,000 18,500 109 107 61 45 56
18,500 19,000 128 125 72 53 65
19,000 19,500 147 143 82 61 73
19,500 20,000 166 162 93 69 81
20,000 20,500 185 181 103 77 89
20,500 21,000 204 199 114 85 97
21,000 21,500 222 217 123 92 106
21,500 22,000 241 236 134 100 114
22,000 23,000 269 263 150 111 126
23,000 24,000 306 300 171 127 142
24,000 25,000 345 337 192 143 159
25,000 26,000 381 373 213 158 176
26,000 27,000 419 410 234 174 192
27,000 28,000 457 447 255 189 209
28,000 29,000 494 484 276 204 225
29,000 30,000 532 520 296 221 242
30,000 31,000 570 557 318 236 257
31,000 32,000 607 594 338 251 274
32,000 33,000 645 631 360 267 291
33,000 34,000 683 667 381 283 307
34,000 35,000 720 705 402 298 323
35,000 36,000 757 741 422 314 340
36,000 37,000 795 778 443 330 357
37,000 38,000 833 815 464 346 373
38,000 39,000 870 851 485 361 389
39,000 40,000 908 888 506 376 405
40,000 41,000 946 925 527 391 423
41,000 42,000 983 962 549 407 438
42,000 43,000 1,021 998 570 423 455
43,000 44,000 1,058 1,036 590 438 471
44,000 45,000 1,095 1,072 611 454 488
45,000 46,000 1,133 1,108 632 470 504
46,000 47,000 1,171 1,145 653 486 520
47,000 48,000 1,208 1,183 674 501 538
48,000 49,000 1,246 1,219 695 516 554
49,000 50,000 1,284 1,256 717 532 570
50,000 51,000 1,321 1,293 737 548 586
51,000 52,000 1,359 1,330 758 563 603
52,000 53,000 1,396 1,366 779 578 619
53,000 54,000 1,433 1,403 800 594 636
54,000 55,000 1,471 1,439 821 610 652
55,000 56,000 1,508 1,476 842 626 669
56,000 57,000 1,546 1,514 863 641 685
57,000 58,000 1,584 1,550 883 656 701
58,000 59,000 1,621 1,586 905 672 718
59,000 60,000 1,659 1,624 925 688 734
60,000 62,000 1,715 1,678 957 711 759
62,000 64,000 1,790 1,752 999 743 792
64,000 66,000 1,865 1,825 1,041 773 825
66,000 68,000 1,941 1,900 1,083 805 857
68,000 70,000 2,016 1,972 1,125 835 890
70,000 72,000 2,092 2,047 1,166 867 923
72,000 74,000 2,166 2,120 1,208 898 956
74,000 76,0002 2,241 2,193 1,250 930 990
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,501, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 722), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb00-09.pdf.
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-09.pdf.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
For 2004, Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 43

Page 44 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,200 $ 15,500 $ 3  $ 6 $ 9 $ 11 $ 13
15,500 15,800 4 9 13 17 19
15,800 16,100 5 12 18 22 26
16,100 16,400 7 15 22 27 32
16,400 16,700 8 18 27 32 39
16,700 17,000 9 21 32 38 44
17,000 17,500 11 25 38 45 52
17,500 18,000 14 30 45 54 63
18,000 18,500 16 35 52 63 73
18,500 19,000 18 40 60 72 83
19,000 19,500 20 46 67 80 94
19,500 20,000 23 50 75 90 104
20,000 20,500 25 55 82 99 115
20,500 21,000 27 61 89 108 125
21,000 21,500 30 65 97 117 135
21,500 22,000 32 70 105 125 146
22,000 23,000 35 78 116 139 161
23,000 24,000 40 88 131 156 182
24,000 25,000 44 98 146 175 202
25,000 26,000 49 108 161 192 223
26,000 27,000 54 118 175 211 244
27,000 28,000 58 128 191 228 265
28,000 29,000 63 138 205 247 285
29,000 30,000 67 149 220 264 306
30,000 31,000 72 159 234 283 326
31,000 32,000 77 168 250 300 348
32,000 33,000 81 179 265 318 367
33,000 34,000 86 189 279 336 389
34,000 35,000 90 199 295 354 409
35,000 36,000 95 209 309 372 430
36,000 37,000 99 219 325 389 451
37,000 38,000 104 229 339 408 471
38,000 39,000 109 239 354 426 491
39,000 40,000 113 249 370 443 512
40,000 41,000 118 259 384 462 533
41,000 42,000 122 269 400 479 554
42,000 43,000 127 279 414 497 575
43,000 44,000 132 289 429 515 595
44,000 45,000 136 299 444 533 616
45,000 46,000 141 309 459 551 636
46,000 47,000 145 320 473 569 657
47,000 48,000 150 329 489 587 678
48,000 49,000 154 340 504 604 699
49,000 50,000 159 350 518 623 719
50,000 51,000 164 360 533 640 740
51,000 52,000 168 370 548 659 760
52,000 53,000 173 380 563 676 781
53,000 54,000 177 390 578 694 802
54,000 55,000 182 400 593 712 823
55,000 56,000 186 410 609 729 844
56,000 57,000 191 420 623 748 864
57,000 58,000 196 430 638 766 884
58,000 59,000 200 440 653 784 905
59,000 60,000 205 450 668 802 925
60,000 62,000 212 465 691 828 957
62,000 64,000 221 485 721 864 998
64,000 66,000 230 506 750 900 1,039
66,000 68,000 239 526 780 935 1,081
68,000 70,000 248 546 810 971 1,123
70,000 72,000 258 566 839 1,008 1,163
72,000 74,000 267 586 869 1,044 1,204
74,000 76,000 276 606 899 1,079 1,247
76,000 78,000 285 626 930 1,114 1,288
78,000 80,000 294 646 960 1,150 1,329
80,000 85,000 310 682 1,011 1,213 1,402
85,000 90,000 333 732 1,086 1,303 1,504
90,000 95,000 356 782 1,161 1,392 1,608
95,000 100,0002 379 832 1,236 1,481 1,712
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
Page 44 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 45 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,200 $ 15,500 $ 4  $ 6 $ 10 $ 10 $ 10
15,500 15,800 6 10 16 18 18
15,800 16,100 8 15 22 25 28
16,100 16,400 9 19 29 33 36
16,400 16,700 11 24 35 40 45
16,700 17,000 13 28 42 48 53
17,000 17,500 16 34 50 58 66
17,500 18,000 19 41 61 71 80
18,000 18,500 23 48 71 84 95
18,500 19,000 26 55 82 96 110
19,000 19,500 29 62 93 109 125
19,500 20,000 32 70 103 122 139
20,000 20,500 36 76 114 135 154
20,500 21,000 39 84 124 148 168
21,000 21,500 42 91 135 160 184
21,500 22,000 45 98 146 173 198
22,000 23,000 50 109 162 192 220
23,000 24,000 57 123 183 218 250
24,000 25,000 63 138 204 243 279
25,000 26,000 70 152 225 269 309
26,000 27,000 76 166 247 294 339
27,000 28,000 83 181 268 319 368
28,000 29,000 90 195 289 345 397
29,000 30,000 96 209 311 371 426
30,000 31,000 103 223 332 397 455
31,000 32,000 109 238 353 422 485
32,000 33,000 116 252 374 448 515
33,000 34,000 122 267 395 473 545
34,000 35,000 129 281 417 498 574
35,000 36,000 135 295 439 523 604
36,000 37,000 142 309 460 549 633
37,000 38,000 148 324 481 575 662
38,000 39,000 155 338 502 601 691
39,000 40,000 161 353 523 626 721
40,000 41,000 168 367 545 651 750
41,000 42,000 175 381 566 677 780
42,000 43,000 181 396 587 702 810
43,000 44,000 188 410 608 728 839
44,000 45,000 194 424 630 753 869
45,000 46,000 201 438 651 779 898
46,000 47,000 207 453 672 805 927
47,000 48,000 214 467 694 830 956
48,000 49,000 220 482 715 855 986
49,000 50,000 227 496 736 881 1,016
50,000 51,000 233 510 758 906 1,045
51,000 52,000 240 525 778 932 1,075
52,000 53,000 246 539 800 958 1,104
53,000 54,000 253 553 821 984 1,133
54,000 55,000 259 568 842 1,009 1,163
55,000 56,000 266 582 864 1,034 1,192
56,000 57,000 273 596 885 1,060 1,221
57,000 58,000 279 611 906 1,085 1,251
58,000 59,000 286 625 927 1,111 1,281
59,000 60,000 292 639 949 1,136 1,311
60,000 62,000 302 661 981 1,174 1,354
62,000 64,000 315 690 1,023 1,225 1,413
64,000 66,000 328 718 1,066 1,276 1,473
66,000 68,000 341 747 1,108 1,328 1,531
68,000 70,000 354 776 1,151 1,378 1,590
70,000 72,000 367 804 1,194 1,429 1,649
72,000 74,000 380 833 1,236 1,481 1,707
74,000 76,000 393 862 1,278 1,532 1,767
76,000 78,000 407 890 1,321 1,583 1,825
78,000 80,000 420 919 1,363 1,634 1,884
80,000 85,000 443 969 1,438 1,723 1,987
85,000 90,000 475 1,041 1,544 1,851 2,135
90,000 95,000 508 1,112 1,651 1,978 2,282
95,000 100,0002 541 1,184 1,757 2,106 2,429
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 45

Page 46 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2007
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,000 $ 15,800 $ 2  $ 5 $ 11 $ 11 $ 13
15,800 16,100 4 10 17 19 22
16,100 16,400 6 14 24 28 31
16,400 16,700 9 18 31 35 41
16,700 17,000 11 23 37 43 50
17,000 17,500 13 29 46 54 62
17,500 18,000 17 37 56 68 77
18,000 18,500 20 44 68 81 93
18,500 19,000 24 51 80 94 108
19,000 19,500 27 59 90 108 124
19,500 20,000 30 67 101 121 139
20,000 20,500 34 74 113 134 154
20,500 21,000 37 82 123 148 170
21,000 21,500 41 89 135 161 185
21,500 22,000 44 97 146 174 201
22,000 23,000 49 108 163 194 224
23,000 24,000 56 123 185 221 255
24,000 25,000 63 138 207 248 285
25,000 26,000 70 153 229 275 316
26,000 27,000 77 168 251 302 347
27,000 28,000 83 183 274 328 378
28,000 29,000 90 198 296 355 409
29,000 30,000 97 213 318 382 439
30,000 31,000 104 228 341 408 470
31,000 32,000 111 243 363 435 501
32,000 33,000 118 258 385 461 532
33,000 34,000 125 273 407 488 563
34,000 35,000 131 288 430 515 593
35,000 36,000 138 303 452 542 624
36,000 37,000 145 318 474 568 656
37,000 38,000 152 333 496 595 686
38,000 39,000 159 348 519 621 717
39,000 40,000 166 363 541 648 748
40,000 41,000 172 378 564 674 779
41,000 42,000 179 393 586 701 810
42,000 43,000 186 408 608 728 840
43,000 44,000 193 423 630 755 871
44,000 45,000 200 438 652 782 902
45,000 46,000 207 453 674 809 933
46,000 47,000 213 468 697 835 964
47,000 48,000 220 483 719 862 995
48,000 49,000 227 498 742 888 1,025
49,000 50,000 234 513 764 915 1,056
50,000 51,000 241 528 786 942 1,087
51,000 52,000 278 543 808 969 1,117
52,000 53,000 254 558 831 995 1,148
53,000 54,000 261 573 853 1,022 1,179
54,000 55,000 268 588 875 1,049 1,210
55,000 56,000 275 603 897 1,076 1,241
56,000 57,000 282 618 920 1,102 1,271
57,000 58,000 289 633 942 1,128 1,303
58,000 59,000 296 648 964 1,155 1,334
59,000 60,000 302 663 987 1,182 1,364
60,000 62,000 313 685 1,020 1,222 1,411
62,000 64,000 326 716 1,064 1,276 1,472
64,000 66,000 340 746 1,108 1,329 1,534
66,000 68,000 354 775 1,154 1,382 1,595
68,000 70,000 367 806 1,198 1,435 1,657
70,000 72,000 381 836 1,242 1,489 1,719
72,000 74,000 395 865 1,287 1,543 1,780
74,000 76,000 408 896 1,331 1,596 1,842
76,000 78,000 422 926 1,376 1,649 1,903
78,000 80,000 436 955 1,421 1,703 1,965
80,000 85,000 460 1,008 1,498 1,796 2,074
85,000 90,000 494 1,083 1,610 1,929 2,228
90,000 95,000 528 1,158 1,721 2,063 2,382
95,000 100,0002 562 1,233 1,833 2,196 2,536
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2007-30 (2007-18 IRB 1104), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-18_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 46 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 47 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2008
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 20 $ 42 $ 62 $ 73 $ 84
19,000 19,500 22 47 71 83 94
19,500 20,000 25 53 78 93 106
20,000 20,500 27 58 87 102 117
20,500 21,000 30 63 95 112 128
21,000 21,500 32 69 103 122 139
21,500 22,000 34 75 111 131 151
22,000 23,000 38 83 123 146 167
23,000 24,000 43 94 139 165 190
24,000 25,000 48 105 155 185 212
25,000 26,000 53 115 172 204 235
26,000 27,000 58 126 188 223 257
27,000 28,000 63 137 204 243 279
28,000 29,000 68 148 220 262 302
29,000 30,000 73 159 236 282 324
30,000 31,000 78 107 252 301 347
31,000 32,000 83 181 268 321 368
32,000 33,000 88 192 284 340 391
33,000 34,000 93 202 301 359 414
34,000 35,000 98 213 317 379 436
35,000 36,000 103 224 333 398 459
36,000 37,000 108 235 349 418 481
37,000 38,000 113 246 365 437 503
38,000 39,000 118 257 381 457 525
39,000 40,000 123 268 397 476 548
40,000 41,000 128 279 413 495 571
41,000 42,000 133 289 430 515 593
42,000 43,000 137 301 446 534 615
43,000 44,000 142 312 462 553 638
44,000 45,000 147 323 478 573 659
45,000 46,000 152 333 495 592 682
46,000 47,000 157 344 511 611 705
47,000 48,000 162 355 527 631 727
48,000 49,000 167 366 543 650 750
49,000 50,000 172 377 559 670 772
50,000 51,000 177 388 575 689 794
51,000 52,000 182 399 591 709 816
52,000 53,000 187 410 607 728 839
53,000 54,000 192 420 624 747 862
54,000 55,000 197 431 640 767 884
55,000 56,000 202 442 657 785 906
56,000 57,000 207 453 673 805 928
57,000 58,000 212 464 689 824 951
58,000 59,000 217 475 705 844 973
59,000 60,000 222 486 721 863 996
60,000 62,000 229 502 746 892 1,029
62,000 64,000 239 524 778 931 1,074
64,000 66,000 249 546 810 970 1,118
66,000 68,000 259 567 843 1,008 1,164
68,000 70,000 269 589 875 1,047 1,209
70,000 72,000 279 611 907 1,086 1,253
72,000 74,000 289 633 939 1,125 1,298
74,000 76,000 299 654 972 1,164 1,342
76,000 78,000 309 676 1,004 1,203 1,387
78,000 80,000 319 698 1,036 1,242 1,432
80,000 85,000 336 736 1,093 1,309 1,511
85,000 90,000 361 791 1,173 1,406 1,623
90,000 95,000 386 845 1,255 1,503 1,734
95,000 100,0002 410 900 1,335 1,600 1,846
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2008-22 (2008-12 IRB 658), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-12_IRB/ar18.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 47

Page 48 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2009
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 9 $ 19 $ 28 $ 34 $ 38
19,000 19,500 10 21 32 38 43
19,500 20,000 11 24 36 42 48
20,000 20,500 12 27 39 46 54
20,500 21,000 13 29 43 51 58
21,000 21,500 15 31 47 55 64
21,500 22,000 16 34 50 60 68
22,000 23,000 17 38 56 66 76
23,000 24,000 20 42 64 75 86
24,000 25,000 22 47 71 84 96
25,000 26,000 24 52 78 93 107
26,000 27,000 26 58 85 101 117
27,000 28,000 29 62 93 110 127
28,000 29,000 31 67 100 119 138
29,000 30,000 33 72 108 128 147
30,000 31,000 35 77 115 137 157
31,000 32,000 38 82 122 146 167
32,000 33,000 40 87 129 155 178
33,000 34,000 42 92 137 163 188
34,000 35,000 44 97 144 172 199
35,000 36,000 47 102 151 181 208
36,000 37,000 49 107 159 189 219
37,000 38,000 51 112 166 199 228
38,000 39,000 53 117 173 208 239
39,000 40,000 56 122 180 216 250
40,000 41,000 58 127 188 225 259
41,000 42,000 60 132 195 234 269
42,000 43,000 62 137 203 242 280
43,000 44,000 65 141 210 252 290
44,000 45,000 67 146 218 260 300
45,000 46,000 69 151 225 269 311
46,000 47,000 71 157 232 278 320
47,000 48,000 74 161 240 286 331
48,000 49,000 76 166 247 296 340
49,000 50,000 78 171 255 304 351
50,000 51,000 80 176 262 313 361
51,000 52,000 83 181 269 322 371
52,000 53,000 85 186 276 331 381
53,000 54,000 87 191 284 339 392
54,000 55,000 89 196 291 349 401
55,000 56,000 92 201 298 357 412
56,000 57,000 94 206 306 365 423
57,000 58,000 96 211 313 375 432
58,000 59,000 98 216 320 384 442
59,000 60,000 101 221 327 393 452
60,000 62,000 104 228 339 406 467
62,000 64,000 109 238 353 424 488
64,000 66,000 113 248 368 441 509
66,000 68,000 118 258 382 459 529
68,000 70,000 122 268 397 476 550
70,000 72,000 127 277 413 493 570
72,000 74,000 131 288 427 511 590
74,000 76,000 136 297 442 529 610
76,000 78,000 140 307 457 546 631
78,000 80,000 145 317 471 564 651
80,000 85,000 152 335 497 595 686
85,000 90,000 164 359 534 639 737
90,000 95,000 175 384 570 683 789
95,000 100,0002 186 409 607 727 839
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2009-24 (2009-17 IRB 885), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-17_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 48 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 49 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2000 through 2004
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 2000 Beginning in 2001 Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003 Beginning in 2004
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 15,500 $ 15,800 $  12 $  11 $  6 $  0 $  0
15,800 16,100 23 22 13 0 0
16,100 16,400 34 33 19 0 0
16,400 16,700 45 44 26 0 0
16,700 17,000 57 56 31 0 0
17,000 17,500 72 70 40 0 0
17,500 18,000 91 89 50 0 0
18,000 18,500 109 107 61 0 30
18,500 19,000 128 125 72 29 38
19,000 19,500 147 143 82 36 47
19,500 20,000 166 162 93 44 55
20,000 20,500 185 181 103 52 63
20,500 21,000 204 199 114 60 72
21,000 21,500 222 217 123 67 80
21,500 22,000 241 236 134 75 88
22,000 23,000 269 263 150 86 100
23,000 24,000 306 300 171 102 117
24,000 25,000 345 337 192 118 133
25,000 26,000 381 373 213 133 149
26,000 27,000 419 410 234 149 166
27,000 28,000 457 447 255 165 183
28,000 29,000 494 484 276 180 198
29,000 30,000 532 520 296 196 215
30,000 31,000 570 557 318 212 231
31,000 32,000 607 594 338 227 248
32,000 33,000 645 631 360 242 264
33,000 34,000 683 667 381 258 281
34,000 35,000 720 705 402 273 298
35,000 36,000 757 741 422 289 314
36,000 37,000 795 778 443 305 330
37,000 38,000 833 815 464 320 346
38,000 39,000 870 851 485 336 364
39,000 40,000 908 888 506 352 379
40,000 41,000 946 925 527 367 396
41,000 42,000 983 962 549 383 412
42,000 43,000 1,021 998 570 398 429
43,000 44,000 1,058 1,036 590 414 445
44,000 45,000 1,095 1,072 611 429 462
45,000 46,000 1,133 1,108 632 445 479
46,000 47,000 1,171 1,145 653 460 495
47,000 48,000 1,208 1,183 674 476 511
48,000 49,000 1,246 1,219 695 492 527
49,000 50,000 1,284 1,256 717 507 544
50,000 51,000 1,321 1,293 737 523 560
51,000 52,000 1,359 1,330 758 538 577
52,000 53,000 1,396 1,366 779 554 593
53,000 54,000 1,433 1,403 800 570 610
54,000 55,000 1,471 1,439 821 585 626
55,000 56,000 1,508 1,476 842 601 643
56,000 57,000 1,546 1,514 863 617 659
57,000 58,000 1,584 1,550 883 632 675
58,000 59,000 1,621 1,586 905 647 691
59,000 60,000 1,659 1,624 925 663 708
60,000 62,000 1,715 1,678 957 687 733
62,000 64,000 1,790 1,752 999 717 766
64,000 66,000 1,865 1,825 1,041 749 798
66,000 68,000 1,941 1,900 1,083 780 832
68,000 70,000 2,016 1,972 1,125 811 864
70,000 72,000 2,092 2,047 1,166 842 897
72,000 74,000 2,166 2,120 1,208 873 931
74,000 76,0002 2,241 2,193 1,250 905 963
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,501, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 722), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb00-09.pdf.
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-09.pdf.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
For 2004, Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available atwww.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 49

Page 50 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,700 $ 17,000 $ 3  $ 6 $ 8 $ 10 $ 11
17,000 17,500 4 10 14 17 20
17,500 18,000 7 15 21 26 30
18,000 18,500 9 20 29 35 40
18,500 19,000 11 25 37 43 51
19,000 19,500 14 30 44 52 61
19,500 20,000 16 35 51 62 71
20,000 20,500 18 40 59 71 81
20,500 21,000 20 45 67 79 92
21,000 21,500 23 50 74 88 103
21,500 22,000 25 55 81 98 113
22,000 23,000 28 63 92 111 129
23,000 24,000 33 73 107 129 149
24,000 25,000 38 83 122 147 169
25,000 26,000 42 93 137 165 190
26,000 27,000 47 103 152 183 210
27,000 28,000 51 113 167 201 231
28,000 29,000 56 123 182 218 253
29,000 30,000 60 133 197 237 272
30,000 31,000 65 143 212 254 294
31,000 32,000 70 153 227 272 314
32,000 33,000 74 163 242 290 335
33,000 34,000 79 173 257 308 355
34,000 35,000 83 184 271 326 376
35,000 36,000 88 193 287 344 397
36,000 37,000 93 203 302 361 418
37,000 38,000 97 214 316 380 438
38,000 39,000 102 223 332 397 459
39,000 40,000 106 234 346 415 480
40,000 41,000 111 244 361 433 500
41,000 42,000 115 254 376 451 521
42,000 43,000 120 264 391 469 542
43,000 44,000 125 274 406 487 562
44,000 45,000 129 284 421 505 583
45,000 46,000 134 294 436 523 603
46,000 47,000 138 304 451 541 624
47,000 48,000 143 314 466 558 645
48,000 49,000 148 324 481 576 666
49,000 50,000 152 334 496 594 687
50,000 51,000 157 344 511 612 707
51,000 52,000 161 355 525 630 728
52,000 53,000 166 364 541 648 748
53,000 54,000 170 375 555 666 769
54,000 55,000 175 385 570 684 789
55,000 56,000 180 394 586 701 811
56,000 57,000 184 405 600 720 830
57,000 58,000 189 415 615 737 852
58,000 59,000 193 425 630 755 873
59,000 60,000 198 435 645 773 893
60,000 62,000 205 450 667 800 924
62,000 64,000 214 470 697 836 966
64,000 66,000 223 490 727 872 1,007
66,000 68,000 232 510 757 908 1,048
68,000 70,000 241 531 786 944 1,089
70,000 72,000 251 550 817 979 1,131
72,000 74,000 260 571 846 1,015 1,172
74,000 76,000 269 591 876 1,051 1,213
76,000 78,000 278 611 906 1,087 1,254
78,000 80,000 287 631 936 1,123 1,296
80,000 85,000 303 666 989 1,185 1,368
85,000 90,000 326 717 1,063 1,274 1,472
90,000 95,000 349 767 1,137 1,365 1,575
95,000 100,0002 372 817 1,212 1,454 1,678
1 For the last year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
Page 50 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 51 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,700 $ 17,000 $ 4  $ 8 $ 12 $ 14 $ 16
17,000 17,500 6 14 20 24 29
17,500 18,000 9 21 31 37 43
18,000 18,500 13 28 42 49 58
18,500 19,000 16 36 52 62 72
19,000 19,500 19 43 63 75 87
19,500 20,000 23 50 73 88 102
20,000 20,500 26 57 84 101 116
20,500 21,000 29 64 95 113 131
21,000 21,500 32 72 105 126 146
21,500 22,000 36 78 116 139 161
22,000 23,000 41 89 132 158 183
23,000 24,000 47 104 153 183 213
24,000 25,000 54 118 174 209 242
25,000 26,000 60 132 196 235 271
26,000 27,000 67 146 217 261 300
27,000 28,000 73 161 238 286 330
28,000 29,000 80 175 260 311 359
29,000 30,000 86 190 281 336 389
30,000 31,000 93 204 302 362 418
31,000 32,000 99 219 323 388 447
32,000 33,000 106 233 344 413 478
33,000 34,000 112 247 366 439 506
34,000 35,000 119 261 387 465 536
35,000 36,000 125 276 408 490 566
36,000 37,000 132 290 430 515 595
37,000 38,000 139 304 451 541 624
38,000 39,000 145 319 472 566 654
39,000 40,000 152 333 493 592 684
40,000 41,000 158 347 515 618 712
41,000 42,000 165 362 536 642 743
42,000 43,000 171 376 557 669 772
43,000 44,000 178 390 579 694 801
44,000 45,000 184 405 600 719 831
45,000 46,000 191 419 621 745 860
46,000 47,000 197 434 642 770 890
47,000 48,000 204 448 663 796 919
48,000 49,000 210 462 685 822 948
49,000 50,000 217 476 707 847 977
50,000 51,000 224 490 728 872 1,008
51,000 52,000 230 505 749 898 1,037
52,000 53,000 237 519 770 924 1,066
53,000 54,000 243 534 791 949 1,096
54,000 55,000 250 548 813 974 1,125
55,000 56,000 256 563 833 1,000 1,155
56,000 57,000 263 577 855 1,025 1,184
57,000 58,000 269 591 877 1,051 1,213
58,000 59,000 276 605 898 1,077 1,243
59,000 60,000 282 620 919 1,102 1,272
60,000 62,000 292 641 951 1,141 1,316
62,000 64,000 305 670 994 1,191 1,375
64,000 66,000 318 699 1,036 1,242 1,435
66,000 68,000 331 728 1,078 1,293 1,494
68,000 70,000 344 756 1,121 1,345 1,552
70,000 72,000 358 784 1,164 1,395 1,612
72,000 74,000 371 813 1,206 1,447 1,670
74,000 76,000 384 842 1,249 1,497 1,729
76,000 78,000 397 871 1,291 1,548 1,788
78,000 80,000 410 899 1,334 1,600 1,846
80,000 85,000 433 949 1,409 1,688 1,950
85,000 90,000 465 1,021 1,515 1,816 2,098
90,000 95,000 498 1,093 1,621 1,944 2,244
95,000 100,0002 531 1,164 1,728 2,071 2,392
1 For the last year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 51

Page 52 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-4. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2007
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,400 $ 16,700 $ 2  $ 4 $ 8 $ 10 $ 11
16,700 17,000 4 9 15 17 21
17,000 17,500 6 15 24 28 33
17,500 18,000 10 22 35 42 48
18,000 18,500 13 30 46 55 64
18,500 19,000 17 37 57 69 79
19,000 19,500 20 45 68 82 94
19,500 20,000 24 52 80 95 109
20,000 20,500 27 60 90 109 125
20,500 21,000 30 67 102 122 141
21,000 21,500 34 75 113 135 156
21,500 22,000 37 82 124 149 171
22,000 23,000 42 94 140 169 194
23,000 24,000 49 109 163 195 225
24,000 25,000 56 123 186 222 256
25,000 26,000 63 138 208 249 286
26,000 27,000 70 153 230 276 317
27,000 28,000 77 168 252 302 349
28,000 29,000 83 184 274 329 379
29,000 30,000 90 199 296 356 410
30,000 31,000 97 214 318 383 440
31,000 32,000 104 228 342 408 472
32,000 33,000 111 243 364 435 503
33,000 34,000 118 258 386 462 534
34,000 35,000 125 273 408 489 564
35,000 36,000 131 289 430 515 595
36,000 37,000 138 304 452 542 626
37,000 38,000 145 318 475 569 657
38,000 39,000 152 333 497 596 688
39,000 40,000 159 348 520 622 718
40,000 41,000 166 363 542 649 749
41,000 42,000 172 379 563 676 780
42,000 43,000 179 397 586 702 811
43,000 44,000 186 409 608 729 842
44,000 45,000 193 423 631 756 872
45,000 46,000 200 438 653 783 903
46,000 47,000 207 453 675 810 934
47,000 48,000 213 469 697 836 965
48,000 49,000 220 484 719 863 996
49,000 50,000 227 499 741 890 1,026
50,000 51,000 234 514 764 916 1,057
51,000 52,000 241 528 787 943 1,088
52,000 53,000 248 543 809 969 1,119
53,000 54,000 254 559 831 996 1,150
54,000 55,000 261 574 853 1,023 1,180
55,000 56,000 268 589 875 1,050 1,211
56,000 57,000 275 604 897 1,076 1,243
57,000 58,000 282 618 920 1,103 1,273
58,000 59,000 289 633 943 1,129 1,304
59,000 60,000 296 648 965 1,156 1,335
60,000 62,000 306 671 998 1,196 1,381
62,000 64,000 319 701 1,043 1,249 1,443
64,000 66,000 333 731 1,087 1,303 1,504
66,000 68,000 347 761 1,131 1,357 1,566
68,000 70,000 361 791 1,176 1,410 1,627
70,000 72,000 374 821 1,221 1,463 1,689
72,000 74,000 388 851 1,265 1,517 1,751
74,000 76,000 402 881 1,309 1,570 1,813
76,000 78,000 415 911 1,354 1,624 1,874
78,000 80,000 429 941 1,399 1,676 1,936
80,000 85,000 453 994 1,476 1,770 2,044
85,000 90,000 487 1,069 1,587 1,904 2,198
90,000 95,000 521 1,144 1,699 2,037 2,352
95,000 100,0002 555 1,219 1,810 2,171 2,506
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2007-30 (2007-18 IRB 1104), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-18_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 52 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 53 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-5. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2008
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 19,000 $ 19,500 $ 17 $ 37 $ 54 $ 65 $ 73
19,500 20,000 20 42 63 73 85
20,000 20,500 22 48 70 84 96
20,500 21,000 25 53 79 93 107
21,000 21,500 27 59 86 103 118
21,500 22,000 30 64 95 112 130
22,000 23,000 33 72 107 128 146
23,000 24,000 38 83 123 147 168
24,000 25,000 43 94 139 166 191
25,000 26,000 48 105 155 186 213
26,000 27,000 53 116 171 205 236
27,000 28,000 58 127 187 225 258
28,000 29,000 63 138 204 243 280
29,000 30,000 68 148 221 263 302
30,000 31,000 73 159 237 282 325
31,000 32,000 78 170 253 301 348
32,000 33,000 83 181 269 321 370
33,000 34,000 88 192 285 340 393
34,000 35,000 93 203 301 360 414
35,000 36,000 98 214 317 379 437
36,000 37,000 103 225 333 399 459
37,000 38,000 108 235 350 418 482
38,000 39,000 113 246 366 437 505
39,000 40,000 118 257 382 457 526
40,000 41,000 123 268 398 476 549
41,000 42,000 128 279 414 496 571
42,000 43,000 133 290 430 515 594
43,000 44,000 137 301 447 534 616
44,000 45,000 142 312 463 553 639
45,000 46,000 147 323 479 573 661
46,000 47,000 152 334 495 592 684
47,000 48,000 157 345 511 612 705
48,000 49,000 162 356 527 631 728
49,000 50,000 167 366 544 651 750
50,000 51,000 172 377 560 670 773
51,000 52,000 177 388 576 689 796
52,000 53,000 182 399 592 709 817
53,000 54,000 187 410 608 728 840
54,000 55,000 192 421 624 748 862
55,000 56,000 197 432 640 767 885
56,000 57,000 202 443 656 787 907
57,000 58,000 207 453 673 806 929
58,000 59,000 212 464 689 825 952
59,000 60,000 217 475 705 845 974
60,000 62,000 224 492 729 874 1,008
62,000 64,000 234 513 762 913 1,052
64,000 66,000 244 535 794 951 1,098
66,000 68,000 254 557 826 990 1,142
68,000 70,000 264 579 858 1,029 1,187
70,000 72,000 274 600 892 1,067 1,232
72,000 74,000 284 622 924 1,106 1,276
74,000 76,000 294 644 956 1,145 1,321
76,000 78,000 304 666 988 1,184 1,366
78,000 80,000 314 687 1,021 1,222 1,411
80,000 85,000 331 726 1,077 1,290 1,489
85,000 90,000 356 780 1,158 1,387 1,601
90,000 95,000 381 835 1,238 1,484 1,713
95,000 100,0002 405 889 1,320 1,581 1,825
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2008-22 (2008-12 IRB 658), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-12_IRB/ar18.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 53

Page 54 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-6.Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2009
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 8 17 25 30 35
19,000 19,500 9 19 29 35 40
19,500 20,000 10 22 33 38 45
20,000 20,500 11 25 36 43 50
20,500 21,000 12 27 40 48 55
21,000 21,500 13 30 43 52 60
21,500 22,000 15 32 47 56 66
22,000 23,000 16 36 52 64 72
23,000 24,000 18 41 60 72 83
24,000 25,000 21 45 68 81 93
25,000 26,000 23 50 75 90 103
26,000 27,000 25 56 82 98 114
27,000 28,000 27 61 89 107 124
28,000 29,000 30 65 97 116 134
29,000 30,000 32 70 104 125 144
30,000 31,000 34 75 112 134 154
31,000 32,000 36 80 119 143 164
32,000 33,000 39 85 126 151 175
33,000 34,000 41 90 134 160 184
34,000 35,000 43 95 141 169 195
35,000 36,000 45 100 148 178 205
36,000 37,000 48 105 155 187 215
37,000 38,000 50 110 163 195 226
38,000 39,000 52 115 170 204 236
39,000 40,000 55 120 177 213 246
40,000 41,000 57 125 185 221 256
41,000 42,000 59 130 192 231 266
42,000 43,000 61 135 199 240 276
43,000 44,000 64 139 207 249 286
44,000 45,000 66 144 215 257 296
45,000 46,000 68 149 222 266 307
46,000 47,000 70 155 229 274 317
47,000 48,000 73 159 237 283 327
48,000 49,000 75 164 244 292 338
49,000 50,000 77 169 251 301 348
50,000 51,000 79 174 259 310 357
51,000 52,000 82 179 266 318 368
52,000 53,000 84 184 273 328 378
53,000 54,000 86 189 281 336 388
54,000 55,000 88 194 288 345 399
55,000 56,000 91 199 295 354 408
56,000 57,000 93 204 302 363 419
57,000 58,000 95 209 310 371 429
58,000 59,000 97 214 317 381 439
59,000 60,000 100 219 324 389 450
60,000 62,000 103 226 336 402 465
62,000 64,000 107 236 351 420 485
64,000 66,000 112 246 365 438 505
66,000 68,000 116 256 380 455 526
68,000 70,000 121 266 394 473 546
70,000 72,000 125 276 409 491 566
72,000 74,000 130 286 423 509 586
74,000 76,000 134 296 438 526 607
76,000 78,000 139 305 454 543 627
78,000 80,000 143 316 467 561 648
80,000 85,000 151 333 493 592 684
85,000 90,000 163 357 531 635 735
90,000 95,000 174 382 567 680 785
95,000 100,0002 185 407 604 724 836
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2009-24 (2009-17 IRB 885), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-17_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 54 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 55 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2000 through 2004
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 2000 Beginning in 2001 Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003 Beginning in 2004
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 46,000 $ 47,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 12 $ 0 $ 0
47,000 48,000 36 46 33 0 0
48,000 49,000 66 83 54 0 0
49,000 50,000 95 119 74 0 0
50,000 51,000 124 157 96 0 0
51,000 52,000 153 193 117 0 0
52,000 53,000 183 230 138 0 0
53,000 54,000 211 266 159 124 147
54,000 55,000 240 304 180 140 164
55,000 56,000 270 340 201 156 180
56,000 57,000 299 377 222 171 197
57,000 58,000 328 414 242 187 213
58,000 59,000 357 451 264 203 229
59,000 60,000 387 487 284 218 245
60,000 62,000 430 543 316 241 270
62,000 64,000 489 616 358 273 303
64,000 66,000 547 690 400 304 336
66,000 68,000 606 763 442 334 369
68,000 70,000 664 837 484 366 402
70,000 72,000 723 910 525 397 435
72,000 74,000 781 984 567 428 468
74,000 76,000 838 1,057 609 460 500
76,000 78,000 897 1,131 652 491 534
78,000 80,000 955 1,204 693 521 566
80,000 85,000 1,058 1,332 767 576 624
85,000 90,000 1,204 1,517 871 655 706
90,000 95,000 1,350 1,701 976 732 788
95,000 100,0002 1,495 1,885 1,081 810 870
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 722), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb00-09.pdf.
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-09.pdf.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
For 2004, Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 55

Page 56 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 45,000 $ 46,000 $ 5  $ 11 $ 18 $ 21 $ 25
46,000 47,000 10 21 33 39 45
47,000 48,000 14 31 48 57 66
48,000 49,000 19 41 63 75 86
49,000 50,000 23 52 77 93 107
50,000 51,000 28 61 93 111 127
51,000 52,000 33 71 108 129 148
52,000 53,000 37 82 122 147 169
53,000 54,000 42 92 137 164 190
54,000 55,000 46 102 152 183 210
55,000 56,000 51 112 167 200 231
56,000 57,000 55 122 182 218 252
57,000 58,000 60 132 197 236 272
58,000 59,000 65 142 212 254 293
59,000 60,000 69 152 227 272 314
60,000 62,000 76 167 250 298 345
62,000 64,000 85 187 280 334 386
64,000 66,000 94 208 309 370 427
66,000 68,000 104 227 339 406 469
68,000 70,000 113 247 369 442 510
70,000 72,000 122 268 398 478 551
72,000 74,000 131 288 428 514 593
74,000 76,000 140 308 458 550 634
76,000 78,000 149 328 489 585 675
78,000 80,000 159 348 518 621 717
80,000 85,000 175 383 571 683 789
85,000 90,000 197 434 645 773 892
90,000 95,000 220 484 720 863 995
95,000 100,0002 243 534 795 952 1,099
Appendix C-3. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 45,000 $ 46,000 $ 4  $ 8 $ 11 $ 12 $ 12
46,000 47,000 10 22 33 37 42
47,000 48,000 17 36 54 63 72
48,000 49,000 24 51 74 89 101
49,000 50,000 30 65 96 114 131
50,000 51,000 37 79 118 139 160
51,000 52,000 43 94 139 165 189
52,000 53,000 50 108 160 190 219
53,000 54,000 56 123 181 216 248
54,000 55,000 63 137 202 242 277
55,000 56,000 69 151 224 267 307
56,000 57,000 76 165 245 293 337
57,000 58,000 82 180 266 318 367
58,000 59,000 89 194 288 343 396
59,000 60,000 95 209 309 369 425
60,000 62,000 105 230 341 407 470
62,000 64,000 118 259 383 459 528
64,000 66,000 131 288 425 510 587
66,000 68,000 144 316 469 560 646
68,000 70,000 158 345 510 612 705
70,000 72,000 171 373 554 662 764
72,000 74,000 184 402 596 713 823
74,000 76,000 197 431 638 765 881
76,000 78,000 210 459 682 815 940
78,000 80,000 223 488 724 866 1,000
80,000 85,000 246 538 798 956 1,103
85,000 90,000 278 610 905 1,083 1,250
90,000 95,000 311 682 1,011 1,211 1,397
95,000 100,0002 344 753 1,118 1,338 1,544
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
3 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 56 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 57 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Car rentals ................. . 24 Excess reimbursements  (See Interest on car loans ....... . 16
Reimbursements)Form 2106 ................ . 33 Itinerants .................... . 3``Hours of service'' limits ... . 12
Extravagant expenses .... . 5, 12Car, defined ................ . 17Form 2106 ................ . 33
Car, truck, or van rentals ... . 2450% limit on meals .......... . 5 L
Casualty and theft losses: F Lavish or extravagantCars ...................... . 16 Fair market value of car .... . 24 expenses .............. . 5, 12A Depreciation ............ . 24 Farmers: Leasing a car, truck, orAccountable plans ...... . 29-32 Charitable organizations: Form 1040, Schedule F .... . 28 van ....................... . 24Accounting to employer .... . 29 Benefit events for ......... . 12 Federal crime investigations or Luxury private boxes atSports events to benefit .... . 11Adequate accounting ....... . 29 prosecutions: entertainment events ..... . 12Independent contractors ... . 32 Club dues .................. . 13 Federal employees engaged Luxury water travel .......... . 8Adequate records .......... . 25 Comments on publication ... . 2 in ....................... . 4
Advertising: Commuting expenses ...... . 15 Federal rate for per diem .... . 5, MCar display ............... . 15 Conventions ............. . 9, 10 29
MACRS (Modified AcceleratedExpenses ................. . 11 Country clubs .............. . 13 Fee-basis officials .......... . 34 Cost RecoverySigns, display racks, or other Cruise ships ................ . 9 Fees you pay ............... . 15 System) .................. . 20promotional material to be Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) 2008 chart (Table 4-1) ..... . 21used on recipient's business allowance ................ . 30premises ............... . 13 Main place of business orD Form 1040, Schedule C ..... . 28 work ...................... . 3Airline clubs ............... . 13 Daily business mileage and Form 1040, Schedule F ..... . 28 Married taxpayers:Allocating costs ...... . 4, 12, 27 expense log (Table Form 2106 ........ . 17, 28, 32-39 Performing artists ......... . 34Allowance  (See 6-2) ...................... . 35 Form 2106-EZ .......... . 32, 39 Meal expenses .............. . 5Reimbursements) Depreciation of car  (See also Form 4562 .................. . 28 50% limit .................. . 10Armed forces: Section 179 deductions) ... . 16
Form 4797 .................. . 23 Determination of applicabilityAssigned overseas ......... . 3 Adjustment for using standard
(Figure A) ............ . 11Form W-2:mileage rate ............ . 25Assistance  (See Tax help)
Exceptions .............. . 11Employer-providedBasis ..................... . 18Associated Actual cost method ......... . 5vehicles ................ . 28Sales taxes ............. . 16entertainment ............ . 10 Form 2106 ................ . 33Reimbursement of personalUnrecovered basis ...... . 23Athletic clubs .............. . 13 Major cities with higherexpenses ............... . 28Casualty or theft, effect .... . 24
allowances .............. . 6Statutory employees ....... . 28Deduction ............. . 16, 25
Standard meal allowance ... . 5,Free tax services ........... . 41Excess depreciation ....... . 23B 6, 30Modified Accelerated CostBasis of car  (See also Meals,Recovery SystemDepreciation of car) ....... . 18 G entertainment-related .... . 12(MACRS) ............... . 20Bona fide business Gifts ....................... . 13 Mileage rate  (See StandardSection 179 deduction ..... . 22purpose ................... . 5 $25 limit .................. . 13 mileage rate)Trade-in, effect ........ . 19, 25Box seats at entertainment Combining for recordkeepingTrucks and vans .......... . 22 Military  (See Armed forces)events ................... . 12 purposes ............... . 27Directly-related Missing children, photographsReporting requirements .... . 28Business travel ............. . 6 entertainment ............. . 9 of ......................... . 2Outside U.S. ............... . 7 Golf clubs .................. . 13Disabled employees: Modified Accelerated CostBusiness use of car ........ . 16 Gulf Opportunity Zone:Impairment-related work Recovery SystemMore-than-50%-use Qualified property ......... . 18expenses ............... . 34 (MACRS) ................. . 20test. .................... . 18 Special depreciation 2008 chart (Table 4-1) ..... . 21Documentary evidence ..... . 25Qualified business use ..... . 18 allowance ............... . 18
More information  (See Tax help)
HEC NHauling tools ............... . 15Employer-providedCanceled checks: Nonaccountable plans ..... . 32vehicles .................. . 16 Help  (See Tax help)As evidence of business
Reporting requirements .... . 28 High-low rate method ...... . 30expenses ............... . 25
Entertainment OHome office ................ . 15Car expenses ........... . 15-24
expenses ........... . 9-12, 13 Office in the home .......... . 15Actual expenses .......... . 16 Hotel clubs ................. . 13
50% limit .................. . 10Allowances for ......... . 29-31 Officials paid on fee
Determination of applicabilityBusiness and personal basis ..................... . 34I(Figure A) ............ . 11use ..................... . 16 Overseas travel:Impairment-related workAssociated test ............ . 10Combining expenses ...... . 27 Conventions ............... . 9expenses ................ . 34Deductible ............. . 12-13Disposition of car .......... . 24 Meal allowance ............ . 6Incidental expenses:Summary (Table 2-1) .... . 12Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) Part of trip outside U.S. ..... . 6Defined .................... . 5Directly-related test ......... . 9allowance ............... . 30 Gifts ...................... . 13Entertainment, defined ..... . 12Form 2106 ................ . 32 No meals, incidentals PForm 2106 ................ . 33Leasing a car, truck, or only ..................... . 5Tickets (See Tickets) Parking fees ............ . 15, 16van ..................... . 24
Income-producingEntertainment facilities: Per diem allowances .... . 29-31Mileage rate (See Standard
property .................. . 28Expenses for use of ....... . 13 Defined ................... . 28mileage rate)
Incomplete records ......... . 26 Federal rate for ............ . 29Estimates of expenses ..... . 25Taxes paid on car ......... . 16
Traffic tickets .............. . 16 Indefinite job assignment ... . 4 Performing artists .......... . 34Exceptions to the 50%
Limit ..................... . 11Car pools .................. . 15 Independent contractors ... . 32 Personal property taxes .... . 16
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 57

Page 58 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Personal trips ............... . 6 Reimbursements ....... . 28-32 Maximum depreciation Travel advance  (See also
Outside U.S. ............... . 8 deduction for cars Reimbursements) ..... . 28, 31Reservists:
table ................... . 22Placed in service, cars ..... . 18 Transportation Travel expenses ........... . 2-9
Modified Accelerated Costexpenses ............... . 14 Another individualProbationary work period ... . 4
Recovery System (MACRS)Traveling more than 100 miles accompanyingProving business 2008 chart (Table 4-1) ... . 21from home .............. . 33 taxpayer ................. . 4purpose .................. . 26 Proving expenses (Table Away from home ........... . 3Returning excessPublic transportation: 5-1) .................... . 26 Deductible ............... . 4-9reimbursements .......... . 31Outside of U.S. travel ....... . 7 Reporting reimbursements Summary of (TableRural mail carriers ......... . 15Publications  (See Tax help) (Table 6-1) .............. . 30 1-1) ................... . 5
Transportation expenses, Defined .................... . 3SR determination of deductibility Going home on days off .... . 4
Section 179 deduction: (Figure B) ........... . 13, 14Recordkeeping In U.S. ..................... . 6
Amended return ........... . 18 Travel expenses, determinationrequirements .......... . 25-27 Lodging .................... . 6
Deduction ................. . 17 of deductibility (TableAdequate records ......... . 25 Luxury water travel ......... . 8
Limits ..................... . 17 1-1) ..................... . 5Daily business mileage and Outside U.S. ............... . 7
Self-employed persons ..... . 11 Weekly travel expense andexpense log (Table Travel to family home ....... . 3
Reporting requirements .... . 28 entertainment record (Table6-2) .................... . 35 Trucks and vans:
6-3) .................... . 39Destroyed records ......... . 27 Skyboxes .................. . 12 Depreciation .............. . 22
How to prove expenses (Table Tax help .................... . 41Special depreciation Transportation workers .... . 12
5-1) .................... . 26 allowance ................ . 18 Tax home, determination Transportation workers'
Incomplete records ........ . 26 of ......................... . 3 expenses ................ . 6Spouse, expenses for .... . 4, 13
Reimbursed expenses ..... . 27 Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 41 TTY/TDD information ....... . 41Standard meal allowance .... . 5,Sampling to prove 6, 30 Temporary job Two places of work ......... . 14expenses ............... . 27 assignments .............. . 4Standard mileage rate ... . 2, 15,Separating and combining 30 Temporary work location ... . 14 Uexpenses ............... . 27 Depreciation adjustment for Tickets ................. . 12, 13 UnclaimedThree-year period of using ................... . 25 Season or series tickets ... . 27 reimbursements .......... . 28retention ................ . 27 Form 2106 ................ . 33 Traffic violations ........... . 16Weekly travel expense and Unions:Statutory employees ....... . 28 Tools:entertainment record (Table Trips from union hall to place ofSuggestions for Hauling tools .............. . 156-3) .................... . 39 work .................... . 15publication ................ . 2 Trade associationReimbursements ........ . 28-32 Unrecovered basis of car ... . 23meetings ................. . 12Accountable plans ......... . 29
Trade-in of car ......... . 19, 25TExcess ............... . 31, 32 VTraffic tickets .............. . 16Form 2106 ................ . 33 Tables and figures: Volunteers .................. . 2Transients ................... . 3Nonaccountable plans ..... . 32 50% limit determination (Figure
Nondeductible expenses ... . 29 A) ...................... . 11 Transportation
Personal expenses ........ . 28 WDaily business mileage and expenses ............. . 14-25
Recordkeeping ............ . 27 expense log (Table Car expenses .......... . 15-24 Weekly travel expense and
Reporting (Table 6-1) ...... . 30 6-2) .................... . 35 Deductible (Figure B) ..... . 13, entertainment record (Table
Unclaimed ................ . 28 Entertainment expenses, 14 6-3) ...................... . 39
determination of deductibility five or more cars .......... . 16Reporting ■(Table 2-1) .............. . 10 Form 2106 ................ . 33requirements .......... . 27-39
Per diem or car Transportation workers ..... . 6,
allowance ............... . 30 12
Page 58 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 59 of 59 of Publication 463 17:36 - 21-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: NEWIND01 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax For
Individuals
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2010
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2010
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
El Impuesto Federal sobre los Ingresos
Para Personas Fisicas
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
17SP
El Proceso de Cobro del IRS594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (American Opportunity,
Hope, and Lifetime Learning Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Business Expenses535
Sch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends
Sch L Standard Deduction for Certain Filers
Sch M Making Work Pay and Government Retiree Credits
Hechos Fortuitos Desastres y Robos547SP
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 59