Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -10% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P535.SGM (21-Dec-2004) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\knjcb\documents\Epicfiles\04P535_current.SGM
Page 1 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535 ContentsCat. No. 15065Z
Introduction..................... 1Department
of the What’s New for 2004............... 2BusinessTreasury
What’s New for 2005............... 2Internal
Revenue Expenses Reminders ...................... 2Service
1. Deducting Business
Expenses ................... 2
For use in preparing
2. Employees’ Pay............... 6
2004 Returns 3. Retirement Plans.............. 8
4. Rent Expense................. 14
5. Interest..................... 16
6. Taxes ...................... 21
7. Insurance ................... 23
8. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize................... 26
9. Amortization................. 30
10. Depletion.................... 37
11. Business Bad Debts............ 42
12. Electric and Clean-Fuel
Vehicles .................... 44
13. Other Expenses............... 48
14. How To Get Tax Help........... 54
Index.......................... 56
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR 6406
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.Get forms and other information Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including the
faster and easier by:
area code, in your correspondence.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (TheInternet • www.irs.gov asterisk must be included in the address.)
Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine) ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
ally to each email, we do appreciate your

Page 2 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
feedback and will consider your comments as 2004, owners of oil and gas property may use an
we revise our tax products. elective safe harbor in determining the
property’s recoverable reserves for purposes ofTax questions. If you have a tax question, 1.computing cost depletion. See chapter 10.visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. We
cannot answer tax questions at either of theStandard mileage rate.The standard mile-
addresses listed above. age rate for the cost of operating your car, van,Deductingpickup, or panel truck in 2004 is 37.5 cents aOrdering forms and publications. Visit
mile for all business miles. See chapter 13.www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to Business
one of the three addresses shown under How To
Get Tax Help in the back of this publication. ExpensesWhat’s New for 2005
Compensation limit.The maximum compen-
sation used for figuring contributions and bene-IntroductionWhat’s New for 2004
fits for a retirement plan increases to $210,000This chapter covers the general rules for deduct-in 2005.The following items highlight some changes in ing business expenses. Business expenses arethe tax law for 2004. the costs of carrying on a trade or business andMeal expense deduction subject to “hours of
they are usually deductible if the business isservice” limits.In 2005, this deduction in-Fringe benefits.Your deduction for the cost operated to make a profit.creases to 70% of the reimbursed meals yourof certain entertainment, amusement, or recrea-
employees consume while they are subject totion fringe benefits paid or incurred after October
Topicsthe Department of Transportation’s “hours of22, 2004, for certain officers, directors, and
This chapter discusses:service” limits. See chapter 13.more-than-10% shareholders is limited to the
amount actually included as compensation sub-
• What you can deductject to employment taxes. See chapter 2.
• How much you can deductCompensation limit.For 2004, the maximum Reminders • When you can deductcompensation used for figuring contributions
and benefits for a retirement plan is $205,000.Qualified environmental cleanup (remedia- • Not-for-profit activitiesSee chapter 3. tion) costs.The deduction for qualified envi-
ronmental cleanup (remediation) costs includeElective deferrals.The limit on elective defer- Useful Itemscosts you pay or incur before 2006. See chapterrals is $13,000 for tax years beginning in 2004. You may want to see:8.These new limits will apply for participants in
SARSEPs, 401(k) plans (excluding SIMPLE PublicationMarginal production of oil and gas.Theplans), and deferred compensation plans ofsuspension of the taxable income limit on per-state or local governments and tax-exempt or- ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Businesscentage depletion from the marginal productionganizations. The catch-up contribution limit forof oil and natural gas has been extended to tax❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car2004 is $3,000 for participants who are age 50years beginning before 2006. For more informa- Expensesor over at the end of the calendar year. Seetion on marginal production, see section 613A(c)chapter 3. ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomeof the Internal Revenue Code.
❏ 529 Miscellaneous DeductionsSIMPLE plan salary reduction contributions.Maximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction.The limit on salary reduction contributions to a ❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for100% of the clean-fuel vehicle deduction andSIMPLE plan increased to $9,000 for 2004. The Individuals, Estates, and Trustsqualified electric vehicle credit are allowed forcatch-up contribution limit for 2004 is $1,500 forqualified property placed in service in 2004 and❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsparticipants who are age 50 or over at the end of2005. See chapter 12.the calendar year. See chapter 3. ❏ 542 Corporations
Photographs of missing children.The Inter-Reforestation costs.You can elect to deduct ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Theftsnal Revenue Service is a proud partner with thea limited amount of reforestation costs paid orNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-❏ 587 Business Use of Your Homeincurred after October 22, 2004. The remainingdren. Photographs of missing children selected (Including Use by Daycarecosts can be amortized over an 84-month pe-by the Center may appear in this publication on Providers)riod. See chapter 8 and chapter 9. pages that would otherwise be blank. You can❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Ruleshelp bring these children home by looking at theStart-up and organizational costs.You can
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST ❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interestelect to deduct up to $5,000 of business start-up
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. Deductionand organizational costs paid or incurred after
October 22, 2004. The remaining costs can be ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
amortized ratably over a 180-month period. See
chapter 8 and chapter 9. Form (and Instructions)
Sports franchise acquisitions.Intangible ❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductions
assets acquired after October 22, 2004, in con-
❏ 5213 Election To Postponenection with acquiring a professional sports
Determination as To Whether thefranchise (including player contracts) can be
Presumption Applies That anamortized ratably over a 15-year period. See
Activity Is Engaged in for Profitchapter 9.
See chapter 14 for information about gettingSafe harbor for creative property costs.
publications and forms.You may be able to amortize certain creative
property costs ratably over a 15-year period.
See chapter 9.
Elective safe harbor for owners of oil and gas
property. For tax years ending after March 7,
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Business assets. Generally, repairs you make to your busi-
ness vehicle are currently deductible. However,What Can I Deduct? 3. Improvements. amounts you pay to recondition and overhaul a
business vehicle are capital expenses and areTo be deductible, a business expense must be You can elect to deduct up to $5,000 ofrecovered through depreciation.both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex- start-up costs that are paid or incurred
pense is one that is common and accepted in after October 22, 2004. The remaining
TIP
Roads and Driveways.  The costs of buildingyour industry. A necessary expense is one thatcosts can be amortized over 180 months. Seea private road on your business property and theis helpful and appropriate for your trade or busi-chapters 8 and 9 for more details. cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-ness. An expense does not have to be indispen- crete one are capital expenses you may be ablesable to be considered necessary. Cost Recovery. Although you generally can-to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a privateIt is important to distinguish business ex-not take a current deduction for a capital ex-road on your business property is a deductiblepenses from: pense, you may be able to recover the amountexpense.you spend through depreciation, amortization,• The expenses used to figure cost of goodsor depletion. These recovery methods allow youTools. Unless the uniform capitalization rulessold. to deduct part of your cost each year. In thisapply, amounts spent for tools used in your
• Capital expenses. way, you are able to recover your capital ex-business are deductible expenses if the tools
pense. See Amortization (chapter 9) and Deple- have a life expectancy of less than 1 year or their• Personal expenses. tion (chapter 10) in this publication. Forcost is minor.
information on depreciation, see Publication
946. Machinery parts.Unless the uniform capitali-Cost of Goods Sold
zation rules apply, the cost of replacing
If your business manufactures products or short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in good
Business Assetspurchases them for resale, you must value in- working condition, but not add to its life, is a
ventory at the beginning and end of each tax deductible expense.There are many different kinds of business as-year to determine your cost of goods sold. Somesets; for example, land, buildings, machinery,of your business expenses may be included in Heating equipment. The cost of changingfurniture, trucks, patents, and franchise rights.figuring cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold is from one heating system to another is a capitalYou must fully capitalize the cost of these as-deducted from your gross receipts to figure your expense.sets, including freight and installation charges.gross profit for the year. If you include an ex-Certain property you produce for use in yourpense in the cost of goods sold, you cannot Personal versus Businesstrade or business must be capitalized under thededuct it again as a business expense. Expensesuniform capitalization rules. See sectionThe following are types of expenses that go1.263A-2 of the regulations for information oninto figuring cost of goods sold. Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, orthese rules. family expenses. However, if you have an ex-• The cost of products or raw materials, in- pense for something that is used partly for busi-cluding freight. ness and partly for personal purposes, divideImprovements• Storage. the total cost between the business and per-
sonal parts. You can deduct the business part.The costs of making improvements to a busi-• Direct labor (including contributions to
ness asset are capital expenses if the improve-For example, if you borrow money and usepension or annuity plans) for workers who
ments add to the value of the asset, appreciably70% of it for business and the other 30% for aproduce the products.
lengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to afamily vacation, you can deduct 70% of the inter-
• Factory overhead. different use. Improvements are generally majorest as a business expense. The remaining 30%
expenditures. Some examples are: new electricis personal interest and is not deductible. See
Under the uniform capitalization rules, youwiring, a new roof, a new floor, new plumbing,chapter 5 for information on deducting interest
must capitalize the direct costs and part of thebricking up windows to strengthen a wall, andand the allocation rules.
indirect costs for certain production or resalelighting improvements.
activities. Indirect costs include rent, interest, Business use of your home.If you use partHowever, you can currently deduct repairs
taxes, storage, purchasing, processing, repack- of your home for business, you may be able tothat keep your property in a normal efficient
aging, handling, and administrative costs. deduct expenses for the business use of youroperating condition as a business expense.
This rule does not apply to personal property home. These expenses may include mortgageTreat as repairs amounts paid to replace parts of
you acquire for resale if your average annual interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre-a machine that only keep it in a normal operating
gross receipts (or those of your predecessor) for ciation.condition.
the preceding 3 tax years are not more than $10 To qualify to claim expenses for the business
Restoration plan.Capitalize the cost of re-million. use of your home, you must meet both of the
conditioning, improving, or altering your prop-following tests.For more information, see the following
erty as part of a general restoration plan to makesources.
1. The business part of your home must beit suitable for your business. This applies even if
• Cost of goods sold—chapter 6 of Publica- used exclusively and regularly for yoursome of the work would by itself be classified as
tion 334. trade or business.repairs.
• Inventories—Publication 538. 2. The business part of your home must be:
Capital versus Deductible• Uniform capitalization rules—Publication a. Your principal place of business, orExpenses538 and section 263A of the Internal Rev-
b. A place where you meet or deal withenue Code and the related regulations.To help you distinguish between capital and patients, clients, or customers in the
deductible expenses, different examples are normal course of your trade or busi-
given below.Capital Expenses ness, or
Motor vehicles. You usually capitalize the c. A separate structure (not attached toYou must capitalize, rather than deduct, some
cost of a motor vehicle you use in your business.your home) used in connection withcosts. These costs are a part of your investment
You can recover its cost through annual deduc- your trade or business.in your business and are called “capital ex-
tions for depreciation.penses.” Capital expenses are considered as-
There are dollar limits on the depreciation You generally do not have to meet the exclu-sets in your business. There are, in general,
you can claim each year on passenger automo- sive use test for the part of your home that youthree types of costs you capitalize.
biles used in your business. See Publication regularly use either for the storage of inventory
1. Business start-up costs (See Tip below). 463. or product samples, or as a daycare facility.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your home office qualifies as your principal what the property costs you. If these costs are
1. The all-events test has been met. The testplace of business if you meet the following re- included in the cost of goods sold, do not deduct
is met when:quirements. them as a business expense.
a. All events have occurred that fix the fact• You use the office exclusively and regu-Limits on losses.If your deductions for an
of liability, andlarly for administrative or management ac- investment or business activity are more than
tivities of your trade or business. the income it brings in, you have a loss. Thereb. The liability can be determined with rea-may be limits on how much of the loss you can sonable accuracy.• You have no other fixed location wherededuct.you conduct substantial administrative or
2. Economic performance has occurred.management activities of your trade or Not-for-profit limits.If you carry on your
business. business activity without the intention of making
Economic performance. You generallya profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offset
cannot deduct or capitalize a business expenseIf you have more than one business location,other income. See Not-for-Profit Activities, later.
until economic performance occurs. If your ex-determine your principal place of business At-risk limits.Generally, a deductible losspense is for property or services provided to you,based on the following factors. from a trade or business or other income-pro-or for your use of property, economic perform-• The relative importance of the activitiesducing activity is limited to the investment youance occurs as the property or services areperformed at each location. have “at risk” in the activity. You are at risk in anyprovided, or the property is used. If your ex-activity for the following. pense is for property or services you provide to• If the relative importance factor does not
others, economic performance occurs as youdetermine your principal place of busi-1. The money and adjusted basis of property
provide the property or services.ness, consider the time spent at each lo-you contribute to the activity.
cation.
2. Amounts you borrow for use in the activityExample. Your tax year is the calendar
if: year. In December 2004, the Field PlumbingFor more information, see Publication 587.
Company did some repair work at your place ofa. You are personally liable for repayment,Business use of your car.If you use your car business and sent you a bill for $600. You paid itorexclusively in your business, you can deduct car by check in January 2005. If you use the accrual
expenses. If you use your car for both business method of accounting, deduct the $600 on yourb. You pledge property (other than prop-and personal purposes, you must divide your tax return for 2004 because all events haveerty used in the activity) as security forexpenses based on actual mileage. occurred to “fix” the fact of liability (in this casethe loan.You can deduct actual car expenses, which the work was completed), the liability can be
include depreciation (or lease payments), gas determined, and economic performance oc-For more information, see Publication 925.
and oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, and curred in that year.Passive activities.Generally, you are in aregistration fees. Or, instead of figuring the busi- If you use the cash method of accounting,passive activity if you have a trade or businessness part of these actual expenses, you may be deduct the expense on your 2005 return.activity in which you do not materially partici-able to use the standard mileage rate to figure
pate, or a rental activity. In general, deductionsPrepayment. You generally cannot deductyour deduction. For 2004, the standard mileage
for losses from passive activities only offset in-expenses in advance, even if you pay them inrate is 37.5 cents a mile for all business miles
come from passive activities. You cannot useadvance. This rule applies to both the cash anddriven.
any excess deductions to offset other income. Inaccrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,If you are self-employed, you can also de-
addition, passive activity credits can only offsetprepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex-duct the business part of interest on your car
the tax on net passive income. Any excess losspense paid far enough in advance to, in effect,loan, state and local personal property tax on the
or credits are carried over to later years. Sus-create an asset with a useful life extending sub-car, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not you
pended passive losses are fully deductible in thestantially beyond the end of the current tax year.claim the standard mileage rate.
year you completely dispose of the activity. ForFor more information on car expenses and
more information, see Publication 925. Example. In 2004, you sign a 10-year leasethe rules for using the standard mileage rate,
and immediately pay your rent for the first 3see Publication 463. Net operating loss.If your deductions areyears. Even though you paid the rent for 2004,more than your income for the year, you have a2005, and 2006, you can only deduct the rent for“net operating loss”. You can use a net operating2004 on your 2004 tax return. You can deductloss to lower your taxes in other years. Seethe rent for 2005 and 2006 on your tax returnsHow Much Can I Publication 536 for more information. for those years.See Publication 542 for information about
Deduct? net operating losses of corporations. Contested liability.Under the cash method,
you can deduct a contested liability only in theYou can deduct the cost of a business expense year you pay the liability. Under the accrualif it meets the criteria of ordinary and necessary method, you can deduct contested liabilitiesand it is not a capital expense. When Can I such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses-
sion income, war profits, and excess profitsRecovery of amount deducted (tax benefit
Deduct an Expense? taxes) either in the tax year you pay the liabilityrule).If you recover part of an expense in the
(or transfer money or other property to satisfysame tax year in which you would have claimed
When you can deduct an expense depends onthe obligation) or in the tax year you settle thea deduction, reduce your current year expense
your accounting method. An accounting methodcontest. However, to take the deduction in theby the amount of the recovery. If you have a
is a set of rules used to determine when and howyear of payment or transfer, you must meetrecovery in a later year, include the recovered
income and expenses are reported. The twocertain conditions. See Contested Liability inamount in income in that year. However, if part
basic methods are the cash and the accrualPublication 538 for more information.of the deduction for the expense did not reduce
method. Whichever method you choose mustyour tax, you do not have to include that part of Related person. Under an accrual method ofclearly reflect income.the recovered amount in income. accounting, you generally deduct expensesFor more information on accounting meth-For more information on recoveries and the when you incur them, even if you have not yetods, see Publication 538.tax benefit rule, see Publication 525. paid them. However, if you and the person youCash method. Under the cash method of ac-Payments in kind. If you provide services to owe are related and that person uses the cashcounting, you generally deduct business ex-pay a business expense, the amount you can method of accounting, you must pay the ex-penses in the tax year you pay them.deduct is limited to your out-of-pocket costs. pense before you can deduct it. Your deduction
You cannot deduct the cost of your own labor.Accrual method. Under an accrual method of is allowed when the amount is includible in in-
Similarly, if you pay a business expense in accounting, you generally deduct business ex- come by the related cash method payee. See
goods or other property, you can deduct only penses when both of the following apply.Related Persons in Publication 538.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The benefit gained by making this choice isExample. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profit
activity. The income and expenses of the activitythat the IRS will not immediately questionNot-for-Profit Activities
are as follows.whether your activity is engaged in for profit.
Accordingly, it will not restrict your deductions.If you do not carry on your business or invest- Gross income................. $3,200Rather, you will gain time to earn a profit in thement activity to make a profit, you cannot use a
required number of years. If you show 3 (or 2)loss from the activity to offset other income. Subtract:
years of profit at the end of this period, yourActivities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport Real estate taxes........ $700
deductions are not limited under these rules. IfHome mortgage interest.... 9 0 0or recreation, are often not entered into for profit.
you do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the limitInsurance............. 4 0 0The limit on not-for-profit losses applies to
can be applied retroactively to any year with aUtilities............... 7 0 0individuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S
Maintenance ........... 2 0 0loss in the 5-year (or 7-year) period.corporations. It does not apply to corporations
Depreciation on an automobile 600other than S corporations. Filing Form 5213 automatically extends the
Depreciation on a machine . . 200 3,700In determining whether you are carrying onperiod of limitations on any year in the 5-year (or
an activity for profit, several factors are taken7-year) period to 2 years after the due date ofLoss ....................... $(500)into account. No one factor alone is decisive.the return for the last year of the period. The
Among the factors to consider are whether: period is extended only for deductions of theIda must limit her deductions to $3,200, theactivity and any related deductions that might begross income she earned from the activity. The1. You carry on the activity in a businesslikeaffected. limit is reached in category (3), as follows.manner,
You must file Form 5213 within 3 years
2. The time and effort you put into the activityafter the due date of your return for theLimit on deduction............. $3,200
indicate you intend to make it profitable, year in which you first carried on the
TIP
Category 1: Taxes andactivity, or, if earlier, within 60 days after receiv-3. You depend on the income for your liveli- interest............... $1,600ing written notice from the Internal Revenuehood, Category 2: Insurance,Service proposing to disallow deductions attrib-utilities, and maintenance . . . 1,300 2,9004. Your losses are due to circumstances be-utable to the activity. Available for Category 3........ $ 300yond your control (or are normal in the
start-up phase of your type of business),
Limit on Deductions The $800 of depreciation is allocated be-5. You change your methods of operation in tween the automobile and machine as follows.an attempt to improve profitability, If your activity is not carried on for profit, take
deductions in the following order and only to the$600 depreciation for the6. You, or your advisors, have the knowledge x $300 = $225extent stated in the three categories. If you are$800 automobileneeded to carry on the activity as a suc-an individual, these deductions may be takencessful business, only if you itemize. These deductions may be$200 depreciation for the7. You were successful in making a profit intaken on Schedule A (Form 1040). x $300 = $75$800 machinesimilar activities in the past,
The basis of each asset is reduced accord-Category 1. Deductions you can take for per-8. The activity makes a profit in some years, ingly.sonal as well as for business activities are al-and
The $1,600 for category (1) is deductible inlowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusiness
9. You can expect to make a future profit full on the appropriate lines for taxes and interestdeductions, such as those for home mortgage
from the appreciation of the assets used in on Schedule A (Form 1040). Ida deducts theinterest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong in
the activity. remaining $1,600 ($1,300 for category (2) andthis category. Deduct them on the appropriate
$300 for category (3)) as other miscellaneouslines of Schedule A (Form 1040). You can de-
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) subjectPresumption of profit.An activity is pre-duct a casualty loss on property you own for
to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.sumed carried on for profit if it produced a profitpersonal use only to the extent it is more than
in at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including the$100 and exceeds 10% of your adjusted gross
Partnerships and S corporations.If a part-current year. Activities that consist primarily ofincome. See Publication 547 for more informa-
nership or S corporation carries on abreeding, training, showing, or racing horses aretion on casualty losses. For the limits that apply
not-for-profit activity, these limits apply at thepresumed carried on for profit if they produced ato mortgage interest, see Publication 936.
partnership or S corporation level. They are re-profit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, includ-
flected in the individual shareholder’s oring the current year. The activity must be sub-Category 2. Deductions that do not result in
partner’s distributive shares.stantially the same for each year within thisan adjustment to the basis of property are al-
period. You have a profit when the gross incomelowed next, but only to the extent your grossMore than one activity.If you have severalfrom an activity exceeds the deductions. income from the activity is more than your de-undertakings, each may be a separate activity orIf a taxpayer dies before the end of theductions under the first category. Most businessseveral undertakings may be combined. The5-year (or 7-year) period, the “test” period endsdeductions, such as those for advertising, insur-following are the most significant facts and cir-on the date of the taxpayer’s death. ance premiums, interest, utilities, and wages,cumstances in making this determination.If your business or investment activitybelong in this category.
passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, IRS will • The degree of organizational and eco-
presume it is carried on for profit. This meansCategory 3. Business deductions that de- nomic interrelationship of various under-
the limits discussed here will not apply. You cancrease the basis of property are allowed last, buttakings.
take all your business deductions from the activ-only to the extent the gross income from the• The business purpose that is (or might be)ity, even for the years that you have a loss. Youactivity exceeds the deductions you take underserved by carrying on the various under-can rely on this presumption unless the IRS laterthe first two categories. Deductions for deprecia-takings separately or together in a busi-shows it to be invalid. tion, amortization, and the part of a casualty lossness or investment setting.an individual could not deduct in category (1)Using the presumption later.If you are start-belong in this category. Where more than one• The similarity of the undertakings.ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) yearsasset is involved, allocate depreciation andshowing a profit, you may want to elect to havethese other deductions proportionally. The IRS will generally accept your characteri-the presumption made after you have the 5 (or zation if it is supported by facts and circum-Individuals must claim the amounts in7) years of experience allowed by the test. stances.categories (2) and (3) as miscellane-You can choose to do this by filing Form
ous deductions on Schedule A (Form5213. Filing this form postpones any determina- If you are carrying on two or more dif-
TIP
1040). They are subject to thetion that your activity is not carried on for profit ferent activities, keep the deductions
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-until 5 (or 7) years have passed since you and income from each one separate.
TIP
cation 529 for information on this limit.started the activity. Figure separately whether each is a
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe is reasonable, you cannot deduct the part of an
deductions and losses separately for each activ- individual officer’s pay that is not reasonable.Benefits
ity that is not for profit.
See chapter 14 for information about gettingTest 2—For Services
publications and forms. Performed
You must be able to prove the payment was
made for services actually performed.
Tests for2. Employee-shareholder salaries.If a corpo-
Deducting Pay ration pays an employee who is also a share-
holder a salary that is unreasonably high
To be deductible, your employees’ pay must beconsidering the services actually performed, theEmployees’ Pay an ordinary and necessary expense and youexcessive part of the salary may be treated as a
must pay or incur it in the tax year. These andconstructive distribution of earnings to the
other requirements that apply to all businessemployee-shareholder. For more information on
expenses are explained in chapter 1. corporate distributions to shareholders, seeWhat’s New
In addition, the pay must meet both of thePublication 542, Corporations.
following tests.Fringe benefits.Your deduction for the cost
of certain entertainment, amusement, or recrea-• Test 1. The pay must be reasonable.
tion fringe benefits paid or incurred after October• Test 2. The pay must be for services per-Kinds of Pay22, 2004, for certain officers, directors, andformed.more-than-10% shareholders is limited to the
Some of the ways you may provide pay to youramount actually included as compensation sub-The form or method of figuring the pay does notemployees in addition to regular wages or sala-ject to employment taxes. See Fringe Benefits, affect its deductibility. For example, bonusesries are discussed next. For specialized andlater. and commissions based on sales or earnings,detailed information on employees’ pay and theand paid under an agreement made before theemployment tax treatment of employees’ pay,services were performed, are generally deducti-see Pub. 15, Pub. 15-A, and Pub. 15-B.ble.
Introduction AwardsTest 1—ReasonablenessYou can generally deduct the pay you give your
employees for the services they perform. The You can generally deduct amounts you pay toDetermine the reasonableness of pay by thepay may be in cash, property, or services. It may your employees as awards, whether paid infacts and circumstances. Generally, reasonableinclude wages, or salaries, or other compensa- cash or property. If you give property to anpay is the amount that like enterprises would paytion such as: vacation allowances, bonuses, employee as an employee achievement award,for the same, or similar, services.commissions, and fringe benefits. For informa- your deduction may be limited. For more onYou must be able to prove that the pay istion about deducting employment taxes for your awards paid in property, see Property, later.reasonable. Base this test on the circumstancesemployees’ pay, see chapter 6. that exist when you contract for the services, notAchievement awards. An achievementYou can claim the following employ-those that exist when the reasonableness isaward is an item of tangible personal propertyment credits if you hire individuals whoquestioned. If the pay is excessive, you cannotthat meets all the following requirements.meet certain requirements. deduct the excess.
TIP
• It is given to an employee for length of
Factors to consider.To determine if pay is service or safety achievement.• Empowerment zone and renewal commu-
reasonable, consider the following items andnity employment credit. • It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres-any other pertinent facts. entation.• Indian employment credit.
• The duties performed by the employee. • It is awarded under conditions and circum-• New York Liberty Zone business em-
stances that do not create a significant• The volume of business handled.ployee credit
likelihood of disguised pay.• The character and amount of responsibil-• Welfare-to-work credit.
ity. Length-of-service award.An award will• Work opportunity credit.
qualify as a length-of-service award if either of• The complexities of your business.Reduce your deduction for employee wages by the following applies.• The amount of time required.the amount of any employment credits you
claim. For more information about these credits, • The employee receives the award after his• The cost of living in the locality.see Publication 954, Tax Incentives for Dis- or her first 5 years of employment.
• The ability and achievements of the indi-tressed Communities. • The employee did not receive anothervidual employee performing the service. length-of-service award (other than one of
Topics • The pay compared with the gross and net very small value) during the same year or
income of the business, as well as withThis chapter discusses: in any of the prior 4 years.
distributions to shareholders if the busi-
ness is a corporation.• Tests for deducting pay Safety achievement award. An award for
safety achievement will qualify as an achieve-• Your policy regarding pay for all your em-• Kinds of pay ment award unless one of the following applies.ployees.
1. It is given to a manager, administrator,• The history of pay for each employee.Useful Items
clerical employee, or other professionalYou may want to see:
employee.Individual officer’s pay.You must base the
Publication test of whether an individual officer’s pay is rea-2. During the tax year, more than 10% of
sonable on each individual officer’s pay and theyour employees, excluding those listed in❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guideservice performed, not on the total amount paid(1), have already received a safety
to all officers or all employees. For example,achievement award (other than one of very❏ 15-A Employer’s Supplemental Tax
even if the total amount you pay to your officerssmall value).Guide
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay

Page 7 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduction limit.Your deduction for the are any benefits other than deferred compensa-Fringe Benefits
tion or transfers of restricted property.cost of employee achievement awards given to
A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the perform-any one employee during the tax year is limited Your deduction for contributions to a welfare
ance of services. You can generally deduct theto the following. benefit fund is limited to the fund’s qualified cost
cost of fringe benefits you provide in whateverfor the tax year. If your contributions to the fund
• $400 for awards that are not qualified plancategory you would otherwise include the cost.are more than its qualified cost, you can carry
awards. For example, if you allow an employee to use a the excess over to the next tax year.
car or other property you lease, deduct the costGenerally, the fund’s “qualified cost” is the• $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual-as a rent or lease expense. total of the following amounts, reduced by theified plan awards. You may be able to exclude all or part of theafter-tax income of the fund.value of some fringe benefits from your employ-Deduct achievement awards as a nonwage
ees’ pay. You also may not owe employmentbusiness expense on your return or business • The cost you would have been able to
taxes on the value of the fringe benefits. Seeschedule. deduct using the cash method of account-
Table 2-1 in Publication 15-B for details. ing if you had paid for the benefits directly.A qualified plan award is an achievement Your deduction for the cost of fringe benefits• The contributions added to a reserve ac-award given as part of an established writtenpaid or incurred after October 22, 2004, for activ-count that are needed to fund claims in-plan or program that does not favor highly com-ities generally considered entertainment,
curred but not paid as of the end of thepensated employees as to eligibility or benefits.amusement, or recreation, or for a facility used
year. These claims can be for supplemen-in connection with such an activity (for example,A highly compensated employee for 2004 is tal unemployment benefits, severancea company aircraft) for certain officers, directors,an employee who meets either of the following pay, or disability, medical, or life insuranceand more-than-10% shareholders is limited totests. benefits.the amount actually reported as compensation
subject to employment taxes. See Pub. 15-B for1. The employee was a 5% owner at any For more information, see sections 419(c) andmore information on fringe benefits included astime during the year or the preceding year. 419A of the Internal Revenue Code and thecompensation.
2. The employee received more than $90,000 related regulations.The following are examples of fringe bene-
in pay for the preceding year. fits.
Meals and lodging. You can usually deductYou can choose to ignore test (2) if the em-• Benefits under employee benefit programsthe cost of furnishing meals and lodging to yourployee was not also in the top 20% of employees(defined below). employees. Deduct the cost in whatever cate-ranked by pay for the preceding year. • Meals and lodging. gory the expense falls. For example, if you oper-
An award is not a qualified plan award if the ate a restaurant, deduct the cost of the meals• Use of a car.average cost of all the employee achievement you furnish to employees as part of the cost of
awards given during the tax year (that would be• Flights on airplanes. goods sold. If you operate a nursing home,
qualified plan awards except for this limit) is motel, or rental property, deduct the cost of• Discounts on property or services.more than $400. To figure this average cost, do furnishing lodging to an employee as expenses
• Memberships in country clubs or other so-not take into account awards of nominal value. for utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation,cial clubs. etc.You may not owe employment taxes
• Tickets to entertainment or sportingon the value of some achievement Deduction limit on meals.You can gener-events.awards you provide to an employee. ally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishing
TIP
See Publication 15-B. meals to your employees. However, you can
deduct the full cost of the following meals.Employee benefit programs. Employee
Bonuses benefit programs include the following. • Meals whose value you include in an
employee’s wages. For more information,• Accident and health plans.You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an
see section 2 in Publication 15-B.employee if you intended the bonus as addi-• Adoption assistance.
tional pay for services, not as a gift, and the • Meals that qualify as a de minimus fringe
• Cafeteria plans.services were performed. However, the total bo- benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi-
nuses, salaries, and other pay must be reasona- cation 15-B. This generally includes meals• Dependent care assistance.
ble for the services performed. If the bonus is you furnish to employees at your place of• Educational assistance.paid in property, see Property, later. business if more than half of these em-
ployees are provided the meals for your• Life insurance coverage.
convenience.Gifts of nominal value.If, to promote em- • Welfare benefit funds.
• Meals you furnish to your employees atployee goodwill, you distribute turkeys, hams, or
You can generally deduct amounts you spend the work site when you operate a restau-other merchandise of nominal value to your em-
on employee benefit programs on the “em- rant or catering service.ployees at holidays, you can deduct the cost of
ployee benefit programs” or other applicable linethese items as a nonwage business expense. • Meals you furnish to your employees asof your tax return. For example, if you provideYour deduction for de minimus gifts of food or part of the expense of providing recrea-dependent care by operating a dependent caredrink are not subject to the 50% deduction limit tional or social activities, such as a com-facility for your employees, deduct your costs inthat generally applies to meals. For more infor- pany picnic.whatever categories they fall (utilities, salaries,mation on this deduction limit, see Meals and etc.). • Meals you are required by federal law tolodging, later.
furnish to crew members of certain com-Life insurance coverage.You cannot de-
mercial vessels (or would be required toduct the cost of life insurance coverage for you,Education Expenses furnish if the vessels were operated atan employee, or any person with a financial
sea). This does not include meals you fur-interest in your business, if you are directly orIf you pay or reimburse education expenses for
nish on vessels primarily providing luxuryindirectly the beneficiary of the policy. See Reg-an employee, you can deduct the payments.
water transportation.ulations section 1.264-1 for more information.Deduct them on the “employee benefit pro-
grams” or other appropriate line of your tax re- • Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platformWelfare benefit funds.A welfare benefit
turn if they are part of a qualified educational or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska.fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangement
assistance program. For information on educa- This includes meals you furnish at a sup-having the effect of a plan) that provides welfare
tional assistance programs, see Educational As- port camp that is near and integral to anbenefits to your employees, independent con-
sistance in section 2 of Publication 15-B.tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefits oil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.
Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the payment under a nonaccountable plan, de-Catch-up contributions. A SIMPLE planLoans or Advances
duct it as wages. can permit participants who are age 50 or over
at the end of the calendar year to make catch-upYou generally can deduct as wages an advanceSee Travel, Meals, and Entertainment in
contributions. The catch-up contribution limit foryou make to an employee for services per-chapter 13 for more information about deducting
2004 is $1,500. This limit increases by $500formed if you do not expect the employee toreimbursements and an explanation of account-
each year thereafter until it reaches $2,500 inrepay the advance. However, if the employeeable and nonaccountable plans.
2006. The limit is subject to cost-of-living in-performs no services, treat the amount you ad-
creases after 2006. The catch-up contributions avanced as a loan. If the employee does notSick and Vacation Pay participant can make for a year cannot exceedrepay the loan, it may be deductible as a bad
the lesser of the following amounts.debt. See chapter 11 for information on the de-You can deduct amounts you pay to your em-
duction for bad debts. ployees for sickness and injury, including • The catch-up contribution limit.lump-sum amounts, as wages. However, your
Below-market interest rate loans.On cer- • The excess of the participant’s compensa-deduction is limited to amounts not compen-
tain loans you make to an employee or share- tion over the salary reduction contributionssated by insurance or other means.
holder, you are treated as having received that are not catch-up contributions.Vacation pay is an employee benefit. It in-interest income and as having paid compensa-cludes amounts paid for unused vacation leave.tion or dividends equal to that interest. SeeYou can deduct vacation pay only in the tax yearBelow-Market Loans in chapter 5. in which the employee actually receives it. This
rule applies regardless of whether you use theIntroductionProperty cash or accrual method of accounting.
This chapter discusses retirement plans you can
If you transfer property (including your set up and maintain for yourself and your em-
company’s stock) to an employee as payment ployees. Retirement plans are savings plans
for services, you can generally deduct it as that offer you tax advantages to set aside money
wages. The amount you can deduct is the for your own and your employees’ retirement.
property’s fair market value on the date of the In general, a sole proprietor or a partner istransfer less any amount the employee paid for3. treated as an employee for retirement plan pur-the property. poses.
You can claim the deduction only for the tax SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you
year in which your employee includes the and your employees a tax favored way to save
property’s value in income. Your employee isRetirement for retirement. You can deduct contributions you
deemed to have included the value in income if make to the plan for your employees. If you are a
you report it on Form W-2 in a timely manner. sole proprietor, you can deduct contributionsPlans You treat the deductible amount as received you make to the plan for yourself. You can also
in exchange for the property, and you must rec- deduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the plan
ognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer. do not cover them. Earnings on the contributions
Your gain or loss is the difference between the are generally tax free until you or your employ-What’s New for 2004
fair market value of the property and its adjusted ees receive distributions from the plan.
basis on the date of transfer. Under certain plans, employees can haveCompensation limit.For 2004, the maximum
you contribute limited amounts of theircompensation used for figuring contributionsA corporation recognizes no gain or
before-tax pay to a plan. These amounts (andand benefits increases to $205,000. Thisloss when it pays for services with its
the earnings on them) are generally tax free untilamount increases to $210,000 in 2005.own stock.CAUTION
!
your employees receive distributions from the
These rules also apply to property trans-Elective deferrals.The limit on elective defer-plan.
ferred to an independent contractor, generallyrals increases to $13,000 for tax years begin-In general, individuals who are employed or
reported on Form 1099-MISC. ning in 2004 and then increases $1,000 each taxself-employed can also set up and contribute to
year thereafter until it reaches $15,000 in 2006.individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).Restricted property. If the property you These new limits will apply for participants in
transfer for services is subject to restrictions thatSARSEPs, 401(k) plans (excluding SIMPLE Topicsaffect its value, you generally cannot deduct itplans), and deferred compensation plans ofThis chapter discusses:and do not report gain or loss until it is substan-state or local governments and tax-exempt or-
tially vested in the recipient. However, if theganizations. The $15,000 figure is subject to• Simplified employee pension (SEP) plansrecipient pays for the property, you must reportcost-of-living increases after 2006.
any gain at the time of the transfer up to the • SIMPLE (Savings incentive match plan forCatch-up contributions. A plan can permit
amount paid. employees) retirement plansparticipants who are age 50 or over at the end of
“Substantially vested” means the property isthe calendar year to also make catch-up contri-• Qualified plans (also called H.R. 10 plansnot subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. Thisbutions. The catch-up contribution limit for 2004or Keogh plans when covering self-em-mean that the recipient is not likely to have tois $3,000. This limit increases by $1,000 eachployed individuals)give up his or her rights in the property in theyear thereafter until it reaches $5,000 in 2006.
• Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs)future. The limit is subject to cost-of-living increases
after 2006. The catch-up contribution a partici-
pant can make for a year cannot exceed the
Reimbursements Useful Items
lesser of the following amounts.for Business Expenses You may want to see:
• The catch-up contribution limit.You can generally deduct the amount you pay or Publication
• The excess of the participant’s compensa-reimburse employees for business expenses
tion over the elective deferrals that are not❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Smallthey incur for your business for items such as
catch-up contributions. Business (SEP, SIMPLE, andtravel and entertainment. However, your deduc-
Qualified Plans)tion for meal and entertainment expenses is
usually limited to 50% of the amount paid.SIMPLE plan salary reduction contributions.❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements
If you make the payment under an accounta- The limit on salary reduction contributions to a(IRAs)
ble plan, deduct it in the category of the expense SIMPLE plan increases to $9,000 beginning in
paid. For example, if you pay an employee for 2004 and then increases to $10,000 in 2005.Form (and Instructions)
travel expenses incurred on your behalf, deduct The $10,000 figure is subject to adjustment after
this payment as a travel expense. If you make 2005 for cost-of-living increases. ❏ W-2 Wage and Tax Statement
Page 8 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 9 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 5304-SIMPLE Savings Incentive Match have you contribute part of their pay to theirDeduction Limit
Plan for Employees of Small SEP-IRAs rather than receive it in cash. This
Employers (SIMPLE)—Not for Use The most you can deduct for employer contribu-contribution is called an elective deferral be-
With a Designated Financial tions (other than elective deferrals) for acause employees choose (elect) to set aside the
Institution common-law employee is 25% of the compen-money and the tax on the money is deferred until
sation (limited to $205,000 per participant) paidit is distributed.❏ 5305-SIMPLE Savings Incentive Match to him or her during the year from the businessThis choice is available only if all the follow-Plan for Employees of Small that has the plan, not to exceed $41,000 pering requirements are met.Employers (SIMPLE)—for Use participant.With a Designated Financial • The SARSEP was set up before 1997.In 2005, the $205,000 and $41,000 amountsInstitution increase to $210,000 and $42,000. • At least 50% of the eligible employees
See chapter 14 for information about gettingDeduction of contributions for yourself. choose the salary reduction arrangement.
publications and forms. When figuring the deduction for employer contri-• You had 25 or fewer eligible employeesbutions made to your own SEP-IRA, compensa- (or employees who would have been eligi-tion is your net earnings from self-employmentble if you had maintained a SEP) at anyminus the following amounts. time during the preceding year.Simplified Employee 1. The deduction for one-half of your self-em-• Each eligible highly compensatedployment tax.Pension (SEP) employee’s deferral percentage each year
is no more than 125% of the average2. The deduction for contributions to your
A simplified employee pension (SEP) is a written deferral percentage (ADP) of all nonhighlyown SEP-IRA.
plan that allows you to make deductible contri- compensated employees eligible to partici-The deduction for contributions to your ownbutions toward your own and your employees’ pate (the ADP test). See Publication 560SEP-IRA and your net earnings depend on eachretirement without getting involved in more com- for the definition of a highly compensatedother. For this reason, you determine the deduc-plex retirement plans. A corporation also can employee and information on how to figuretion for contributions to your own SEP-IRA indi-have a SEP and make deductible contributions the deferral percentage.rectly by reducing the contribution rate called fortoward its employees’ retirement. However, cer-
in your plan. Use Worksheet 3-A, shown undertain advantages available to qualified plans,
Qualified Plan, later, to figure the rate. Limit on elective deferrals.In general, thesuch as the special tax treatment that may apply
total income an employee can defer under ato lump-sum distributions, do not apply to SEPs.SEP and defined contribution plan.If you SARSEP and certain other elective deferral ar-Under a SEP, you make the contributions toalso contributed to a qualified defined contribu-rangements for 2004 is limited to the lesser ofa traditional individual retirement arrangementtion plan, you must reduce the 25% deduction$13,000 or 25% of the employee’s compensa-(called a SEP-IRA) set up for each eligible em-limit for that plan by the allowable deduction for
ployee. tion (as defined in Publication 560). This limitcontributions to the SEP-IRAs of those partici-
SEP-IRAs are set up for, at a minimum, each applies only to amounts that reduce thepating in both the SEP plan and the defined
eligible employee. A SEP-IRA may have to be employee’s pay, not to any contributions fromcontribution plan.
set up for a leased employee, but need not be employer funds.
SEP and another qualified plan.If you alsoset up for an excludable employee. For more
contributed to any other type of qualified plan,information, see Publication 560. Catch-up contributions.A SEP can permittreat the SEP as a separate profit-sharing (de-participants who are age 50 or older at the endForm 5305-SEP. You may be able to use fined contribution) plan when applying the over-of the calendar year to make catch-up contribu-Form 5305-SEP, Simplified Employee Pen- all 25% deduction limit described in sectiontions. The catch-up contribution limit for 2004 ission—Individual Retirement Accounts Contri- 404(h)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.$3,000 ($4,000 for 2005). Elective deferrals arebution Agreement, in setting up your SEP. If your SEP contribution is more thannot treated as catch-up contributions for 2004
the deduction limit (nondeductible con-until they exceed the limit discussed earlierContribution Limits tribution), you can carry over and de-under Limit on elective deferrals, the SARSEP
TIP
duct the difference in later years. However, theADP test (see Publication 560), or the plan limitContributions you make for 2004 to a contribution carryover, when combined with the(if any). However, the catch-up contribution acommon-law employee’s SEP-IRA are limited tocontribution for the later year, is subject to theparticipant can make for a year cannot exceedthe lesser of $41,000 ($42,000 for 2005) or 25%deduction limit for that year. the lesser of the following amounts.of the employee’s compensation. Compensa-
tion generally does not include your contribu-Employee contributions. Employees can • The catch-up contribution limit.tions to the SEP, but does include certainalso make contributions of up to $3,000 (or• The excess of the participant’s compensa-elective deferrals unless you choose not to in-$3,500 if they are 50 or older) for 2004 to theirtion over the elective deferrals that are notclude them. SEP-IRAs independent of the employer’s SEP
catch-up contributions.contributions. However, the employee’s deduc-Annual compensation limit. You generally tion for IRA contributions may be reduced orcannot consider the part of an employee’s com- Catch-up contributions are not subject to theeliminated because the employee is covered bypensation over $205,000 ($210,000 for 2005) limit discussed under Limit on elective deferrals,an employer retirement plan (the SEP plan).when you figure your contribution limit for that earlier.See Publication 590 for details.employee.
Deduction limit and elective deferrals.Salary ReductionMore than one plan.If you also contribute to a Compensation, as discussed earlier, under De-defined contribution retirement plan (definedSimplified Employee duction Limit, includes elective deferrals. Elec-later), annual additions to all of a participant’sPension (SARSEP) tive deferrals are no longer subject to thisaccounts are limited to the lesser of $41,000 or deduction limit. However, the combined deduc-100% of the participant’s compensation. When tion for a participant’s elective deferrals, andAn employer is no longer allowed to setyou figure this limit, you must add your contribu- other SEP contributions, cannot exceedup a SARSEP. However, participantstions to all defined contribution plans. A SEP is $41,000.in a SARSEP set up before 1997 (in-CAUTION
!
considered a defined contribution plan for thiscluding employees hired after 1996) can con-limit. tinue to have their employer contribute part ofEmployment taxes. Elective deferrals that
their pay to the plan. meet the ADP test are not subject to income taxContributions for yourself.The annual limits
in the year of deferral, but they are included inon your contributions to a common-law A SARSEP is a SEP set up before 1997 that
wages for social security, Medicare, and federalemployee’s SEP-IRA also apply to contributions included a salary reduction arrangement. Under
unemployment (FUTA) tax.you make to your own SEP-IRA. the arrangement, employees can choose to
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 9

Page 10 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See Publication 560 for information on SIMPLE crue, for service in any year beginning with theReporting SEP Contributions
year the SIMPLE IRA plan becomes effective.401(k) plans.on Form W-2
Exception. If you maintain a qualified planMany financial institutions will help youYour contributions to an employee’s SEP-IRA for collective bargaining employees, you areset up a SIMPLE plan.are excluded from the employee’s income. Do permitted to maintain a SIMPLE IRA plan forTIP
not include these contributions in your other employees.
employee’s wages on Form W-2 for income,
social security, or Medicare tax purposes. How-
ever, your SEP contributions under a salary re-
Who Can ParticipateSIMPLE IRA Planduction arrangement are included in your in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?
employee’s wages for social security and Medi-A SIMPLE IRA plan is a retirement plan that
care tax purposes only. uses SIMPLE IRAs for each eligible employee.Eligible employee.Any employee who re-
Under a SIMPLE IRA plan, a SIMPLE IRA mustceived at least $5,000 in compensation duringExample. Jim’s salary reduction arrange-be set up for each eligible employee. For theany 2 years preceding the current calendar yearment calls for 10% of his salary to be contributeddefinition of an eligible employee, see Who Can and is reasonably expected to receive at leastby his employer as an elective deferral to Jim’sParticipate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?, next. $5,000 during the current calendar year is eligi-SEP-IRA. Jim’s salary for the year is $30,000 ble to participate. The term employee includes a(before reduction for the deferral). The employer self-employed individual who received earneddid not choose to treat deferrals as compensa-Who Can Set Up income.tion under the arrangement. To figure the defer-a SIMPLE IRA Plan? You can use less restrictive eligibility require-ral, the employer multiplies Jim’s salary of ments (but not more restrictive ones) by elimi-$30,000 by 9.0909%, the reduced rate You can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan if you meetnating or reducing the prior year compensationequivalent of 10%, to get the deferral ofboth the following requirements. requirements, the current year compensation$2,727.27. (This method is the same one you, requirements, or both. For example, you can• You meet the employee limit.as a self-employed person, use to figure the allow participation for employees who receivedcontributions you make on your own behalf. See• You do not maintain another qualified planat least $3,000 in compensation during any pre-Worksheet 3-A, under Qualified Plan, later.) unless the other plan is for collective bar-ceding calendar year. However, you cannot im-On Jim’s Form W-2, his employer shows gaining employees. pose any other conditions on participating in atotal wages of $27,272.73 ($30,000 − SIMPLE IRA plan.$2,727.27), social security wages of $30,000,
Employee limit. You can set up a SIMPLEand Medicare wages of $30,000. Jim reports Excludable employees. The following em-IRA plan only if you had 100 or fewer employees$27,272.73 as wages on his individual income ployees do not need to be covered under awho received $5,000 or more in compensationtax return. SIMPLE IRA plan.from you for the preceding year. Under this rule,If his employer chooses to treat the deferrals
you must take into account all employees em-• Employees who are covered by a unionas compensation, Jim’s deferral would be
ployed at any time during the calendar year agreement and whose retirement benefits$3,000 ($30,000 x 10%). In this case, the em-
regardless of whether they are eligible to partici-were bargained for in good faith by theployer uses the rate called for under the ar-
pate. Employees include self-employed individ-employees’ union and you.rangement (not the reduced rate) to figure the
uals who received earned income and leaseddeferral and the ADP test. On Jim’s Form W-2, • Nonresident alien employees who haveemployees.the employer shows total wages of $27,000 received no U.S. source wages, salaries,Once you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan, you($30,000 − $3,000), social security wages of or other personal services compensationmust continue to meet the 100-employee limit$30,000, and Medicare wages of $30,000. Jim from you.each year you maintain the plan.reports $27,000 as wages on his return.
In either case, the maximum deductible con-Grace period for employers who cease toCompensation. Compensation for employ-tribution would be $6,000 ($30,000 x 20%).meet the 100-employee limit.If you maintainees is the total wages required to be reported onthe SIMPLE IRA plan for at least 1 year and youMore information. For more information on Form W-2. Compensation also includes the sal-cease to meet the 100-employee limit in a lateremployer withholding requirements, see Publi- ary reduction contributions made under thisyear, you will be treated as meeting it for the 2cation 15, (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guide. plan, compensation deferred under a sectioncalendar years immediately following the calen-For more information on SEPs, see Publica- 457 plan, and the employees’ elective deferralsdar year for which you last met it.tion 560. under a section 401(k) plan, a SARSEP, or a
A different rule applies if you do not meet thesection 403(b) annuity contract. If you are
100-employee limit because of an acquisition,self-employed, compensation is your net earn-
disposition, or similar transaction. Under thisings from self-employment (line 4, Section A, or
rule, the SIMPLE IRA plan will be treated asSIMPLE line 6, Section B, of Schedule SE (Form 1040))
meeting the 100-employee limit for the year ofbefore subtracting any contributions made to the
the transaction and the 2 following years if bothRetirement Plans SIMPLE IRA plan for yourself.
the following conditions are satisfied.
A Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees• Coverage under the plan has not signifi-(SIMPLE plan) is a written arrangement that How To Set Up a SIMPLE IRA Plancantly changed during the grace period.provides you and your employees with a simpli-
You can use Form 5304-SIMPLE or Formfied way to make contributions to provide retire-• The SIMPLE IRA plan would have contin-
5305-SIMPLE to set up a SIMPLE IRA plan.ment income. Under a SIMPLE plan, employees ued to qualify after the transaction if you
Each form is a model savings incentive matchcan choose to make salary reduction contribu-had remained a separate employer.
plan for employees (SIMPLE) plan document.tions to the plan rather than receiving these
Which form you use depends on whether youamounts as part of their regular pay. In addition,The grace period for acquisitions, dis-select a financial institution or your employeesyou will contribute matching or nonelective con-positions, and similar transactions alsoselect the institution that will receive the contri-tributions. applies if, because of these types ofCAUTION
!
butions.SIMPLE plans can only be maintained on atransactions, you do not meet the rules ex-Use Form 5304-SIMPLE if you allow eachcalendar-year basis. plained under Other qualified plan, next, or Who plan participant to select the financial institutionA SIMPLE plan can be set up in either of theCan Participate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?, later. for receiving his or her SIMPLE IRA plan contri-following ways.
butions. Use Form 5305-SIMPLE if you require• Using SIMPLE IRAs (SIMPLE IRA plan). Other qualified plan.The SIMPLE IRA plan that all contributions under the SIMPLE IRA plan
generally must be the only retirement plan to• As part of a 401(k) plan (SIMPLE 401(k) be deposited initially at a designated financial
which you make contributions, or benefits ac-plan). institution.
Page 10 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 11 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The SIMPLE IRA plan is adopted when you • Written notice that his or her balance can than catch-up contributions) on a dollar-for-dol-
(and the designated financial institution, if any) be transferred without cost or penalty if lar basis up to 3% of the employee’s compensa-
have completed all appropriate boxes and you use a designated financial institution. tion. This requirement does not apply if you
blanks on the form and you have signed it. Keep make nonelective contributions as discussed
the original form. Do not file it with the IRS. later.Election period.The election period is gener-
ally the 60-day period immediately precedingOther uses of the forms. If you set up a Example. In 2004, your employee, JohnJanuary 1 of a calendar year (November 2 toSIMPLE IRA plan using Form 5304-SIMPLE or Rose, earned $25,000 and chose to defer 5% ofDecember 31 of the preceding calendar year).Form 5305-SIMPLE, you can use the form to his salary. You make a 3% matching contribu-However, the dates of this period are modified ifsatisfy other requirements, including the follow- tion. The total contribution you can make foryou set up a SIMPLE IRA plan in mid-year (foring. John is $2,000, figured as follows.example, on July 1) or if the 60-day period falls
• Meeting employer notification require-before the first day an employee becomes eligi-Salary reduction contributionsments for the SIMPLE IRA plan. Page 3 ofble to participate in the SIMPLE IRA plan.($25,000 × .05)................ $1,250Form 5304-SIMPLE and Page 3 of Form A SIMPLE IRA plan can provide longer peri-Employer matching contribution5305-SIMPLE contain a Model Notificationods for permitting employees to enter into salary($25,000 × .03)................ 7 5 0
to Eligible Employees that provides the reduction agreements or to modify prior agree-Total contributions............. $2,000
necessary information to the employee.ments. For example, a SIMPLE IRA plan can
provide a 90-day election period instead of theLower percentage. If you choose a match-• Maintaining the SIMPLE IRA plan records60-day period. Similarly, in addition to theing contribution less than 3%, the percentageand proving you set up a SIMPLE IRA 60-day period, a SIMPLE IRA plan can providemust be at least 1%. You must notify the em-plan for employees. quarterly election periods during the 30 daysployees of the lower match within a reasonable
before each calendar quarter, other than the firstperiod of time before the 60-day election periodDeadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA plan.quarter of each year. (discussed earlier) for the calendar year. YouYou can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan effective on cannot choose a percentage less than 3% forany date from January 1 thru October 1 of a more than 2 years during the 5-year period thatyear, provided you did not previously maintain aContribution Limits ends with (and includes) the year for which theSIMPLE IRA plan. This requirement does not choice is effective.Contributions are made up of salary reductionapply if you are a new employer that comes into
Nonelective contributions. Instead ofcontributions and employer contributions. You,existence after October 1 of the year the
matching contributions, you can choose to makeas the employer, must make either matchingSIMPLE IRA plan is set up and you set up a
nonelective contributions of 2% of compensa-contributions or nonelective contributions, dis-SIMPLE IRA plan as soon as administratively
tion on behalf of each eligible employee who hascussed later. No other contributions can befeasible after your business comes into exis-
at least $5,000 of compensation (or some lowermade to the SIMPLE IRA plan. These contribu-tence. If you previously maintained a SIMPLE
amount of compensation that you select) fromtions, which you can deduct, must be madeIRA plan, you can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan
you for the year. If you make this choice, youtimely. See Time limits for contributing funds,effective only on January 1 of a year. A SIMPLE
must make nonelective contributions whether orlater.IRA plan cannot have an effective date that is
not the employee chooses to make salary re-before the date you actually adopt the plan.Salary reduction contributions.The amount duction contributions. Only $205,000 of the
the employee chooses to have you contribute toemployee’s compensation can be taken into ac-Setting up a SIMPLE IRA.SIMPLE IRAs are
a SIMPLE IRA on his or her behalf cannot becount to figure the contribution limit.the individual retirement accounts or annuities
more than $9,000 for 2004 ($10,000 for 2005).If you choose this 2% contribution formula,into which the contributions are deposited. A
These contributions must be expressed as ayou must notify the employees within a reasona-SIMPLE IRA must be set up for each eligible
percentage of the employee’s compensation un-ble period of time before the 60-day electionemployee. Forms 5305-S, SIMPLE Individual
less you permit the employee to express themperiod (discussed earlier) for the calendar year.Retirement Trust Account, and 5305-SA,
as a specific dollar amount. You cannot placeSIMPLE Individual Retirement Custodial Ac-
restrictions on the contribution amount (such asExample 1. In 2004, your employee, Janecount, are model trust and custodial account
limiting the contribution percentage), except toWood, earned $36,000 and chose to have youdocuments the participant and the trustee (or
comply with the $9,000 limit. contribute 10% of her salary. You make a 2%custodian) can use for this purpose.
If an employee is a participant in any othernonelective contribution. Both of you are underA SIMPLE IRA cannot be designated as a
employer plan during the year and has electiveage 50. The total contributions you can make forRoth IRA. Contributions to a SIMPLE IRA will
salary reductions or deferred compensationher are $4,320, figured as follows.not affect the amount an individual can contrib-
under those plans, the salary reduction contribu-ute to a Roth IRA.
tions under a SIMPLE IRA plan also are electiveSalary reduction contributions
Deadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA.A ($36,000 × .10).............. $3,600deferrals that count toward the overall $13,000
SIMPLE IRA must be set up for an employee 2% nonelective contributionsannual limit on exclusion of salary reductions
before the first date by which a contribution is ($36,000 × .02).............. 7 2 0and other elective deferrals.
required to be deposited into the employee’s Total contributions........... $4,320
Catch-up contributions.A SIMPLE planIRA. See Time limits for contributing funds, later,
can permit participants who are age 50 or olderunder Contribution Limits. Example 2. Using the same facts as in Ex-at the end of the calendar year to make catch-up
ample 1, above, the maximum contribution youcontributions. The catch-up contribution limit for
can make for Jane if she earned $75,000 is2004 is $1,500. This limit increases by $500Notification Requirement $10,500, figured as follows.each year thereafter until it reaches $2,500 in
If you adopt a SIMPLE IRA plan, you must notify2006. The limit is subject to cost-of-living in-Salary reduction contributionseach employee of the following informationcreases after 2006. The catch-up contributions a(maximum amount) .......... $9,000before the beginning of the election period.participant can make for a year cannot exceed2% nonelective contributionsthe lesser of the following amounts.• The employee’s opportunity to make or ($75,000 × .02)............. 1,500
Total contributions.......... $10,500change a salary reduction choice under a• The catch-up contribution limit.
SIMPLE IRA plan. • The excess of the participant’s compensa-Time limits for contributing funds.You• Your choice to make either reduced tion over the elective deferrals that are notmust make the salary reduction contributions tomatching contributions or nonelective con-catch-up contributions. the SIMPLE IRA within 30 days after the end oftributions (discussed later). the month in which the amounts would other-
• A summary description and the location ofEmployer matching contributions. You wise have been payable to the employee in
the plan. The financial institution shouldgenerally are required to match each cash. You must make matching contributions or
provide you with this information. employee’s salary reduction contributions (other nonelective contributions by the due date (in-
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 11

Page 12 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cluding extensions) for filing your federal income Early withdrawals generally are subject to aKinds of Qualified Plans
tax return for the year. 10% additional tax. However, the additional tax
is increased to 25% if funds are withdrawn withinThere are two basic kinds of qualified retirement
2 years of beginning participation. plans: defined contribution plans and defined
When To Deduct Contributions benefit plans.
More information.See Publication 590 for in-You can deduct SIMPLE IRA contributions in the
formation about IRA rules, including those ontax year with or within which the calendar year Defined Contribution Planthe tax treatment of distributions, rollovers, re-for which contributions were made ends. You
quired distributions, and income tax withholding.can deduct contributions for a particular tax year This plan provides for a separate account for
if they are made for that tax year and are made each person covered by the plan. Benefits are
by the due date (including extensions) of your based only on amounts contributed to or allo-
More Information onfederal income tax return for that year. cated to each account.
SIMPLE IRA Plans There are two types of defined contribution
Example 1. Your tax year is the fiscal year plans: profit-sharing and money purchase pen-If you need more help to set up and maintain aending June 30. Contributions under a SIMPLE sion.SIMPLE IRA plan, see the following IRS noticeIRA plan for the calendar year 2004 (includingand revenue procedure.contributions made in 2004 before July 1, 2004) Profit-sharing plan.This plan lets your em-
are deductible in the tax year ending June 30, ployees or their beneficiaries share in the profits
2005. of your business. The plan must have a definiteNotice 98-4. This notice contains questions
formula for allocating the contribution among theand answers about the implementation and op-
Example 2. You are a sole proprietor whose participating employees and for distributing theeration of SIMPLE IRA plans, including the elec-
tax year is the calendar year. Contributions accumulated funds in the plan.tion and notice requirements for these plans.
under a SIMPLE IRA plan for the calendar yearNotice 98-4 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1998-1.
2004 (including contributions made in 2005 by Money purchase pension plan. Under this
April 15, 2005) are deductible in the 2004 tax plan, contributions are fixed and are not basedRevenue Procedure 97-29. This revenueyear. on your business profits. For example, if the planprocedure provides guidance to drafters of pro-requires contributions of 10% of each participat-totype SIMPLE IRAs on obtaining opinion let-ing employee’s compensation, regardless ofters. Revenue Procedure 97-29 is in CumulativeWhere To Deduct Contributions whether you have a profit, the plan is a moneyBulletin 1997-1. purchase pension plan.Deduct contributions you make for your
common-law employees on your tax return. For
example, sole proprietors deduct them on Defined Benefit PlanSchedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (FormQualified Plan
1040), partnerships deduct them on Form 1065, This is any plan that is not a defined contribution
and corporations deduct them on Form 1120, plan. In general, contributions to a qualified de-A qualified retirement plan is a written plan you
Form 1120-A, or Form 1120S. fined benefit plan are based on what is neededcan set up for the exclusive benefit of your em-
to provide definitely determinable benefits toployees and their beneficiaries. It is sometimesSole proprietors and partners deduct contri- plan participants. Your contributions to the plancalled a Keogh or H.R. 10 plan.butions for themselves on line 32 of Form 1040. are based on actuarial assumptions. Generally,You, or you and your employees, can make(If you are a partner, contributions for yourself you will need continuing professional help tocontributions to the plan. If your plan meets theare shown on the Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) you administer a defined benefit plan.qualification requirements, you generally canreceive from the partnership).
deduct your contributions to the plan. For more
Setting Up a Planinformation, see Publication 560.
Your employees generally are not taxed onTax Treatment of Contributions You must adopt a written plan. The plan can beyour contributions or increases in the plan’s as-an IRS-approved master or prototype plan of-You can deduct your contributions and your em-sets until they are distributed. However, certainfered by a sponsoring organization. Or it can beployees can exclude these contributions fromloans made from qualified plans are treated asan individually designed plan.their gross income. SIMPLE IRA contributionstaxable distributions. For more information, see
are not subject to federal income tax withhold-Publication 575. Master or prototype plans. The followinging. However, salary reduction contributions are
sponsoring organizations generally can providesubject to social security, Medicare, and federalQualification requirements.To be a quali- IRS-approved master or prototype plans.unemployment (FUTA) taxes. Matching and
fied plan, the plan must meet many require-nonelective contributions are not subject to • Trade or professional organizations.ments. They include requirements thatthese taxes.
determine the following. • Banks (including savings and loan as-
Reporting on Form W-2. Do not include sociations and federally insured credit un-• Who must be covered by the plan.SIMPLE IRA contributions in the “Wages, tips, ions).
other compensation” box of Form W-2. How- • How contributions to the plan are to be• Insurance companies.ever, salary reduction contributions must be in-invested.
cluded in the boxes for social security wages • Mutual funds.• How contributions to the plan and benefitsand Medicare wages. Also include the proper
Adoption of a master or prototype plan does notunder the plan are to be determined.code in Box 12. For more information, see the
mean your plan is automatically qualified. It stillinstructions for Forms W-2 and W-3. • How much of an employee’s interest in themust meet all the qualification requirementsplan must be guaranteed (vested). stated in the law.
For more information, see Publication 560.Distributions (Withdrawals)
Individually designed plan.If you prefer, you
Distributions from a SIMPLE IRA are subject toMore than one job.If you are self-employed can set up an individually designed plan to meet
IRA rules and generally are includible in income and also work for someone else, you can partici- specific needs. Although advance IRS approval
for the year received. Tax-free rollovers can be pate in retirement plans for both jobs. Generally, is not required, you can apply for approval by
made from one SIMPLE IRA into another your participation in a retirement plan for one job paying a fee and requesting a determination
SIMPLE IRA. A rollover from a SIMPLE IRA to a does not affect your participation in a plan for the letter. You may need professional help with this.
non-SIMPLE IRA can be made tax free only other job. However, if you have an IRA, you may Revenue Procedure 2004-6 in Internal Revenue
after a 2-year participation in the SIMPLE IRA not be allowed to deduct part or all of your IRA Bulletin 2004-1 may help you decide whether to
plan. contributions. See Publication 590. apply for approval.
Page 12 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 13 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
yourself is limited to the lesser of $41,000 orWorksheet 3-B. Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed
20% (25% reduced as discussed later) of your
Step 1 net earnings.
Enter your net profit from line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040); line 3, Schedule Net earnings. Your net earnings must beC-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form 1040); or box 14, code A*,
from self-employment in a trade or business inSchedule K-1 (Form 1065)...................................
which your personal services are a material*General partners should reduce this amount by the same additional expenses
income-producing factor. Your net earnings dosubtracted from box 14, code A to determine the amount on line 1 or 2 of
Schedule SE not include items excluded from income (or de-
Step 2 ductions related to that income), other than for-
Enter your deduction for self-employment tax from line 30, Form 1040....... eign earned income and foreign housing cost
Step 3 amounts.
Net earnings from self-employment. Subtract step 2 from step 1........... Your net earnings are your business gross
Step 4 income minus the allowable business deduc-
Enter your rate from the Worksheet 3-A........................... tions from that business. Allowable business
Step 5 deductions include contributions to SEP and
Multiply step 3 by step 4..................................... qualified plans for common-law employees and
Step 6 the deduction for one-half of your self-employ-
Multiply $205,000 by your plan contribution rate (not the reduced rate)....... ment tax.
Step 7 Net earnings include a partner’s distributive
Enter the smaller of step 5 or step 6............................. share of partnership income or loss (other than
Step 8 separately stated items such as capital gains
Contribution dollar limit...................................... $41,000 and losses) and any guaranteed payments. If• If you made any elective deferrals, go to step 9. you are a limited partner, net earnings include• Otherwise, skip steps 9 through 18 and enter the smaller only guaranteed payments for services ren-of step 7 or step 8 on step 19. dered to or for the partnership. For more infor-Step 9 mation, see Partnership Income or Loss underEnter your allowable elective deferrals made during 2004. Do not enter more Figuring Earnings Subject to Self-Employmentthan $13,000............................................ Tax in Publication 533.Step 10 Net earnings do not include income passedSubtract step 9 from step 8...................................
through to shareholders of S corporations.Step 11
Subtract step 9 from step 3......................... Adjustments. You must reduce your net
Step 12 earnings by the deduction for one-half of your
Enter one-half of step 11.................................... self-employment tax. Also, net earnings must be
Step 13 reduced by the deduction for contributions you
Enter the smallest of step 7, 10, or 12............................ make for yourself. This reduction is made indi-
Step 14 rectly, as explained next.
Subtract step 13 from step 3..................................
Net earnings reduced by adjusting contri-Step 15
bution rate.You must reduce net earnings byEnter the smaller of step 9 or step 14............................
your deduction for contributions for yourself. The• If you made catch-up contributions, go to step 16.
deduction and the net earnings depend on each• Otherwise, skip steps 16 through 18 and go to step 19.
other. You make the adjustment indirectly byStep 16
reducing the contribution rate called for in theSubtract step 15 from step 14.................................
plan and using the reduced rate to figure yourStep 17
maximum deduction for contributions for your-Enter your catch-up contributions, if any. Do not enter more than $3,000......
self.Step 18
Enter the smaller of step 16 or step 17........................... Annual compensation limit.You generallyStep 19 cannot take into account more than $205,000 ofAdd steps 13, 15, and 18. This is your maximum deductible contribution.... your compensation in figuring your contributionNext: Enter this amount on line 32, Form 1040. to a defined contribution plan.
Figuring Your DeductionWhen figuring the deduction limit, the follow-Deduction Limits
ing rules apply. Use the following worksheet to find the reducedThe deduction limit for contributions to a quali- contribution rate for yourself. Make no reduction• Elective deferrals (discussed in Publica-fied plan depends on the kind of plan you have. to the contribution rate for any common-law em-tion 560) are not subject to the limit.
ployees.In figuring the deduction for contribu-• Compensation includes elective deferrals.Worksheet 3-A. Rate Worksheet fortions to these plans, you cannot take
• The maximum compensation that can beinto account any contributions or bene- Self-EmployedCAUTION
!
taken into account for each employee isfits that are more than the limits discussed under
1) Plan contribution rate as a$205,000.Limits on Contributions and Benefits in Publica-
decimal (for example, 101/2% =tion 560. However, your deduction can be as
.105) ...................much as the plan’s unfunded current liability.Defined benefit plans.An actuary must fig- 2) Rate in line 1 plus 1 (for example,ure the deduction for contributions to a defined.105 + 1 = 1.105)...........benefit plan because it is based on actuarialDefined contribution plans.The deduction 3) Self-employed rate as a decimalassumptions and computations.for contributions to a defined contribution plan rounded to at least 3 decimal
(profit sharing plan or money purchase pension places (line 1 ÷ line 2)........Deduction of contributions for yourself.Toplan) cannot be more than 25% of the compen-
take a deduction for contributions you make to asation paid (or accrued) during the year to the After you have figured your self-employedplan for yourself, you must have net earningseligible employees participating in the plan. You rate, you can figure your maximum deduction forfrom the trade or business for which the planmust reduce this limit in figuring the deduction contributions for yourself by completing Work-was set up.for contributions you make for your own ac- sheet 3-B.
count. See Deduction of contributions for your-Limit on deduction.If the qualified plan is a An Example of how to complete the work-
self, later. defined contribution plan, your deduction for sheets follows.
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 13

Page 14 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 560 also discusses the reportingWorksheet 3-B. Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed — Illustrated
forms that must be filed for these plans.
Step 1
Enter your net profit from line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040); line 3, Schedule
C-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form 1040); or box 14, code A*,
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)................................... $200,000 Individual Retirement*General partners should reduce this amount by the same additional expenses
subtracted from box 14, code A to determine the amount on line 1 or 2 of Arrangement (IRA)Schedule SE
Step 2 An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is aEnter your deduction for self-employment tax from line 30, Form 1040....... 8,128 personal savings plan that allows you to setStep 3 aside money for your retirement. You may beNet earnings from self-employment. Subtract step 2 from step 1........... 191,872 able to deduct your contributions, depending onStep 4 the type of IRA and your circumstances. Gener-Enter your rate from Worksheet 3-A ............................. 0.078
ally, amounts in an IRA, including earnings andStep 5
gains, are not taxed until they are distributed. InMultiply step 3 by step 4..................................... 14,966
certain cases, your earnings and gains may notStep 6
be taxed at all if they are distributed according toMultiply $205,000 by your plan contribution rate (not the reduced rate)....... 17,425
the rules. For more information on IRAs, seeStep 7
Publication 590.Enter the smaller of step 5 or step 6............................. 14,966
Step 8
Contribution dollar limit...................................... $41,000
• If you made any elective deferrals, go to step 9.
• Otherwise, skip steps 9 through 18 and enter the smaller
of step 7 or step 8 on step 19.
Step 9
4.Enter your allowable elective deferrals made during 2004. Do not enter more
than $12,000............................................ N / A
Step 10
Subtract step 9 from step 8...................................
Rent ExpenseStep 11
Subtract step 9 from step 3.........................
Step 12
Enter one-half of step 11.................................... Introduction
Step 13
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of rentEnter the smallest of step 7, 10, or 12............................
or lease payments you make for property youStep 14
use in your business but do not own. It alsoSubtract step 13 from step 3..................................
discusses how to treat other kinds of paymentsStep 15
you make that are related to your use of thisEnter the smaller of step 9 or step 14............................
property. These include payments you make for• If you made catch-up contributions, go to step 16.
taxes on the property, improvements to the• Otherwise, skip steps 16 through 18 and go to step 19.
property, and getting a lease. There is a discus-Step 16
sion about capitalizing (including in the cost ofSubtract step 15 from step 14.................................
property) certain rent expenses at the end of theStep 17
chapter.Enter your catch-up contributions, if any. Do not enter more than $3,000......
Step 18
Enter the smaller of step 16 or step 17........................... Topics
Step 19 This chapter discusses:
Add steps 13, 15, and 18. This is your maximum deductible contribution.... $14,966
Next: Enter this amount on line 32, Form 1040. • The definition of rent
• Taxes on leased property
Worksheet 3-A. Rate Worksheet for • The cost of getting a leaseExample Self-Employed — • Improvements by the lesseeYou are a sole proprietor with no employees. Illustrated
The terms of your plan provide that you contrib- • Capitalizing rent expenses
1) Plan contribution rate as aute 81/2% (.085) of your compensation (defined
decimal (for example, 101/2% =earlier) to your plan. Your net profit from line 31, See chapter 14 for information about getting.105) ................... 0.085Schedule C (Form 1040) is $200,000. You have publications and forms.2) Rate in line 1 plus 1 (for example,no elective deferrals or catch-up contributions.
.105 + 1 = 1.105)........... 1.085Your self-employment tax deduction on line 30
3) Self-employed rate as a decimalof Form 1040 is $8,128. You figure your self-em-
rounded to at least 3 decimalployed rate and maximum deduction for em- Rentplaces (line 1 ÷ line 2)........ 0.078ployer contributions you made for yourself as
shown in illustrated Worksheet 3-A and Work- Rent is any amount you pay for the use ofWhen to make contributions.To take a de-sheet 3-B. property you do not own. In general, you canduction for contributions for a particular year,
deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is foryou must make the contributions not later than
property you use in your trade or business. If youthe due date (generally April 15 for calendar
have or will receive equity in or title to the prop-year taxpayers), plus extensions, of your tax
erty, the rent is not deductible.return for that year.
Unreasonable rent.You cannot take a rentalMore information. See Publication 560 for
deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, themore information on retirement plans for small
issue of reasonableness arises only if you andbusiness owners, including the self-employed.
the lessor are related. Rent paid to a related
Page 14 Chapter 4 Rent Expense

Page 15 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
person is reasonable if it is the same amount amount you have to pay under the agree- rules apply if the lease calls for total payments of
you would pay to a stranger for use of the same ment. more than $250,000 and any of the following
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because apply.
• The agreement designates part of the pay-it is figured as a percentage of gross sales. Forments as interest, or that part is easy to• Rents increase during the lease.examples of related persons, see Related Per- recognize as interest. • Rents decrease during the lease.sons in chapter 12.
Rent on your home. If you rent your home • Rents are deferred (rent is payable afterLeveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans-
and use part of it as your place of business, you the end of the calendar year following theactions may not be considered leases. Lever-
may be able to deduct the rent you pay for that calendar year in which the use occurs andaged leases generally involve three parties: a
part. You must meet the requirements for busi- the rent is allocated).lessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor.
ness use of your home. For more information,Usually the lease term covers a large part of the• Rents are prepaid (rent is payable beforesee Business use of your home in chapter 1. useful life of the leased property, and the the end of the calendar year preceding thelessee’s payments to the lessor are enough toRent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid in calendar year in which the use occurs andcover the lessor’s payments to the lender.your trade or business is deductible in the year the rent is allocated).If you plan to take part in what appears to bepaid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, you These rules do not apply if your lease specifiesa leveraged lease, you may want to get ancan deduct only the amount that applies to your equal amounts of rent for each month in theadvance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001-28 onuse of the rented property during the tax year. lease term and all rent payments are due in thepage 1156 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19You can deduct the rest of your payment only calendar year to which the rent relates (or in thecontains the guidelines the IRS will use to deter-over the period to which it applies. preceding or following calendar year).mine if a leveraged lease is a lease for federal
income tax purposes. Revenue ProcedureExample 1. You leased a building for 5 Generally, if the special rules apply, you must2001-29 on page 1160 of the same Internalyears beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 per use an accrual method of accounting (and timeRevenue Bulletin provides the information re-year. You paid the first year’s rent ($12,000) on value of money principles) for your rental ex-quired to be furnished in a request for an ad-June 30. You can deduct only $6,000 (6/12 × penses, regardless of your overall method ofvance ruling on a leveraged lease transaction.$12,000) for the rent that applies to the first year. accounting. In addition, in certain cases in whichInternal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 is available atthe IRS has determined that a lease was de-www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-19.pdfExample 2. Last January you leased prop- signed to achieve tax avoidance, you must takeIn general, Revenue Procedure 2001-28erty for 3 years for $6,000 a year. You paid the rent and stated or imputed interest into accountprovides that, for advance ruling purposes only,full $18,000 (3 × $6,000) during the first year of under a constant rental accrual method in whichthe IRS will consider the lessor in a leveragedthe lease. Each year you can deduct only the rent is treated as accruing ratably over thelease transaction to be the owner of the property$6,000, the part of the lease that applies to that entire lease term. For details, see section 467 ofand the transaction to be a valid lease if all theyear. the Internal Revenue Code.factors in the revenue procedure are met, in-
Canceling a lease.You generally can deductcluding the following.
as rent an amount you pay to cancel a business• The lessor must maintain a minimum un-lease. conditional “at risk” equity investment inTaxes on
Lease or purchase. There may be instances the property (at least 20% of the cost of
in which you must determine whether your pay- Leased Propertythe property) during the entire lease term.
ments are for rent or for the purchase of the
• The lessee may not have a contractualproperty. You must first determine whether your If you lease business property, you can deductright to buy the property from the lessor atagreement is a lease or a conditional sales con- as additional rent any taxes you have to pay toless than fair market value when the righttract. Payments made under a conditional sales or for the lessor. When you can deduct theseis exercised.contract are not deductible as rent expense. taxes as additional rent depends on your ac-
counting method.• The lessee may not invest in the property,Conditional sales contract.Whether an
except as provided by Revenue Procedureagreement is a conditional sales contract de- Cash method. If you use the cash method of2001-28.pends on the intent of the parties. Determine accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-
intent based on the provisions of the agreement tional rent only for the tax year in which you pay• The lessee may not lend any money to the
and the facts and circumstances that exist when them.lessor to buy the property or guarantee the
you make the agreement. No single test, or loan used by the lessor to buy the prop-Accrual method. If you use an accrualspecial combination of tests, always applies.erty. method of accounting, you can deduct taxes asHowever, in general, an agreement may be con- additional rent for the tax year in which you can• The lessor must show that it expects tosidered a conditional sales contract rather than determine all the following.receive a profit apart from the tax deduc-a lease if any of the following is true. tions, allowances, credits, and other tax• That you have a liability for taxes on the• The agreement applies part of each pay- attributes. leased property.ment toward an equity interest you will re-
ceive. • How much the liability is.The IRS may charge you a user fee for issuing
a tax ruling. For more information, see Revenue• You get title to the property after you make • That economic performance occurred.Procedure 2004-1, on page 1 of Internal Reve-a stated amount of required payments.
nue Bulletin No. 2004-1 at www.irs.gov/pub/ The liability and amount of taxes are deter-• The amount you must pay to use the prop-irs-irbs/irb04-01.pdf, or Publication 1375, whichmined by state or local law and the lease agree-erty for a short time is a large part of theis a reprint of Revenue Procedure 2004-1.ment. Economic performance occurs as you useamount you would pay to get title to the the property.Leveraged leases of limited-use property.property. The IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever-
• You pay much more than the current fair Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendaraged leases of so-called limited-use property.
rental value of the property. year taxpayer that uses an accrual method ofLimited-use property is property not expected to
accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi-be either useful to or usable by a lessor at the• You have an option to buy the property at ness. Under state law, owners of real propertyend of the lease term except for continued leas-a nominal price compared to the value of become liable (incur a lien on the property) foring or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce-the property when you may exercise the real estate taxes for the year on January 1 ofdure 2001-28 for examples of limited-useoption. Determine this value when you that year. However, they do not have to payproperty and property that is not limited-usemake the agreement. these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18property.
• You have an option to buy the property at months later) when tax bills are issued. UnderLeases over $250,000.Special rules are pro-a nominal price compared to the total the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable forvided for certain leases of tangible property. The
Chapter 4 Rent Expense Page 15

Page 16 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the real estate taxes in the later year when theCost of a modification agreement.You may
tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the have to pay an additional “rent” amount over partCapitalizing
tax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable for of the lease period to change certain provisions
the taxes for that year. in your lease. You must capitalize these pay-
Rent Expenses
Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as ments and amortize them over the remaining
rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak’s period of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay-Under the uniform capitalization rules, you have
liability under the lease becomes fixed. ments as additional rent, even if they are de-to capitalize the direct costs and part of the
scribed as rent in the agreement. indirect costs for production or resale activities.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Indirect costs include amounts incurred for
Example 1 except that, according to the terms ofExample. You are a calendar year taxpayerrenting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.
the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estate and sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a buildingGenerally, you are subject to the uniform
taxes when the owner of the property becomes starting on January 1. However, before you oc-capitalization rules if you do any of the following
liable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct the cupy it, you decide that you really need lessin the course of a trade or business or an activity
real estate taxes as rent on its tax return for the space. The lessor agrees to reduce your rentcarried on for profit.
earlier year. This is the year in which Oak’s from $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release• Produce real or tangible personal propertyliability under the lease becomes fixed. the excess space from the original lease. Infor use in the business or activity.exchange, you agree to pay an additional rent
amount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install-• Produce real or tangible personal property
ments of $50 each. for sale to customers.
You must capitalize the $3,000 and amortizeCost of • Acquire property for resale. However, thisit over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor-rule does not apply to personal propertytization deduction each year will be $150Getting a Lease acquired for resale if your average annual($3,000 ÷ 20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 × gross receipts for the 3 previous tax yearsYou may either enter into a new lease with the$50) that you will pay during each of the first 5were not more than $10 million.lessor of the property or get an existing leaseyears as rent.
from another lessee. Very often when you get anCommissions, bonuses, and fees.Commis-existing lease from another lessee, you must Example 1. You rent construction equip-sions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts youpay the previous lessee money to get the lease, ment to build a storage facility. You must capital-pay to get a lease on property you use in yourbesides having to pay the rent on the lease. ize as part of the cost of the building the rent youbusiness are capital costs. You must amortizeIf you get an existing lease on property or paid for the equipment. You recover your cost bythese costs over the term of the lease.equipment for your business, you generally claiming a deduction for depreciation on the
Loss on merchandise and fixtures.If youmust amortize any amount you pay to get that building.
sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that youlease over the remaining term of the lease. For
bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost ofexample, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and Example 2. You rent space in a facility to
getting the lease. You must capitalize the lossthere are 10 years remaining on the lease with conduct your business of manufacturing tools.
and amortize it over the remaining term of theno option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 each You must include the rent you paid to occupy the
lease.year. facility in the cost of the tools you produce.
The cost of getting an existing lease of tangi- More information.For more information, seeble property is not subject to the amortization section 263A of the Internal Revenue Code.rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in
chapter 9. Improvements
Option to renew. The term of the lease forby Lesseeamortization includes all renewal options plus
any other period for which you and the lessorIf you add buildings or make other permanentreasonably expect the lease to be renewed.improvements to leased property, depreciate5.However, this applies only if less than 75% ofthe cost of the improvements using the modifiedthe cost of getting the lease is for the termaccelerated cost recovery system (MACRS).remaining on the purchase date (not includingDepreciate the property over its appropriate re-any period for which you may choose to renew,covery period. You cannot amortize the costInterestextend, or continue the lease). Allocate theover the remaining term of the lease.lease cost to the original term and any optionIf you do not keep the improvements whenterm based on the facts and circumstances. Inyou end the lease, figure your gain or loss basedsome cases, it may be appropriate to make the Introductionon your adjusted basis in the improvements atallocation using a present value computation.that time. This chapter discusses the tax treatment of busi-For more information, see Regulations sectionFor more information, see the discussion ofness interest expense. Business interest ex-1.178-1(b)(5). MACRS in Publication 946, How To Depreciatepense is an amount charged for the use of
Property. money you borrowed for business activities.Example 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease
Assignment of a lease.If a long-term lesseewith 20 years remaining on it and two options to
Topicswho makes permanent improvements to landrenew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paid
This chapter discusses:later assigns all lease rights to you for money$7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for the
and you pay the rent required by the lease, therenewal options. Because $7,000 is less than • Allocation of interestamount you pay for the assignment is a capital75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (or
investment. If the rental value of the leased land$7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30 • Interest you can deduct
increased since the lease began, part of youryears. That is the remaining life of your present • Interest you cannot deductcapital investment is for that increase in thelease plus the periods for renewal.
rental value. The rest is for your investment in• Capitalization of interest
Example 2. The facts are the same as inthe permanent improvements. • When to deduct interestExample 1, except that you paid $8,000 for theThe part that is for the increased rental value
original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op-of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and you• Below-market loans
tions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 overamortize it over the remaining term of the lease.
the 20-year remaining life of the original lease.You can depreciate the part that is for your
The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease wasinvestment in the improvements over the recov-
not less than 75% of the total cost of the leaseery period of the property as discussed earlier,
(or $7,500). without regard to the lease term.
Page 16 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 17 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Date Transactionceeds to buy an automobile for personal use.Useful Items
You must allocate interest expense on the loanYou may want to see: January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan Ato personal use (purchase of the automobile) and
even though the loan is secured by businessPublication $1,000 unborrowed funds
property. deposited❏ 537 Installment Sales
If the property that secures the loan isJanuary 13 $500 proceeds of Loan B❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods your home, you generally do not allo- deposited
cate the loan proceeds or the related
TIP
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses February 18 $800 used for personalinterest. The interest is usually deductible as purposes❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest qualified home mortgage interest, regardless of
Deduction February 27 $700 used for passivehow the loan proceeds are used. For more infor-
activitymation, see Publication 936.
Form (and Instructions) June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan CAllocation period.The period for which a deposited❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized loan is allocated to a particular use begins on the
Deductions November 20 $800 used for andate the proceeds are used and ends on the
investmentearlier of the following dates.❏ Sch E (Form 1040)Supplemental
December 18 $600 used for personalIncome and Loss • The date the loan is repaid. purposes❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1065)Partner’s Share of • The date the loan is reallocated to anotherEdith treats the $800 used for personal pur-Income, Deductions, Credits, etc. use. poses as made from the $500 proceeds of Loan❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1120S)Shareholder’s A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. SheShare of Income, Deductions, Proceeds not disbursed to borrower.Even treats the $700 used for a passive activity asCredits, etc. if the lender disburses the loan proceeds to amade from the remaining $200 proceeds of
third party, the allocation of the loan is still basedLoan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. She❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement on your use of the funds. This applies whethertreats the $800 used for an investment as made❏ 3115 Application for Change in you pay for property, services, or anything elseentirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treatsAccounting Method by incurring a loan, or you take property subjectthe $600 used for personal purposes as made
to a debt. from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense
and $400 of unborrowed funds.Deduction Proceeds deposited in borrower’s account.
For the periods during which loan proceedsTreat loan proceeds deposited in an account as❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations are held in the account, Edith treats them asproperty held for investment. It does not matter
property held for investment.whether the account pays interest. Any interestSee chapter 14 for information about gettingyou pay on the loan is investment interest ex-Payments from checking accounts.Gen-publications and forms. pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan,erally, you treat a payment from a checking oryou must reallocate the loan based on the use ofsimilar account as made at the time the check isthe funds. written if you mail or deliver it to the payee within
a reasonable period after you write it. You canAllocation of Interest Example. Connie, a calendar-year tax- treat checks written on the same day as writtenpayer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im-in any order.The rules for deducting interest vary, dependingmediately uses the proceeds to open a checkingon whether the loan proceeds are used for busi- Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re-account. No other amounts are deposited in theness, personal, or investment activities. If you ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-account during the year and no part of the loanuse the proceeds of a loan for more than one ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treatprincipal is repaid during the year. On April 1,type of expense, you must make an allocation to any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)Connie uses $20,000 from the checking accountdetermine the interest for each use of the loan’s made from any account you own, or from cash,for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem-proceeds. as made from those proceeds. This applies tober 1, Connie uses an additional $40,000 fromAllocate your interest expense to the follow- any payment made within 30 days before orthe account for personal purposes.ing categories. after the proceeds are received in cash or de-Under the interest allocation rules, the entire
posited in your account.$100,000 loan is treated as property held for• Nonpassive trade or business activity in-
If the loan proceeds are deposited in aninvestment for the period from January 4terest
account, you can apply this rule even if the rulesthrough March 31. From April 1 through August• Passive trade or business activity interest stated earlier under Order of funds spent would31, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan as
otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as• Investment interest used in the passive activity and $80,000 of the
used for other purposes. If you apply this rule toloan as property held for investment. From Sep-• Portfolio interest any payments, disregard those payments (andtember 1 through December 31, she must treat
the proceeds from which they are made) when• Personal interest $40,000 of the loan as used for personal pur-
applying the rules stated under Order of fundsposes, $20,000 as used in the passive activity,In general, you allocate interest on a loan the spent.and $40,000 as property held for investment.same way you allocate the loan proceeds. You If you received the loan proceeds in cash,allocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse-Order of funds spent.Generally, you treatyou can treat the payment as made on the datements to specific uses. loan proceeds deposited in an account as usedyou received the cash instead of the date you(spent) before either of the following amounts.actually made the payment.The easiest way to trace disburse- • Any unborrowed amounts held in thements to specific uses is to keep the Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 onsame account.proceeds of a particular loan separate
TIP
August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash.from any other funds. • Any amounts deposited after these loanFrank deposits $1,500 in an account on Augustproceeds. 18 and on August 28 writes a check on theSecured loan. The allocation of loan pro-
account for a passive activity expense. Also,ceeds and the related interest is not generally
Frank deposits his paycheck, deposits otherExample. On January 9, Edith opened aaffected by the use of property that secures the
loan proceeds, and pays his bills during thechecking account, depositing $500 of the pro-loan.
same period. Regardless of these other transac-ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowed
tions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit hefunds. The following table shows the transac-Example. You secure a loan with property
made on August 18 as being paid on August 4tions in her account during the tax year.used in your business. You use the loan pro-
from the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank can
Chapter 5 Interest Page 17

Page 18 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
treat the passive activity expense he paid onLoan refinancing.Allocate the replacement You will receive the statement if you pay interest
loan to the same uses to which the repaid loan to a person (including a financial institution or aAugust 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro-
was allocated. Make the allocation only to the cooperative housing corporation) in the courseceeds treated as deposited in the account.
extent you use the proceeds of the new loan to of that person’s trade or business. A govern-Optional method for determining date ofrepay any part of the original loan. mental unit is a person for purposes of furnishingreallocation.You can use the following the statement.method to determine the date loan proceeds areDebt-financed distribution.A debt-financed If you receive a refund of interest you over-reallocated to another use. You can treat alldistribution occurs when a partnership or S cor-paid in an earlier year, this amount will be re-payments from loan proceeds in the accountporation borrows funds and allocates thoseported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannotduring any month as taking place on the later offunds to distributions made to partners or share-deduct this amount. For information on how tothe following dates. holders. The manner in which you report the report this refund, see Refunds of interest laterinterest expense associated with the distributedin this chapter.• The first day of that month. debt proceeds depends on your use of those
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.proceeds.• The date the loan proceeds are deposited
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgagein the account. How to report.If the proceeds were used incannot be deducted as interest. These ex-a nonpassive trade or business activity, reportHowever, you can use this optional method only penses, which include mortgage commissions,the interest on line 28 of Schedule E (Formif you treat all payments from the account during abstract fees, and recording fees, are capital1040); enter “interest expense” and the name ofthe same calendar month in the same way. expenses. If the property mortgaged is businessthe partnership or S corporation in column (a)or income-producing property, you can amortizeInterest on a separate account.If you and the amount in column (h). If the proceedsthe costs over the life of the mortgage.have an account that contains only loan pro-were used in a passive activity, follow the in-ceeds and interest earned on the account, you Prepayment penalty. If you pay off yourstructions for Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss
can treat any payment from that account as mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty forLimitations, to determine the amount of interest
being made first from the interest. When the doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter-expense that can be reported on line 28 of
interest earned is used up, any remaining pay- est.Schedule E; enter “interest expense” and the
ments are from loan proceeds. name of the partnership in column (a) and theInterest on employment tax deficiency.In-amount in column (f). If the proceeds were usedterest charged on employment taxes assessedExample. You borrowed $20,000 and usedin an investment activity, enter the interest onon your business is deductible.the proceeds of this loan to open a new savingsForm 4952. If the proceeds are used for per-
account. When the account had earned interest Original issue discount (OID).OID is a formsonal purposes, the interest is generally not de-
of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur- of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-ductible.
poses. You can treat the withdrawal as coming erally has OID when its proceeds are less than
first from the interest earned on the account, its principal amount. The OID is the difference
$867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133 between the stated redemption price at maturity
($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on the and the issue price of the loan.Interest Youloan from the time it was deposited in the ac-  A loan’s stated redemption price at maturity
count until the time of the withdrawal is invest- is the sum of all amounts (principal and interest)Can Deduct
ment interest expense. The interest charged on payable on it other than qualified stated interest.
the part of the proceeds used for personal pur- Qualified stated interest is stated interest that isYou can generally deduct as a business ex-
poses ($19,133) from the time you withdrew it unconditionally payable in cash or propertypense all interest you pay or accrue during the
until you either repay it or reallocate it to another (other than another loan of the issuer) at leasttax year on debts related to your trade or busi-
use is personal interest expense. The interest annually over the term of the loan at a singleness. Interest relates to your trade or business if
charged on the loan proceeds you left in the fixed rate.you use the proceeds of the loan for a trade or
account ($867) continues to be investment inter- You generally deduct OID over the term ofbusiness expense. It does not matter what type
est expense until you either repay it or reallocate the loan. Figure the amount to deduct each yearof property secures the loan. You can deduct
it to another use. using the constant-yield method, unless the OIDinterest on a debt only if you meet all the follow-
on the loan is de minimis.ing requirements.
Loan repayment. When you repay any part of De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it• You are legally liable for that debt.a loan allocated to more than one use, treat it as is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the• Both you and the lender intend that thebeing repaid in the following order. stated redemption price of the loan at maturitydebt be repaid. multiplied by the number of full years from the1. Personal use. date of original issue to maturity (the term of the• You and the lender have a true
2. Investments and passive activities (other loan).debtor-creditor relationship.
than those included in (3)). If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one
of the following ways to figure the amount you3. Passive activities in connection with aPartial liability.If you are liable for part of acan deduct each year.rental real estate activity in which you ac-business debt, you can deduct only your share
tively participate. of the total interest paid or accrued. • On a constant-yield basis over the term of
the loan.4. Former passive activities. Example. You and your brother borrow • On a straight-line basis over the term ofmoney. You are liable for 50% of the note. You5. Trade or business use and expenses for the loan.use your half of the loan in your business, andcertain low-income housing projects.
you make one-half of the loan payments. You• In proportion to stated interest payments.
can deduct your half of the total interest pay-Line of credit (continuous borrowings). • In its entirety at maturity of the loan.ments as a business deduction.The following rules apply if you have a line of You make this choice by deducting the OID in aMortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paidcredit or similar arrangement. manner consistent with the method chosen onor accrued on real estate you own legally oryour timely filed tax return for the tax year in1. Treat all borrowed funds on which interestequitably is deductible. However, rather thanwhich the loan is issued.accrues at the same fixed or variable ratededucting the interest currently, you may have
as a single loan. to add it to the cost basis of the property asExample. On January 1, 2004, you took outexplained later under Capitalization of Interest.2. Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowed a $100,000 discounted loan and received
funds on which interest accrues at differentStatement. If you paid $600 or more of $98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature on
fixed or variable rates as different loans.mortgage interest (including certain points) dur- January 1, 2014 (a 10-year term), and the
Treat these loans as repaid in the ordering the year on any one mortgage, you generally $100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter-
shown on the loan agreement. will receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement. est of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of each
Page 18 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 19 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year, beginning January 1, 2005. The $1,500 result in original issue discount, deductible as tax return is not a business deduction even
OID on the loan is de minimis because it is less explained in the preceding discussion. though the tax due is related to income from
than $2,500 ($100,000 × .0025 × 10). You your trade or business. Treat this interest as aPartial payments on a nontax debt.If youchoose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basis business deduction only in figuring a net operat-make partial payments on a debt (other than aover the term of the loan. Beginning in 2004, you ing loss deduction.debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied,can deduct $150 each year for 10 years. Penalties.Penalties on underpaid deficien-in general, first to interest and any remainder to
Constant-yield method.If the OID is not de cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-principal. You can deduct only the interest. This
minimis, you must use the constant-yield est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, yourule does not apply when it can be inferred that
method to figure how much you can deduct each cannot deduct any fines or penalties.the borrower and lender understood that a differ-
year. You figure your deduction for the first yearent allocation of the payments would be made.
Interest on loans with respect to life insur-using the following steps. Installment purchase.If you make an install-ance policies.You generally cannot deductment purchase of business property, the con-1. Determine the issue price of the loan. Gen- interest on a debt incurred with respect to anytract between you and the seller generallyerally, this equals the proceeds of the loan. life insurance, annuity, or endowment contractprovides for the payment of interest. If no inter-If you paid points on the loan (as dis- that covers any individual unless that individualest or a low rate of interest is charged under thecussed later), the issue price generally is is a key person.contract, a portion of the stated principal amountthe difference between the proceeds and If the policy or contract covers a key person,payable under the contract may be recharacter-the points. you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 ofized as interest (unstated interest). The amountdebt for that person. However, the deduction for2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield torecharacterized as interest reduces your basisany month cannot be more than the interestmaturity. in the property and increases your interest ex-figured using Moody’s Composite Yield on Sea-pense. For more information on installment3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay- soned Corporate Bonds (formerly known assales and unstated interest, see Publicationments from the result in (2). This is the Moody’s Corporate Bond Yield537.OID you can deduct in the first year. Average-Monthly Average Corporates)
(Moody’s rate) for that month.To figure your deduction in any subsequent
year, follow the above steps, except determine Who is a key person? A key person is an
the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get the officer or 20% owner. However, the number ofInterest Youadjusted issue price, add to the issue price any individuals you can treat as key persons is lim-
OID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2) ited to the greater of the following.Cannot Deduct
and (3) above. • Five individuals.The yield to maturity is generally shown inCertain interest payments cannot be deducted.
the literature you receive from your lender. If you • The lesser of 5% of the total officers andIn addition, certain other expenses that may
do not have this information, consult your lender employees of the company or 20 individu-seem to be interest are not, and you cannot
or tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity is als.deduct them as interest.
the discount rate that, when used in computingYou cannot currently deduct interest that
the present value of all principal and interest Exceptions for pre-June 1997, contracts.must be capitalized, and you generally cannot
payments, produces an amount equal to the You can generally deduct the interest if the con-deduct personal interest.
principal amount of the loan. tract was issued before June 9, 1997, and theInterest paid with funds borrowed from origi-covered individual is someone other than annal lender. If you use the cash method ofExample. The facts are the same as in the employee, officer, or someone financially inter-accounting, you cannot deduct interest you payprevious example, except that you deduct the ested in your business. If the contract was pur-with funds borrowed from the original lenderOID on a constant yield basis over the term of chased before June 21, 1986, you can generallythrough a second loan, an advance, or any otherthe loan. The yield to maturity on your loan is deduct the interest no matter who is covered byarrangement similar to a loan. You can deduct10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2004, the contract.the interest expense once you start making pay-you can deduct $93 [($98,500 × .102467) − Interest allocated to unborrowed policyments on the new loan.$10,000]. For 2005, you can deduct $103 cash value. Corporations and partnershipsWhen you make a payment on the new loan,[($98,593 × .102467) − $10,000]. generally cannot deduct any interest expenseyou first apply the payment to interest and then
Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan or allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-to the principal. All amounts you apply to the
mortgage ends, you may be able to deduct any surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. Thisinterest on the first loan are deductible, along
remaining OID in the tax year in which the loan rule applies to contracts issued after June 8,with any interest you pay on the second loan,
or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may end 1997, that cover someone other than an officer,subject to any limits that apply.
due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure, director, employee, or 20% owner. For moreCapitalized interest.You cannot currentlyor similar event. information, see section 264(f) of the Internaldeduct interest you are required to capitalizeRevenue Code.If you refinance with the original lender,under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-
you generally cannot deduct the re-talization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy
maining OID in the year in which theCAUTION
!
property and pay interest owed by the seller (for
refinancing occurs, but you may be able to de-example, by assuming the debt and any interestCapitalizationduct it over the term of the new mortgage oraccrued on the property), you cannot deduct the
loan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed frominterest. Add this interest to the basis of theof Interestoriginal lender under Interest You Cannot De-property.
duct, later. Under the uniform capitalization rules, you gen-Commitment fees or standby charges.
erally must capitalize interest on debt equal toFees you incur to have business funds availablePoints. The term “points” is often used to de- your expenditures to produce real property oron a standby basis, but not for the actual use ofscribe some of the charges paid by a borrower certain tangible personal property. The propertythe funds, are not deductible as interest pay-when the borrower takes out a loan or a mort- must be produced by you for use in your trade orments. You may be able to deduct them asgage. These charges are also called loan origi- business or for sale to customers. You cannotbusiness expenses.nation fees, maximum loan charges, or premium capitalize interest related to property that youIf the funds are for inventory or certain prop-charges. If any of these charges (points) are acquire in any other manner.erty used in your business, the fees are indirectsolely for the use of money, they are interest. Interest you paid or incurred during the pro-costs and you generally must capitalize themBecause points are prepaid interest, you duction period must be capitalized if the propertyunder the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-cannot deduct the full amount in the year paid. produced is designated property. Designatedtalization of Interest, later.(For an exception for points paid on your home property is any of the following.mortgage, see Publication 936.) Instead, theInterest on income tax.Interest charged on
• Real property.points reduce the issue price of the loan and income tax assessed on your individual income
Chapter 5 Interest Page 19

Page 20 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Tangible personal property with a class lifePrepaid interest.You generally cannot de- • A loan in exchange for a note that requiresof 20 years or more. duct any interest paid before the year it is due.the payment of interest at the applicableInterest paid in advance can be deducted only in• Tangible personal property with an esti- federal rate.the tax year in which it is due.mated production period of more than 2 • An additional payment in an amount equalyears. Discounted loan.If interest or a discount isto the forgone interest.subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a• Tangible personal property with an esti- The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi-payment of interest and you cannot deduct itmated production period of more than 1 dend, contribution to capital, payment of com-when you get the loan. For more information,year if the estimated cost of production is pensation, or other payment, depending on thesee Original issue discount (OID) under Interestmore than $1 million. substance of the transaction.You Can Deduct, earlier.
For any period, forgone interest  is:Refunds of interest.If you pay interest andProperty you produce.You produce property
then receive a refund in the same tax year of anyif you construct, build, install, manufacture, de- 1. The interest that would be payable for that
part of the interest, reduce your interest deduc-velop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treat period if interest accrued on the loan at the
property produced for you under a contract astion by the refund. If you receive the refund in aapplicable federal rate and was payable
produced by you up to the amount you pay orlater tax year, include the refund in your incomeannually on December 31,
incur for the property. to the extent the deduction for the interest re-minus
duced your tax.Carrying charges. Carrying charges include 2. Any interest actually payable on the loan
taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or for the period.Accrual method. Under an accrual method,to carry, transport, or install personal property.you can deduct only interest that has accruedYou can choose to capitalize carrying charges Applicable federal rates are publishedduring the tax year.not subject to the uniform capitalization rules if by the IRS each month in the Internal
they are otherwise deductible. For more infor- Revenue Bulletin. Internal RevenuePrepaid interest.You generally cannot de-
TIP
mation, see chapter 8. Bulletins are available on the IRS web site atduct any interest paid before it is due. Instead,
www.irs.gov. You can also contact an IRS officededuct it in the year in which it is due.Capitalized interest.Treat capitalized inter- to get these rates.est as a cost of the property produced. YouDiscounted loan.If interest or a discount is
recover your interest when you sell or use thesubtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not aLoans subject to the rules.The rules forproperty. If the property is inventory, recoverpayment of interest and you cannot deduct itbelow-market loans apply to the following.capitalized interest through cost of goods sold. Ifwhen you get the loan. For more information,
the property is used in your trade or business,see Original issue discount (OID) under Interest 1. Gift loans (below-market loans where the
recover capitalized interest through an adjust-You Can Deduct, earlier. forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).
ment to basis, depreciation, amortization, or
Tax deficiency.If you contest a federal in-2. Compensation-related loans (below-mar-other method.
ket loans between an employer and ancome tax deficiency, interest does not accrue
Partnerships and S corporations.The inter- employee or between an independent con-until the tax year the final determination of liabil-
est capitalization rules are applied first at the tractor and a person for whom the contrac-ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency,
partnership or S corporation level. The rules are tor provides services).then the interest accrues in the year the tax was
then applied at the partners’ or shareholders’asserted and agreed to by you. 3. Corporation-shareholder loans.level to the extent the partnership or S corpora-However, if you contest but pay the pro-tion has insufficient debt to support the produc- 4. Tax avoidance loans (below-market loansposed tax deficiency and interest, and you dotion or construction costs. where the avoidance of federal tax is onenot designate the payment as a cash bond, thenIf you are a partner or a shareholder, you of the main purposes of the interest ar-the interest is deductible in the year paid.may have to capitalize interest you incur during rangement).
the tax year for the production costs of the part-Related person. If you use an accrual 5. Loans to qualified continuing care facilitiesnership or S corporation. You may also have tomethod, you cannot deduct interest owed to aunder a continuing care contract (made af-capitalize interest incurred by the partnership orrelated person who uses the cash method untilter October 11, 1985).S corporation for your own production costs. Topayment is made and the interest is includible in
properly capitalize interest under these rules, Except as noted in (5) above, these rulesthe gross income of that person. The relation-
you must be given the required information in an apply to demand loans (loans payable in full atship is determined as of the end of the tax year
attachment to the Schedule K-1 you receive any time upon the lender’s demand) outstandingfor which the interest would otherwise be de-
from the partnership or S corporation. after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans thatductible. If a deduction is denied under this rule,
are not demand loans) made after that date.the rule will continue to apply even if your rela-Additional information.The procedures for
tionship with the person ceases to exist beforeapplying the uniform capitalization rules are be- Treatment of gift and demand loans.If youthe interest is includible in the gross income ofyond the scope of this publication. For more receive a below-market gift loan or demandthat person. See Related Persons in Publicationinformation, see sections 1.263A-8 through loan, you are treated as receiving an additional538.1.263A-15 of the regulations and Notice 88-99. payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to the
Notice 88-99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988-2. forgone interest on the loan. You are then
treated as transferring this amount back to the
lender as interest. These transfers are consid-
Below-Market Loans ered to occur annually, generally on December
When To 31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade or
If you receive a below-market gift or demandbusiness, you can deduct the forgone interest
Deduct Interest loan and use the proceeds in your trade oreach year as a business interest expense. The
business, you may be able to deduct the forgonelender must report it as interest income.
If the uniform capitalization rules, discussedinterest. See Treatment of gift and demand Limit on forgone interest for gift loans ofunder Capitalization of Interest, earlier, do notloans later in this discussion. $100,000 or less.For gift loans between indi-apply to you, deduct interest as follows. A below-market loan is a loan on which noviduals, forgone interest treated as transferred
interest is charged or on which interest isCash method. Under the cash method, you back to the lender is limited to the borrower’s net
charged at a rate below the applicable federalcan generally deduct only the interest you actu- investment income for the year. This limit ap-
rate. A gift or demand loan that is a below-mar-ally paid during the tax year. You cannot deduct plies if the outstanding loans between the lender
ket loan generally is considered an arm’s-lengtha promissory note you gave as payment be- and borrower total $100,000 or less. If the
transaction in which you, the borrower, are con-cause it is a promise to pay and not an actual borrower’s net investment income is $1,000 or
sidered as having received both the following.payment. less, it is treated as zero. This limit does not
Page 20 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 21 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
apply to a loan if the avoidance of any federal tax d. Any reasons, other than taxes, for
is one of the main purposes of the interest ar- structuring the transaction as a
rangement. below-market loan. 6.
Treatment of term loans.If you receive a Exception for certain loans to a qualifiedbelow-market term loan other than a gift or de-continuing care facility.The below-marketmand loan, you are treated as receiving an addi- Taxesinterest rules do not apply to a loan made to ational cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on thequalified continuing care facility under a continu-date the loan is made. This payment is equal toing care contract if the lender (or lender’sthe loan amount minus the present value, at thespouse) is age 65 or older by the end of theIntroductionapplicable federal rate, of all payments duecalendar year. For 2004, this exception appliesunder the loan. The same amount is treated as You can deduct various federal, state, local, andonly to the part of the total outstanding loansoriginal issue discount on the loan. See Original foreign taxes directly attributable to your trade orfrom the lender (or lender’s spouse) that doesissue discount (OID) under Interest You Can business as business expenses.not exceed $154,500.Deduct, earlier. A qualified continuing care facility is one orYou cannot deduct federal incomemore facilities that are designed to provide serv-Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less.The taxes, estate and gift taxes, or stateices under continuing care contracts and whererules for below-market loans do not apply to any inheritance, legacy, and successionCAUTION
!
substantially all the residents have entered intoday on which the total outstanding loans be- taxes.continuing care contracts. In addition, substan-tween the borrower and lender is $10,000 ortially all the facilities used to provide servicesless. This exception applies only to the follow- Topicsrequired under the continuing care contracting. This chapter discusses:must be owned or operated by the loan bor-
rower.1. Gift loans between individuals if the loan is • When to deduct taxesA continuing care contract is a written con-not directly used to buy or carry
tract between an individual and a qualified con-income-producing assets. • Real estate taxes
tinuing care facility that meets all the following2. Compensation-related loans or • Income taxesconditions.corporation-shareholder loans if the avoid- • Employment taxesance of any federal tax is not a principal1. The individual and/or the individual’s
purpose of the interest arrangement. • Other taxesspouse must be entitled to use the facility
for the rest of their life or lives.This exception does not apply to a term loan
described in (2) above that was previously sub-2. The residential use must begin in a sepa-Useful Items
ject to the below-market loan rules. Those rulesrate, independent living unit provided byYou may want to see:
will continue to apply even if the outstandingthe continuing care facility and continue
balance is reduced to $10,000 or less. until the individual (or individual’s spouse)Publication
is incapable of living independently. The
Exceptions for loans without significant tax ❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guidefacility must provide various “personal
effect.The following loans are specifically ex-care” services to the resident such as ❏ 378 Fuel Tax Credits and Refundsempted from the rules for below-market loansmaintenance of the residential unit, meals,
because their interest arrangements do not ❏ 533 Self-Employment Taxand daily aid and supervision relating to
have a significant effect on the federal tax liabil-routine medical needs. ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsity of the borrower or the lender.
3. The facility must be obligated to provide❏ 551 Basis of Assets
long-term nursing care if the resident is no1. Loans made available by lenders to the
longer capable of living independently.general public on the same terms and con- Form (and Instructions)
ditions that are consistent with the lender’s4. The contract must require the facility to❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductionscustomary business practices. provide the “personal services” and
“long-term nursing care” without substan-❏ Sch SE (Form 1040)Self-Employment2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or
tial additional cost to the individual. Taxmunicipal government that are made avail-
able under a program of general applica- ❏ 3115 Application for Change inSale or exchange of property.Different rulestion to the public. Accounting Methodgenerally apply to a loan connected with the sale3. Certain employee-relocation loans. or exchange of property. If the loan does notSee chapter 14 for information about gettingprovide adequate stated interest, part of the4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person, publications and forms.principal payment may be considered interest.unless the interest income would be effec-
However, there are exceptions that may requiretively connected with the conduct of a U.S.
you to apply the below-market interest rate rulestrade or business and not exempt from
to these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi-U.S. tax under an income tax treaty. When Tonal Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537.5. Any other loan if the taxpayer can show
More information. For more information onthat the interest arrangement has no signif- Deduct Taxes
below-market loans, see section 7872 of theicant effect on the federal tax liability of the
Internal Revenue Code and section 1.7872-5TGenerally, you can only deduct taxes in the yearlender or the borrower. Whether an inter-
of the regulations. you pay them. This applies whether you use theest arrangement has a significant effect on
cash method or an accrual method of account-the federal tax liability of the lender or the
ing.borrower will be determined by all the facts
Under an accrual method, you can deduct aand circumstances. Consider all the follow-
tax before you pay it if you meet the exceptioning factors.
for recurring items discussed under Economic
a. Whether items of income and deduction Performance in Publication 538. You can also
generated by the loan offset each other. choose to ratably accrue real estate taxes as
discussed later under Real Estate Taxes.b. The amount of the items.
c. The cost of complying with the Limit on accrual of taxes.A taxing jurisdic-
below-market loan provisions if they tion can require the use of a date for accruing
were to apply. taxes that is earlier than the date it originally
Chapter 6 Taxes Page 21

Page 22 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
required. However, if you use an accrual crease the basis of your property by the amountExample. John Smith is a calendar year
method, and can deduct the tax before you pay of the assessment. taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His real
it, use the original accrual date for the year of estate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1,You can deduct taxes for these local benefits
change and all future years to determine when 2004, to June 30, 2005, are $1,200. July 1 is theonly if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, or
you can deduct the tax. assessment and lien date.interest charges related to those benefits. If part
If John chooses to ratably accrue the taxes,of the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest,
Example. Your state imposes a tax on per- $600 will accrue in 2004 ($1,200 ×
6/12, Julyyou must be able to show how much of the tax is
sonal property used in a trade or business con- 1–December 31) and the balance will accrue infor these expenses to claim a deduction for that
ducted in the state. This tax is assessed and 2005.part of the tax.
becomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). In Separate choices.You can choose to rata-2004, the state changed the assessment and Example. Waterfront City, to improve down-bly accrue the taxes for each separate trade orlien dates from July 1, 2005, to December 31,town commercial business, converted a down-business and for nonbusiness activities if you2004, for property tax year 2005. Use the origi-town business area street into an enclosedaccount for them separately. Once you choosenal accrual date (July 1, 2005) to determinepedestrian mall. The city assessed the full costto ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must usewhen you can deduct the tax. You must also useof construction, financed with 10-year bonds,that method unless you get permission from thethe July 1 accrual date for all future years toagainst the affected properties. The city is pay-IRS to change. See Form 3115, later.determine when you can deduct the tax. ing the principal and interest with the annual
Making the choice.If you choose to ratablypayments made by the property owners.
Uniform capitalization rules.Uniform capi- accrue the taxes for the first year in which youThe assessments for construction costs aretalization rules apply to certain taxpayers who incur real estate taxes, attach a statement tonot deductible as taxes or as business ex-produce real property or tangible personal prop- your income tax return for that year. The state-penses, but are depreciable capital expenses.erty for use in a trade or business or for sale to ment should show all the following items.The part of the payments used to pay the inter-customers. They also apply to taxpayers whoest charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes.• The trades or businesses to which theacquire property for resale. Under these rules, choice applies and the accounting methodyou either include certain costs in inventory orCharges for services.Water bills, sewerage, or methods used.capitalize certain expenses related to the prop-and other service charges assessed againsterty, such as taxes. For more information, see • The period to which the taxes relate.your business property are not real estate taxes,Publication 538. but are deductible as business expenses. • The computation of the real estate tax de-
duction for that first year.Carrying charges. Carrying charges includePurchase or sale of real estate.If real estatetaxes you pay to carry or develop real estate oris sold, the real estate taxes must be allocatedGenerally, you must file your return by the dueto carry, transport, or install personal property.between the buyer and the seller. date (including extensions). However, if youYou can choose to capitalize carrying charges
timely filed your return for the year withoutThe buyer and seller must allocate the realnot subject to the uniform capitalization rules if
choosing to ratably accrue, you can still makeestate taxes according to the number of days inthey are otherwise deductible. For more infor-
the choice by filing an amended return within 6the real property tax year (the period to whichmation, see chapter 8.
months after the due date of the return (exclud-the tax imposed relates) that each owned the
ing extensions). Attach the statement to theproperty. Treat the seller as paying the taxes upRefunds of taxes.If you receive a refund for
amended return and write “Filed pursuant toto but not including the date of sale. Treat theany taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in-
section 301.9100-2” on the statement. File thebuyer as paying the taxes beginning with theclude the refund in income to the extent the
amended return at the same address you fileddate of sale. You can usually find this informa-deduction reduced your federal income tax in
the original return.tion on the settlement statement you received atthe earlier year. For more information, see Re-
closing.covery of amount deducted (tax benefit rule) in Form 3115. If you choose to ratably accrue
chapter 1. If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes untilfor a year after the first year in which you incur
they are paid because you use the cash methodreal estate taxes or if you want to change yourYou must include in income any inter-and the buyer of your property is personallychoice to ratably accrue real estate taxes, fileest you receive on tax refunds. liable for the tax, you are considered to haveForm 3115. For more information, including ap-
TIP
paid your part of the tax at the time of the sale.plicable time frames for filing, see the instruc-
This permits you to deduct the part of the tax uptions for Form 3115.
to (but not including) the date of sale even
though you did not pay it. You must also include
the amount of that tax in the selling price of the
property.
Real Estate Taxes Income Taxes
If you (the seller) use an accrual method and
have not chosen to ratably accrue real estateDeductible real estate taxes are any state, local, This section discusses federal, state, local, and
taxes, you are considered to have accrued youror foreign taxes on real estate levied for the foreign income taxes.
part of the tax on the date you sell the property.general public welfare. The taxing authority
Federal income taxes. You cannot deductmust base the taxes on the assessed value of
federal income taxes.Example. Al Green, a calendar year accrualthe real estate and charge them uniformly
method taxpayer, owns real estate in Elmagainst all property under its jurisdiction. De- State and local income taxes.A corporationCounty. He has not chosen to ratably accrueductible real estate taxes generally do not in- or partnership can deduct state and local in-property taxes. November 30 of each year is theclude taxes charged for local benefits and come taxes imposed on the corporation or part-assessment and lien date for the current realimprovements that increase the value of the nership as business expenses. An individualproperty tax year, which is the calendar year. Heproperty. See Taxes for local benefits, later. can deduct state and local income taxes only assold the property on June 30, 2004. Under hisIf you use an accrual method, you generally an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Formaccounting method he would not be able tocannot accrue real estate taxes until you pay 1040).claim a deduction for the taxes because the salethem to the government authority. However, you However, an individual can deduct a stateoccurred before November 30. He is treated ascan choose to ratably accrue the taxes during tax on gross income (as distinguished from nethaving accrued his part of the tax, 181/366  (Janu-the year. See Choosing to ratably accrue, later. income) directly attributable to a trade or busi-ary 1–June 29), on June 30 and he can deduct itness as a business expense.for 2004.Taxes for local benefits.Generally, you can-
not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and Accrual of contested income taxes.If you
improvements that tend to increase the value ofChoosing to ratably accrue.If you use an use an accrual method, can deduct taxes before
your property. These include assessments for accrual method, you can choose to accrue real you pay them, and contest a state or local in-
streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, estate tax related to a definite period ratably come tax liability, a special rule applies. Under
and public parking facilities. You should in- over that period. this special rule, you must accrue and deduct
Page 22 Chapter 6 Taxes

Page 23 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any contested amount in the tax year in which
the liability is finally determined.
Other TaxesIf additional state or local income taxes for a 7.prior year are assessed in a later year, you canThe following are other taxes you can deduct ifdeduct the taxes in the year in which they wereyou incur them in the ordinary course of youroriginally imposed (the prior year) if the tax liabil-trade or business.ity is not contested. You cannot deduct them in Insurancethe year in which the liability is finally deter-
mined. Excise taxes.You can deduct as a business
expense all excise taxes that are ordinary andThe filing of an income tax return is not
Introductionnecessary expenses of carrying on your trade orconsidered a contest and, in the ab-
sence of an overt act of protest, youbusiness. However, see Fuel taxes, later. You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec-
TIP
can deduct the tax in the prior year. Also, you essary cost of insurance as a business expense
can deduct any additional taxes in the prior year if it is for your trade, business, or profession.Franchise taxes.You can deduct corporateif you do not show some affirmative evidence of However, you may have to capitalize certain
franchise taxes as a business expense.denial of the liability. insurance costs under the uniform capitalization
rules. For more information, see CapitalizedHowever, if you consistently deduct addi-
Premiums, later.tional assessments in the year they are paid orFuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel,finally determined (including those for whichand other motor fuels that you use in your busi-Topicsthere was no contest), you must continue to doness are usually included as part of the cost ofso. You cannot take a deduction in the earlier This chapter discusses:the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa-year unless you receive permission to changerate item.your method of accounting. For more informa- • Deductible premiums
tion on accounting methods, see When Can I You may be entitled to a credit or refund for• Nondeductible premiumsDeduct an Expense? in chapter 1. federal excise tax you paid on fuels used for
• Capitalized premiumscertain purposes. For more information, see
Foreign income taxes. Generally, you can Publication 378. • When to deduct premiumstake either a deduction or a credit for income
taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or a
Useful ItemsOccupational taxes. You can deduct as aU.S. possession. However, an individual cannot
take a deduction or credit for foreign incomebusiness expense an occupational tax chargedYou may want to see:
taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S.at a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of
Publicationtax under the foreign earned income exclusionworking or conducting a business in the locality.
or the foreign housing exclusion. For information
❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringeon these exclusions, see Publication 54, Tax BenefitsPersonal property tax.You can deduct anyGuide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens
tax imposed by a state or local government onAbroad. For information on the foreign tax credit, ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi- personal property used in your trade or busi-❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsviduals. ness.
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on aForm (and Instructions)
service or on the purchase or use of property asEmployment Taxes ❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Returnpart of the cost of the service or property. If the
service or the cost or use of the property is aIf you have employees, you must withhold vari- See chapter 14 for information about gettingdeductible business expense, you can deductous taxes from your employees’ pay. Most em- publications and forms.the tax as part of that service or cost. If theployers must withhold their employees’ share of
social security and Medicare taxes along withproperty is merchandise bought for resale, the
state and federal income taxes. You may alsosales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. If
need to pay certain employment taxes from yourthe property is depreciable, add the sales tax toDeductible Premiumsown funds. These include your share of socialthe basis for depreciation. For more information
security and Medicare taxes as an employer,on basis, see Publication 551. You generally can deduct premiums you pay foralong with unemployment taxes. the following kinds of insurance related to yourDo not deduct state and local salesYou should treat the taxes you withhold from trade or business. taxes imposed on the buyer that youyour employees’ pay as wages on your tax re- must collect and pay over to the stateCAUTION
!
turn. You can deduct the employment taxes you 1. Fire, storm, theft, accident, or similaror local government. Also, do not include thesemust pay from your own funds as taxes. losses.taxes in gross receipts or sales.
2. Credit insurance that covers losses fromExample. You pay your employee $18,000
business bad debts.a year. However, after you withhold various
Self-employment tax. You can deducttaxes, your employee receives $14,500. You 3. Group hospitalization and medical insur-one-half of your self-employment tax as a busi-also pay an additional $1,500 in employment ance for employees, including long-termness expense in figuring your adjusted grosstaxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as care insurance.
income. This deduction only affects your incomewages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay from
a. If a partnership pays accident andtax. It does not affect your net earnings fromyour own funds as taxes.
health insurance premiums for its part-self-employment or your self-employment tax.For more information on employment taxes,
ners, it generally can deduct them assee Publication 15 (Circular E). To deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, line guaranteed payments to partners.
30, the amount shown on the Deduction forUnemployment fund taxes. As an employer, b. If an S corporation pays accident andone-half of self-employment tax line of Scheduleyou may have to make payments to a state health insurance premiums for its 2%SE (Form 1040).unemployment compensation fund or to a state shareholder-employees, it generally can
For more information on self-employmentdisability benefit fund. Deduct these payments deduct them, but must also include
as taxes. tax, see Publication 533. them in the shareholder’s wages sub-
Chapter 7 Insurance Page 23

Page 24 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ject to federal income tax withholding. your partnership or S corporation paid them and• An individual who requires substantial su-
See Publication 15-B. you included the premium amounts in your pervision to be protected from threats to
gross income. Take the deduction on line 31 ofhealth and safety due to severe cognitive
4. Liability insurance. Form 1040. impairment.
5. Malpractice insurance that covers your The certification must have been made by aQualified long-term care insurance.Youpersonal liability for professional negli- licensed health care practitioner within the previ-can include premiums paid on a qualifiedgence resulting in injury or damage to pa- ous 12 months.long-term care insurance contract for you, yourtients or clients. spouse, or your dependents when figuring yourBenefits received.For information on ex-
deduction. But, for each person covered, you6. Workers’ compensation insurance set by cluding benefits you receive from a long-term
can include only the smaller of the followingstate law that covers any claims for bodily care contract from gross income, see Publica-
amounts.injuries or job-related diseases suffered by tion 525.
employees in your business, regardless of
1. The amount paid for that person. Other coverage. You cannot take the deduc-fault.
tion for any month you were eligible to partici-2. The amount shown below. (Use thea. If a partnership pays workers’ compen- pate in any employer (including your spouse’s)person’s age at the end of the year.)sation premiums for its partners, it gen- subsidized health plan at any time during that
erally can deduct them as guaranteed a. Age 40 or younger–$260 month. This rule is applied separately to plans
payments to partners. that provide long-term care insurance and plansb. Age 41 to 50–$490 that do not provide long-term care insurance.b. If an S corporation pays workers’ com-
c. Age 51 to 60–$980 However, any medical insurance payments notpensation premiums for its 2%
deductible on line 31 of Form 1040 can be in-shareholder-employees, it generally cand. Age 61 to 70–$2,600 cluded as medical expenses on Schedule Adeduct them, but must also include
e. Age 71 or older–$3,250 (Form 1040) if you itemize deductions.them in the shareholder’s wages.
Effect on itemized deductions.Subtract the7. Contributions to a state unemployment in-Qualified long-term care insurance con-health insurance deduction from your medicalsurance fund are deductible as taxes iftract.A qualified long-term care insuranceinsurance when figuring medical expenses onthey are considered taxes under state law.contract is an insurance contract that only pro-Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv-8. Overhead insurance that pays for business tions.ices. The contract must meet all the followingoverhead expenses you have during longrequirements.periods of disability caused by your injury Effect on self-employment tax.Do not sub-
or sickness. • It must be guaranteed renewable. tract the health insurance deduction when figur-
ing net earnings for your self-employment tax.9. Car and other vehicle insurance that cov-• It must provide that refunds, other than
ers vehicles used in your business for lia-refunds on the death of the insured orHow to figure the deduction.Generally, youbility, damages, and other losses. If youcomplete surrender or cancellation of thecan use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-operate a vehicle partly for personal use,contract, and dividends under the contracttions to figure your deduction. However, if any ofdeduct only the part of the insurance pre-may be used only to reduce future premi-the following apply, you must use the worksheetmium that applies to the business use of ums or increase future benefits. in this chapter.the vehicle. If you use the standard mile-
• It must not provide for a cash surrenderage rate to figure your car expenses, you • You had more than one source of incomevalue or other money that can be paid,cannot deduct any car insurance premi- subject to self-employment tax.assigned, pledged, or borrowed.ums.
• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ (re-• It generally must not pay or reimburse ex-10. Life insurance covering your officers and lating to foreign earned income).penses incurred for services or items thatemployees if you are not directly or indi-
would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-• You are using amounts paid for qualifiedrectly a beneficiary under the contract.
cept where Medicare is a secondary payer long-term care insurance to figure the de-
11. Business interruption insurance that paysor the contract makes per diem or other duction.
for lost profits if your business is shut downperiodic payments without regard to ex-If you are claiming the health coverage taxdue to a fire or other cause. penses. credit, complete Form 8885 before you figure
this deduction.Qualified long-term care services.Quali-Self-Employed Health fied long-term care services are: Health coverage tax credit.You may be
Insurance Deduction able to take this credit only if you were an eligible• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, al-peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-You may be able to deduct 100% of the amount ternative TAA recipient, or Pension Benefithabilitative services, andpaid for medical and dental insurance and quali- Guaranty Corporation pension recipient. Usefied long-term care insurance for you, your• Maintenance or personal care services.Form 8885, Health Coverage Tax Credit, to fig-spouse, and your dependents if you are one of ure the amount, if any, of your health insuranceThe services must be required by a chronically illthe following. credit.individual and prescribed by a licensed health• A self-employed individual with a net profit More than one health plan and business.care practitioner.reported on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F. If you have more than one health plan during theChronically ill individual.A chronically illyear and each plan is established under a differ-• A partner with net earnings from self-em-individual is a person who has been certified asent business, you must use separate work-ployment reported on Schedule K-1 (Formone of the following. sheets (Worksheet 7-A) to figure each plan’s net1065), box 14, code A.
earnings limit. Include the premium you paid• An individual who has been unable, due to• A shareholder owning more than 2% of under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa-loss of functional capacity for at least 90the outstanding stock of an S corporation rate worksheet and your net profit (or wages)days, to perform at least two activities ofwith wages from the corporation reported from that business on line 4 (or line 11). For adaily living without substantial assistanceon Form W-2. plan that provides long-term care insurance, thefrom another individual. Activities of daily
total of the amounts entered for each person onThe insurance plan must be established under living are eating, toileting, transferring
line 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than theyour business. You may be allowed this deduc- (general mobility), bathing, dressing, and
appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person.tion whether you paid the premiums yourself or continence.
Page 24 Chapter 7 Insurance

Page 25 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
policy owner is obligated to repay aWorksheet 7-A. Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction
loan from you using the proceeds of theWorksheet (Keep for your records.)
policy. A person has a financial interest
in your business if the person is an1.Enter total payments made during the year for health insurance owner or part owner of the business orcoverage established under your business for you, your spouse, and has lent money to the business.your dependents. (Do not include payments for any month you were
eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or your b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997,
spouse’s employer or any amount you claim on line 4 of Form 8885. you generally cannot deduct the premi-
Also, do not include payments for qualified long-term care insurance.)1. ums on any life insurance policy, en-
2.For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract, dowment contract, or annuity contract if
enter for each person covered the smaller of the following amounts. you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
a) Total payments made for that person during the year. ciary. The disallowance applies without
b) The amount shown below. (Use the person’s age at the end of regard to whom the policy covers.
the year.)
c. Partners. If, as a partner in a partner-$260—if that person is age 40 or younger
ship, you take out an insurance policy$490—if age 41 to 50 on your own life and name your part-$980—if age 51 to 60 ners as beneficiaries to induce them to$2,600—if age 61 to 70 retain their investments in the partner-$3,250—if age 71 or older ship, you are considered a beneficiary.(Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to You cannot deduct the insurance premi-participate in a long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your ums.or your spouse’s employer.) If more than one person is covered,
figure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then enter 4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take outthe total of those amounts........................... 2.
a policy on your life or on the life of an-3.Add the total of lines 1 and 2............................ 3.
other person with a financial interest in4.Enter your net profit* and any other earned income** from the trade or your business to get or protect a businessbusiness under which the insurance plan is established. (If the
loan, you cannot deduct the premiums asbusiness is an S corporation, skip to line 11.)................. 4.
a business expense. Nor can you deduct5.Enter the total of all net profits* from: line 31, Schedule C (Form
the premiums as interest on business1040); line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form
loans or as an expense of financing loans.1040); or box 14, code A, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065); plus any other
In the event of death, the proceeds of theincome allocable to the profitable businesses. See the instructions for
policy are not taxed as income even if theySchedule SE (Form 1040). (Do not include any net losses shown on
are used to liquidate the debt.these schedules.)................................... 5.
6.Divide line 4 by line 5................................. 6.
7.Multiply Form 1040, line 30 by the percentage on line 6.......... 7.
8.Subtract line 7 from line 4.............................. 8.
9.Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 32, attributable to the Capitalized Premiumssame trade or business in which the insurance plan is established . . .9.
10.Subtract line 9 from line 8.............................. 10. Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must11.Enter your wages from an S corporation in which you are a capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirectmore-than-2% shareholder and in which the insurance plan is costs for certain production or resale activities.established....................................... 11. Include these costs in the basis of property you12.Enter the amount from Form 2555, line 43, attributable to the amount produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-entered on line 4 or 11 above, or the amount from Form 2555-EZ, line ing them as a current deduction. You recover the18, attributable to the amount entered on line 11 above.......... 12.
costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost13.Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies........... 13.
of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise14.Compare the amounts on lines 3 and 13 above. Enter the smaller of dispose of the property.the two amounts here and on Form 1040, line 31. (Do not include
Indirect costs include premiums for insur-this amount when figuring a medical expense deduction on
ance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip-Schedule A (Form 1040).).............................. 14.
ment, materials, property produced, or property
* If you used either optional method to figure your net earnings from self-employment from any business,acquired for resale.
do not enter your net profit from the business. Instead, enter the amount attributable to that business
from Schedule SE, line 4b. Uniform capitalization rules.You may be* *Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property yousubject to the uniform capitalization rules if youcreated. It does not include capital gain income.
do any of the following, unless the property is
produced for your use other than in a business
or an activity carried on for profit.
2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre-
1. Produce real property or tangible personalmiums for a policy that pays for lost earn-Nondeductible property. For this purpose, tangible per-ings due to sickness or disability. However,
sonal property includes a film, sound re-see the discussion on overhead insurance,Premiums cording, video tape, book, or similaritem (8), under Deductible Premiums, ear-
property.lier.You cannot deduct premiums on the following
2. Acquire property for resale.3. Certain life insurance and annuities.kinds of insurance.
However, these rules do not apply to the follow-a. For contracts issued before June 9,1. Self-insurance reserve funds.  You cannot ing property.1997, you cannot deduct the premiumsdeduct amounts credited to a reserve set on a life insurance policy covering you,1. Personal property you acquire for resale ifup for self-insurance. This applies even ifan employee, or any person with a fi- your average annual gross receipts areyou cannot get business insurance cover- nancial interest in your business if you$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.age for certain business risks. However, are directly or indirectly a beneficiary of
your actual losses may be deductible. See 2. Property you produce if you meet either ofthe policy. You are included among
Publication 547. possible beneficiaries of the policy if the the following conditions.
Chapter 7 Insurance Page 25

Page 26 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Your indirect costs of producing the • Form 4626, Alternative Minimum Tax—
property are $200,000 or less. Corporations.
b. You use the cash method of accounting8. Topicsand do not account for inventories.
This chapter discusses:
More information. For more information on • Carrying chargesCosts Youthese rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in
• Research and experimental costsPublication 538 and the regulations under Inter-
nal Revenue Code section 263A. Can Deduct • Intangible drilling costs
• Exploration costs
or Capitalize • Development costs
When To Deduct • Circulation costs
Premiums • Environmental cleanup costsWhat’s New
• Business start-up and organizational costsYou can usually deduct insurance premiums in
Reforestation costs.You can choose to de-the tax year to which they apply. • Reforestation costsduct a limited amount of the reforestation costs
Cash method. If you use the cash method ofthat are paid or incurred after October 22, 2004.• Retired asset removal costsaccounting, you generally deduct insurance pre-See Reforestation Costs, later. • Barrier removal costsmiums in the tax year you actually paid them,
Start-up and organizational costs.You caneven if you incurred them in an earlier year.
choose to deduct up to $5,000 of businessHowever, see Prepayment, later. Useful Itemsstart-up and organizational costs paid or in-You may want to see:Accrual method. If you use an accrual curred after October 22, 2004. See Businessmethod of accounting, you cannot deduct insur-Start-Up Costs and Organizational Costs, later. Publicationance premiums before the tax year in which you
incur a liability for them. In addition, you cannot
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofdeduct insurance premiums before the tax year
Assetsin which you actually pay them (unless the ex-
Important Reminderception for recurring items applies). For more
Form (and Instructions)information about the accrual method of ac-
Qualified environmental cleanup (remedia-counting, see chapter 1. For information about ❏ 3468 Investment Credittion) costs.The deduction for qualified envi-the exception for recurring items, see Publica-
ronmental cleanup (remediation) costs include❏ 8826 Disabled Access Credittion 538.
costs you pay or incur before 2006. For morePrepayment. You cannot deduct expenses ininformation on the environmental cleanup costSee chapter 14 for information about gettingadvance, even if you pay them in advance. Thisdeduction, see Environmental Cleanup Costs, publications and forms.rule applies to any expense paid far enough inlater.advance to, in effect, create an asset with a
useful life extending substantially beyond the
end of the current tax year. Carrying ChargesExpenses such as insurance are generallyIntroductionallocable to a period of time. You can deduct Carrying charges include the taxes and interestinsurance expenses for the year to which theyThis chapter discusses costs you can choose toyou pay to carry or develop real property or toare allocable. deduct or capitalize. carry, transport, or install personal property.You generally deduct a cost as a currentCertain carrying charges must be capitalizedExample. In 2004, you signed a 3-year in-business expense by subtracting it from yourunder the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor-surance contract. Even though you paid the pre-income in either the year you incur it or the yearmation on capitalization of interest, see chaptermiums for 2004, 2005, and 2006 when you you pay it. 5.) You can choose to capitalize carryingsigned the contract, you can only deduct theIf you capitalize a cost, you may be able tocharges not subject to the uniform capitalizationpremium for 2004 on your 2004 tax return. Yourecover it over a period of years through periodicrules, but only if they are otherwise deductible.can deduct in 2005 and 2006 the premium allo-deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre-You can choose to capitalize carryingcable to those years. ciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it tocharges separately for each project you have
the basis of property to which it relates.Dividends received.If you receive dividends and for each type of carrying charge. For unim-
A partnership, corporation, estate, or trustfrom business insurance and you deducted the proved and unproductive real property, your
makes the choice to deduct or capitalize thepremiums in prior years, at least part of the choice is good for only 1 year. You must decide
costs discussed in this chapter except for explo-dividends generally are income. For more infor- whether to capitalize carrying charges each year
ration costs for mineral deposits. Each individualmation, see Recovery of amount deducted (tax the property remains unimproved and unpro-
partner, shareholder, or beneficiary choosesbenefit rule) in chapter 1 under How Much Can I ductive. For other real property, your choice to
whether to deduct or capitalize explorationDeduct? capitalize carrying charges remains in effect un-
costs. til construction or development is completed.
For personal property, your choice is effectiveYou may be subject to the alternative
until the date you install or first use it, whicheverminimum tax (AMT) if you deduct any
is later.of the expenses discussed in this chap-CAUTION
!
ter, other than carrying charges and the costs ofHow to make the choice.To make the choiceremoving architectural barriers and retired as-to capitalize a carrying charge, write a statementsets. saying which charges you choose to capitalize.For more information on the alternative mini-Attach it to your original tax return for the yearmum tax, see the instructions for one of thethe choice is to be effective. However, if youfollowing forms. timely filed your return for the year without mak-
ing the choice, you can still make the choice by
• Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—In-filing an amended return within 6 months of the
dividuals. due date of the return (excluding extensions).
Page 26 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 27 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IF you . . . THEN . . .Attach the statement to the amended return and
write “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2” onchoose to deduct research and deduct all research and experimental costs in thethe statement. File the amended return at theexperimental costs as a current first year you pay or incur the costs and all latersame address you filed the original return.business expense years.
do not deduct research and if you meet the requirements, amortize them over at
experimental costs as a current least 60 months, starting with the month you first
business expense receive an economic benefit from the research. SeeResearch and
Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 9.
Experimental Costs
The costs of research and experimentation areWhen and how to choose. You make the How to make the choice.  You choose to
generally capital expenses. However, you canchoice to deduct research and experimental deduct IDCs as a current business expense by
choose to deduct these costs as a current busi-costs by deducting them on your tax return for taking the deduction on your income tax return
ness expense. Your choice to deduct thesethe year in which you first pay or incur research for the first tax year you have eligible costs. No
costs is binding for the year it is made and for alland experimental costs. If you do not make the formal statement is required. If you file Schedule
later years unless you get IRS approval to makechoice to deduct research and experimental C (Form 1040), enter these costs under “Other
a change. costs in the first year in which you pay or incur expenses.”
If you meet certain requirements, you maythe costs, you can deduct the costs in a later For oil and gas wells, your choice is binding
choose to defer and amortize research and ex-year only with approval from the IRS. for the year it is made and for all later years. For
perimental costs. For information on choosing to geothermal wells, your choice can be revoked
defer and amortize these costs, see Research by the filing of an amended return on which youResearch credit.If you pay or incur qualified
and Experimental Costs in chapter 9. do not take the deduction. You can file theresearch expenses, you may be able to take the
amended return for the year up to the normalresearch credit. For more information about theResearch and experimental costs defined. time of expiration for filing a claim for credit orresearch credit, see the instructions to FormResearch and experimental costs are reasona- refund, generally, within 3 years after the date6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities.ble costs you incur in your trade or business for you filed the original return or within 2 years afteractivities intended to provide information that the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.would eliminate uncertainty about the develop-
ment or improvement of a product. Uncertainty Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells.
Intangibleexists if the information available to you does not If you capitalize the drilling and development
establish how to develop or improve a product or costs of geothermal wells that you place in serv-Drilling Coststhe appropriate design of a product. Whether ice during the tax year, you may be able to claim
costs qualify as research and experimental a business energy credit. See the instructionsThe costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermalcosts depends on the nature of the activity to for Form 3468 for more information.wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. Youwhich the costs relate rather than on the nature
can usually recover them through depreciationNonproductive well. If you capitalize yourof the product or improvement being developed
or depletion. However, you can choose to de-IDCs, you have another option if the well isor the level of technological advancement.
duct intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a currentnonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of theThe costs of obtaining a patent, including
business expense. These are certain drilling andnonproductive well as an ordinary loss. Youattorneys’ fees paid or incurred in making and
development costs for wells in the United Statesmust indicate and clearly state your choice onperfecting a patent application, are research and
in which you hold an operating or working inter-your tax return for the year the well is completed.experimental costs. However, costs paid or in-
est. You can deduct only costs for drilling orOnce made, the choice for oil and gas wells iscurred to obtain another’s patent are not re-
preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, orbinding for all later years. You can revoke yoursearch and experimental costs.
geothermal steam or hot water. choice for a geothermal well by filing anProduct. The term “product” includes any of amended return that does not claim the loss.You can choose to deduct only the costs ofthe following items. items with no salvage value. These includeCosts incurred outside the United States.wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re-• Formula. You cannot deduct as a current business ex-lated to drilling wells and preparing them for• Invention. pense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil,production. Your cost for any drilling or develop-gas, or geothermal well located outside thement work done by contractors under any form• Patent. United States. However, you can choose to in-of contract is also an IDC. However, see• Pilot model. clude the costs in the adjusted basis of the wellAmounts paid to contractor that must be capital-to figure depletion or depreciation. If you do notized, later.• Process. make this choice, you can deduct the costs overYou can also choose to deduct the cost of• Technique. the 10-year period beginning with the tax year indrilling exploratory bore holes to determine thewhich you paid or incurred them. These rules do• Property similar to the items listed above.location and delineation of offshore hydrocarbonnot apply to a nonproductive well.deposits if the shaft is capable of conductingIt also includes products used by you in yourhydrocarbons to the surface on completion. Ittrade or business or held for sale, lease, ordoes not matter whether there is any intent tolicense. produce hydrocarbons. Exploration CostsCosts not included.Research and experi- If you do not choose to deduct your IDCs as
mental costs do not include expenses for any ofa current business expense, you can choose toThe costs of determining the existence, location,the following activities. deduct them over the 60-month period begin-extent, or quality of any mineral deposit arening with the month they were paid or incurred.• Advertising or promotions. ordinarily capital expenditures if the costs lead
to the development of a mine. You recover these• Consumer surveys. Amounts paid to contractor that must be costs through depletion as the mineral is re-capitalized. Amounts paid to a contractor• Efficiency surveys. moved from the ground. However, you canmust be capitalized if they are either: choose to deduct domestic exploration costs• Management studies.
paid or incurred before the beginning of the• Amounts properly allocable to the cost of• Quality control testing. development stage of the mine (except those fordepreciable property, or
oil, gas, and geothermal wells).• Research in connection with literary, his-• Amounts paid only out of production ortorical, or similar projects. proceeds from production if these How to make the choice.You choose to de-
• The acquisition of another’s patent, model, amounts are depletable income to the re- duct exploration costs by taking the deduction
production, or process. cipient. on your income tax return, or on an amended
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or CapitalizePage 27

Page 28 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income tax return, for the first tax year for which Under these circumstances, you generally
you wish to deduct the costs paid or incurredtreat as ordinary income all of your gain if it isCirculation Costs
during the tax year. Your return must adequatelyless than your adjusted exploration costs with
describe and identify each property or mine, andrespect to the mine. If your gain is more thanA publisher can deduct as a current business
clearly state how much is being deducted foryour adjusted exploration costs, treat as ordi-expense the costs of establishing, maintaining,
each one. The choice applies to the tax year younary income only a part of your gain, up to theor increasing the circulation of a newspaper,
make this choice and all later tax years.amount of your adjusted exploration costs.magazine, or other periodical. For example, a
publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extraPartnerships. Each partner, not the part-
employees for a limited time to get new sub-Foreign exploration costs.If you pay or incurnership, chooses whether to capitalize or to de-
scriptions through telephone calls. Circulationexploration costs for a mine or other naturalduct that partner’s share of exploration costs.
costs are deductible even if they normally woulddeposit located outside the United States, you
Reduced corporate deductions for explora- be capitalized.cannot deduct all the costs in the current year.
tion costs. A corporation (other than an S This rule does not apply to the followingYou can choose to include the costs (other than
corporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes- costs that must be capitalized.for an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the ad-
tic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re-justed basis of the mineral property to figure cost• The purchase of land or depreciable prop-maining 30% of costs and amortize them overdepletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chap-erty.the 60-month period starting with the month theter 10.) If you do not make this choice, you mustexploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpo- • The acquisition of circulation through thededuct the costs over the 10-year period begin-ration may also elect to capitalize and amortize purchase of any part of the business ofning with the tax year in which you pay or incurmining exploration costs over a 10-year period. another publisher of a newspaper, maga-them. These rules also apply to foreign develop-For more information on this method of amorti- zine, or other periodical, including thement costs.zation, see Internal Revenue Code section purchase of another publisher’s list of sub-
59(e). scribers.
The 30% the corporation capitalizes cannot
be added to its basis in the property to figure Other treatment of circulation costs.If youDevelopment Costscost depletion. However, the amount amortized do not want to deduct circulation costs as ais treated as additional depreciation and is sub- current business expense, you can choose oneYou can deduct costs paid or incurred during theject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo- of the following ways to recover these costs.tax year for developing a mine or any othersition of the property. See Section 1250
natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well)Property under Depreciation Recapture in chap- • Capitalize all circulation costs that are
located in the United States. These costs mustter 3 of Publication 544. properly chargeable to a capital account.
be paid or incurred after the discovery of ores orThese rules also apply to the deduction of • Amortize circulation costs over the 3-yearminerals in commercially marketable quantities.development costs by corporations. See Devel- period beginning with the tax year theyDevelopment costs include those incurred foropment Costs, later. were paid or incurred.you by a contractor. Also, development costs
Recapture of exploration expenses.When include depreciation on improvements used in
your mine reaches the producing stage, youthe development of ores or minerals. They doHow to make the choice.You choose to capi-must recapture any exploration costs you chosenot include costs for the acquisition or improve-talize circulation costs by attaching a statementto deduct. Use either of the following methods.ment of depreciable property. to your return for the first tax year the choice
applies. Your choice is binding for the year it isInstead of deducting development costs inMethod 1—Include the deducted costs in made and for all later years, unless you get IRSthe year paid or incurred, you can choose togross income for the tax year the mine reaches approval to revoke it.treat them as deferred expenses and deductthe producing stage. Your choice must be
them ratably as the units of produced ores orclearly indicated on the return. Increase your
minerals benefited by the expenses are sold.adjusted basis in the mine by the amount in-
This choice applies each tax year to expensescluded in income. Generally, you must choose
Environmental Cleanuppaid or incurred in that year. Once made, thethis recapture method by the due date (includ-
choice is binding for the year and cannot being extensions) of your return. However, if you
Costsrevoked for any reason.timely filed your return for the year without
making the choice, you can still make the Environmental cleanup (remediation) costs arechoice by filing an amended return within 6How to make the choice. The choice to de-generally capital expenditures. However, youmonths of the due date of the return (excludingduct development costs ratably as the ores orcan choose to deduct these costs as a currentextensions). Make the choice on your minerals are sold must be made for each minebusiness expense if certain requirements (dis-amended return and write “Filed pursuant toor other natural deposit by a clear indication oncussed later) are met. This special tax treatmentsection 301.9100-2” on the form where you areyour return or by a statement filed with the IRSis generally available for qualified environmentalincluding the income. File the amended returnoffice where you file your return. Generally, youcleanup costs you pay or incur before January 1,at the same address you filed the original re-must make the choice by the due date of the2006.turn. return (including extensions). However, if you
timely filed your return for the year without mak-Method 2—Do not claim any depletion deduc- Qualified environmental cleanup costs.ing the choice, you can still make the choice bytion for the tax year the mine reaches the pro- Qualified environmental cleanup costs are gen-filing an amended return within 6 months of theducing stage and any later tax years until the erally costs you pay or incur to abate or controldue date of the return (excluding extensions).depletion you would have deducted equals the hazardous substances at a qualified contami-Clearly indicate the choice on your amendedexploration costs you deducted. nated site.return and write “Filed pursuant to section
Hazardous substance. Hazardous sub-301.9100-2.” File the amended return at theYou also must recapture deducted explora- stances are defined in section 101(14) of thesame address you filed the original return.tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty from Comprehensive Environmental Response,mine property before it reaches the producing Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 andForeign development costs. The rules dis-stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction for certain substances are designated as hazard-cussed earlier for foreign exploration costs applythe tax year you receive the bonus or royalty and ous in section 102 of the Act. Substances areto foreign development costs.any later tax years, until the depletion you would not hazardous if a removal or remedial action ishave deducted equals the exploration costs you prohibited under sections 104 and 104(a)(3) ofReduced corporate deductions for develop-deducted. the Act.ment costs. The rules discussed earlier forGenerally, if you dispose of the mine before
reduced corporate deductions for explorationyou have fully recaptured the exploration costs Qualified contaminated site.A qualified
costs also apply to corporate deductions for de-you deducted, recapture the balance by treating contaminated site is any area that meets both of
velopment costs.all or part of your gain as ordinary income. the following requirements.
Page 28 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 29 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More information. For more information of removing the retired asset. However, if you
1. You hold it for use in a trade or business,about the environmental cleanup cost deduc- replace a component (part) of a depreciable
for the production of income, or as inven-tion, see Internal Revenue Code section 198. asset, capitalize the removal costs if the re-
tory. placement is an improvement and deduct the
costs if the replacement is a repair.2. There has been a release, threat of re-
lease, or disposal of any hazardous sub-
Business Start-Up andstance at or on the site.
You must get a statement from the designatedOrganizational Costs Barrier Removal Costsstate environmental agency that the site meets
requirement (2). Business start-up and organizational costs areThe cost of an improvement to a business asset
A site is not eligible if it is on, or proposed for,generally capital expenditures. Costs paid oris normally a capital expense. However, you can
the national priorities list under sectionincurred before October 23, 2004, must be capi-choose to deduct the costs of making a facility or
105(a)(8)(B) of the Comprehensive Environ-talized unless an election is made to amortizepublic transportation vehicle more accessible to
mental Response, Compensation, and Liabilitythem. You can choose to deduct up to $5,000 ofand usable by those who are disabled or elderly.
Act of 1980. To find out if a site is on the nationalbusiness start-up and $5,000 of organizationalYou must own or lease the facility or vehicle for
priorities list, contact the U.S. Environmentalcosts, paid or incurred after October 22, 2004,use in connection with your trade or business.
Protection Agency. as a current business expense. The $5,000 de-A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc-
duction is reduced by the amount your totaltures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, orExpenditures for depreciable property. start-up or organizational costs exceed $50,000.similar real or personal property. A public trans-You cannot deduct the cost of acquiring depre-Any remaining costs must be amortized. Forportation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus orciable property used in connection with theinformation about amortizing start-up and orga-railroad car, that provides transportation serviceabatement or control of hazardous substancesnizational costs, see chapter 9. to the public (including service for your custom-at a qualified contaminated site. However, theStart-up costs include any amounts paid orers, even if you are not in the business of provid-part of the depreciation for such property that isincurred in connection with creating an activeing transportation services).otherwise allocated to the qualified contami-trade or business or investigating the creation orYou cannot deduct any costs that you paid ornated site shall be treated as a qualified environ-acquisition of an active trade or business. Orga-incurred to completely renovate or build a facilitymental cleanup cost. nizational costs include the costs of creating aor public transportation vehicle or to replace
corporation. For more information on start-updepreciable property in the normal course ofWhen and how to choose. You choose to and organizational costs, see chapter 9. business.deduct environmental cleanup costs by taking
the deduction on the income tax return (filed by Deduction limit.The most you can deduct asHow to make the choice.  You choose tothe due date including extensions) for the tax- a cost of removing barriers to the disabled anddeduct the start-up or organizational costs byable year in which the costs are paid or incurred. the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However,claiming the deduction on the income tax returnThe costs are deducted differently depending on you can add any costs over this limit to the basis(filed by the due date including extensions) forthe type of business entity involved. of the property and depreciate these excessthe taxable year in which the active trade or
costs.business begins.Individuals. Deduct the environmental
cleanup costs on the “Other Expenses” line of Partners and partnerships. The $15,000Schedule C, E, or F (Form 1040). If the schedule limit applies to a partnership and also to eachrequires you to separately identify each expense partner in the partnership. A partner can allocateincluded in “Other Expenses” write “Section 198Reforestation Costs the $15,000 limit in any manner among theElection” on the line next to the environmental partner’s individually incurred costs and thecleanup costs. Reforestation costs paid or incurred before Oc- partner’s distributive share of partnership costs.tober 23, 2004, must be capitalized unless anIf the partner cannot deduct the entire share ofAll other entities.All other taxpayers (in-election is made to amortize them. You canpartnership costs, the partnership can add anycluding S corporations, partnerships, and trusts)choose to deduct up to $10,000 of qualifyingcosts not deducted to the basis of the improveddeduct the environmental cleanup costs on thereforestation costs paid or incurred after Octo-property.“Other Deductions” line of the appropriate fed-ber 22, 2004 for each qualified timber property.A partnership must be able to show that anyeral income tax return. On a schedule attachedThe remaining costs can be amortized over anamount added to basis was not deducted by theto the return that separately identifies each ex-84-month period. See chapter 9 for more infor-partner and that it was over a partner’s $15,000pense included in “Other Deductions” writemation on amortization of reforestation costs.limit (as determined by the partner). If the part-“Section 198 Election” on the line next to the Qualifying reforestation costs are the directnership cannot show this, it is presumed that theamount for environmental cleanup costs. costs of planting or seeding for forestation orpartner was able to deduct the distributive shareMore than one environmental cleanup reforestation. Qualified timber property is prop-of the partnership’s costs in full.cost. If, for any taxable year, you pay or incurerty that contains trees in significant commercial
more than one environmental cleanup cost, youquantities. See chapter 9 for more informationExample. John Duke’s distributive share ofcan choose to deduct one or more of such ex-on qualifying reforestation costs and qualifiedABC partnership’s deductible expenses for thependitures for that year. You can choose totimber property. removal of architectural barriers was $14,000.deduct one expenditure and choose to capitalize John had $12,000 of similar expenses in his soleHow to make the choice.You choose to de-another expenditure (whether or not they are of proprietorship. He chose to deduct $7,000 ofduct qualifying reforestation costs by claimingthe same type or paid or incurred with respect to them. John allocated the remaining $8,000 ofthe deduction on your timely filed income taxthe same qualified contaminated site). A choice the $15,000 limit to his share of ABC’s ex-return (including extensions) for the tax year theto deduct an expenditure for one year has no penses. John can add the excess $5,000 of hisexpenses were paid or incurred.effect on other years. You must make a separate own expenses to the basis of the property usedFor additional information on reforestationchoice for each year in which you intend to in his business. Also, if ABC can show that Johncosts, see chapter 9.deduct qualified environmental cleanup costs. could not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 – $8,000) of
his share of the partnership’s expenses becauseRecapture. This deduction may have to be of how John applied the limit, ABC can addrecaptured as ordinary income under section $6,000 to the basis of its property.1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of theRetired Asset Removal
property that would have received an addition to Qualification standards.You can deduct
basis if you had not chosen to deduct the expen- your costs as a current expense only if the bar-Costs
diture. For more information on recapturing the rier removal meets the guidelines and require-
deduction, see Depreciation and amortizationIf you retire and remove a depreciable asset inments issued by the Architectural and
under Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub- connection with the installation or production ofTransportation Barriers Compliance Board
lication 544. a replacement asset, you can deduct the costs under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or CapitalizePage 29

Page 30 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of 1990. You can view the Act at www.usdoj.gov/ $15,000 limit. If you make this choice, you must ever, this chapter does not discuss amortization
crt/ada/pubs/ada.txt. maintain adequate records to support your de- of bond premium. For information on that topic,
duction. The following is a list of some architectural see chapter 3 of Publication 550.
For your choice to be valid, you generallybarrier removal costs that can be deducted.
must file your return by its due date, includingTopics• Ground and floor surfaces. extensions. However, if you timely filed yourThis chapter discusses:return for the year without making the choice,• Walks.
you can still make the choice by filing an • Deducting amortization• Parking lots. amended return within 6 months of the due date
of the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi-• Amortizing costs of going into business• Ramps.
cate the choice on your amended return and • Amortizing costs of getting a lease• Entrances. write “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2.” File
the amended return at the same address you • Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles• Doors and doorways.
filed the original return. Your choice is irrevoca-• Amortizing reforestation costs• Stairs. ble after the due date, including extensions, of
• Amortizing costs of pollution control facili-your return.• Floors.
ties• Toilet rooms. Disabled access credit.If you make your
• Amortizing costs of research and experi-business accessible to persons with disabilities• Drinking fountains. mentationand your business is an eligible small business,
• Telephones. you may be able to claim the disabled access
credit. If you choose to claim the credit, you must• Elevators. Useful Itemsreduce the amount you deduct or capitalize by
You may want to see:• Controls. the amount of the credit.
For more information about the disabled ac-• Signage. Publicationcess credit, see Form 8826.
• Alarms. ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
• Protruding objects. Assets
• Symbols of accessibility. ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
You can find the ADA guidelines and require- ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
ments for architectural barrier removal at9.www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/reg3a.html. Form (and Instructions)
The following is a list of some deductible ❏ 3468 Investment Credittransportation barrier removal costs.
Amortization ❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization• Rail facilities.
❏ 4626 Alternative Minimum Tax —• Buses. Corporations
What’s New• Rapid and light rail vehicles. ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—
IndividualsYou can find the guidelines and requirements forStart-up and organizational costs.You cantransportation barrier removal at elect to deduct a limited amount of start-up andSee chapter 14 for information about gettingwww.fta.dot.gov/14534_5608_ENG_HTML.htm organizational costs paid or incurred after Octo-publications and forms.ber 22, 2004. The remaining costs can be amor- Also, you can access the ADA website at
tized ratably over a 180-month period. Seewww.ada.gov for additional information.
Going Into Business, later.Other barrier removals.To be deductible,
expenses of removing any barrier not coveredSports franchise acquisitions.Intangible How To Deductby the above standards must meet all three ofassets acquired after October 22, 2004, in con-
the following tests. nection with acquiring a professional sportsAmortizationfranchise (including player contracts) can be
1. The removed barrier must be a substantialamortized ratably over a 15-year period. SeeYou deduct amortization that begins during thebarrier to access or use of a facility orSection 197 Intangibles, later. current year by completing Part VI of Form 4562public transportation vehicle by persons
and attaching it to your current year’s return.who have a disability or are elderly.Safe harbor for creative property costs.
You may be able to amortize certain creativeFor a later year, do not report your deduction2. The removed barrier must have been a property costs ratably over a 15-year period.for amortization on Form 4562 unless you beginbarrier for at least one major group of per-See Safe Harbor for Creative Property Costs,to amortize a different amortizable item in thatsons who have a disability or are elderlylater. year. In that case, list on the Form 4562 not only(such as people who are blind, deaf, or
the item you are beginning to amortize in thewheelchair users). Reforestation costs.You can elect to deductlater year, but any items you had previouslya limited amount of reforestation costs paid or3. The barrier must be removed without cre- begun to amortize and are still amortizing. Forincurred after October 22, 2004. The remainingating any new barrier that significantly im- example, you began amortizing one lease incosts can be amortized over an 84-month pe-pairs access to or use of the facility or 2003, and a second lease in 2004. You wouldriod. See Reforestation Costs, later.vehicle by a major group of persons who show the second lease on line 42 of the 2004have a disability or are elderly. Form 4562, and the first on line 43.
If you do not have to report amortization onHow to make the choice. If you choose to Introduction Form 4562 for years after the year the amortiza-deduct your costs for removing barriers to the
tion begins, deduct amortization directly on thedisabled or the elderly, claim the deduction on Amortization is a method of recovering (deduct-
“Other expenses” line of Schedule C or F (Formyour income tax return (partnership return for ing) certain capital costs over a fixed period of
1040) or the “Other deductions” line of Formpartnerships) for the tax year the expenses were time. It is similar to the straight line method of
1065, 1120, 1120-A, or 1120-S. However, if youpaid or incurred. Identify the deduction as a depreciation.
are amortizing reforestation costs, see Where toseparate item. The choice applies to all the qual- The various amortizable costs covered in
report under Reforestation Costs, later.ifying costs you have during the year, up to the this chapter are included in the list below. How-
Page 30 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 31 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Purchasing an active trade or business. Nonqualifying costs.The following costs are
Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-not organizational costs. They are capital ex-Going Into Business tive trade or business include only investigativepenses that you cannot amortize.
costs incurred in the course of a general searchWhen you go into business, treat all costs you • Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-for or preliminary investigation of the business.incur to get your business started as capital curities, such as commissions, profes-These are the costs that help you decideexpenses. Capital expenses are part of your sional fees, and printing costs.whether to purchase a new business and whichbasis in the business. Generally, you recoveractive business to purchase. Costs you incur in• Costs associated with the transfer of as-costs for particular assets through depreciationan attempt to purchase a specific business aresets to the corporation.deductions. You generally cannot recover othercapital expenses that you cannot amortize.costs until you sell the business or otherwise go
out of business. Example. In June, you hired an accountingCosts of OrganizingHowever, you can elect to amortize certainfirm and a law firm to assist you in the potentiala Partnershipcosts for setting up and organizing your busi-purchase of XYZ. They researched XYZ’s indus-
ness. The amortization period starts with thetry and analyzed the financial projections ofThe costs of organizing a partnership are themonth your active trade or business begins.XYZ. In September, the law firm prepared anddirect costs of creating the partnership.For costs paid or incurred before October 23,submitted a letter of intent to XYZ. The letter
2004, you can elect an amortization period of 60stated that a binding commitment would resultQualifying costs.You can amortize an orga-months or more. For costs paid or incurred afteronly after a purchase agreement was signed.nizational cost only if it meets all the followingOctober 22, 2004, you can elect to deduct aThe law firm and accounting firm continued totests.limited amount of start-up and organizationalprovide services including a review of XYZ’s
costs (see chapter 8). The costs that are notbooks and records and the preparation of a • It is for the creation of the partnership and
deducted currently can be amortized ratablypurchase agreement. In October, you signed anot for starting or operating the partner-over a 180-month period. purchase agreement with XYZ. ship trade or business.
The cost must qualify as one of the following.The costs to investigate the business before• It is chargeable to a capital account.submitting the letter of intent to XYZ are amortiz-• A business start-up cost. able investigative costs. The costs for services• It could be amortized over the life of the
after that time relate to the attempt to purchase• An organizational cost for a corporation. partnership if the partnership had a fixed
the business and must be capitalized. life.• An organizational cost for a partnership.
• It is incurred by the due date of the part-Disposition of business.If you completely nership return (excluding extensions) fordispose of your business before the end of theBusiness Start-Up Costs the first tax year in which the partnershipamortization period, you can deduct any remain-is in business. However, if the partnershipStart-up costs are costs for creating an activeing deferred start-up costs. However, you can
uses the cash method of accounting andtrade or business or investigating the creation ordeduct these deferred start-up costs only to the
pays the cost after the end of its first taxacquisition of an active trade or business.extent they qualify as a loss from a business.
year, see Cash method partnership underStart-up costs include any amounts paid or in-
How To Amortize, later.curred in connection with any activity engaged inCosts of Organizing
for profit and for the production of income in • It is for a type of item normally expected toa Corporationanticipation of the activity becoming an active benefit the partnership throughout its en-trade or business. The costs of organizing a corporation are thetire life.
direct costs of creating the corporation.
Qualifying costs.A start-up cost is amortiz- Organizational costs include the following
able if it meets both the following tests. fees.Qualifying costs.You can amortize an orga-
nizational cost only if it meets all the following• It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or • Legal fees for services incident to the or-tests.incurred it to operate an existing active ganization of the partnership, such as ne-
trade or business (in the same field as the gotiation and preparation of the• It is for the creation of the corporation.one you entered into). partnership agreement.• It is chargeable to a capital account.• It is a cost you pay or incur before the day • Accounting fees for services incident to• It could be amortized over the life of theyour active trade or business begins. the organization of the partnership.corporation if the corporation had a fixed
life. • Filing fees.Start-up costs include costs for the following
items. • It is incurred before the end of the first tax
Nonqualifying costs. The following costsyear in which the corporation is in busi-• An analysis or survey of potential markets,
ness. A corporation using the cash cannot be amortized.products, labor supply, transportation facil-
method of accounting can amortize orga-ities, etc. • The cost of acquiring assets for the part-nizational costs incurred within the first tax
nership or transferring assets to the part-• Advertisements for the opening of the year, even if it does not pay them in that
nership.business. year.
• The cost of admitting or removing part-• Salaries and wages for employees who
The following are examples of organizationalare being trained and their instructors. ners, other than at the time the partnership
costs. is first organized.• Travel and other necessary costs for se-
• The cost of temporary directors.curing prospective distributors, suppliers, • The cost of making a contract concerning
or customers. the operation of the partnership trade or• The cost of organizational meetings.
business (including a contract between a• Salaries and fees for executives and con-• State incorporation fees. partner and the partnership).sultants, or for similar professional serv-
• The cost of accounting services for settingices. • The costs for issuing and marketing inter-
up the corporation. ests in the partnership (such as broker-
age, registration, and legal fees andNonqualifying costs.Start-up costs do not • The cost of legal services (such as draft-
printing costs). These “syndication fees”include deductible interest, taxes, or research ing the charter, bylaws, terms of the origi-
are capital expenses that cannot be de-and experimental costs. See Research and Ex- nal stock certificates, and minutes of
preciated or amortized.perimental Costs, later. organizational meetings).
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 31

Page 32 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Liquidation of partnership.If a partnership is• A description of each start-up cost in- line of your tax return if you are not otherwise
liquidated before the end of the amortization curred. required to file Form 4562.
period, the unamortized amount of qualifying For more information on the costs of getting
• The month your active business began (ororganizational costs can be deducted in the a lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease inwas acquired).partnership’s final tax year. However, these chapter 4.
• The number of months in your amortiza-costs can be deducted only to the extent they
tion period.qualify as a loss from a business.
Filing the statement early.You can elect Section 197 IntangiblesHow To Amortize
to amortize your start-up costs by filing the state-
ment with a return for any tax year before theYou deduct start-up and organizational costs in You must generally amortize over 15 years the
year your active business begins. If you file theequal amounts over the applicable amortization capitalized costs of “section 197 intangibles” you
statement early, the election becomes effectiveperiod (discussed earlier). You can choose an acquired after August 10, 1993. You must amor-
in the month of the tax year your active businessamortization period for start-up costs that is dif- tize these costs if you hold the section 197
begins.ferent from the period you choose for organiza- intangibles in connection with your trade or busi-
tional costs, as long as both are not less than the ness or in an activity engaged in for the produc-Revised statement. You can file a revisedapplicable amortization period. Once you tion of income.statement to include any start-up costs not in-choose an amortization period, you cannotcluded in your original statement. However, you You may not be able to amortize sec-change it. cannot include on the revised statement any tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans-To figure your deduction, divide your totalcost you previously treated on your return as a action that did not result in a significantCAUTION
!
start-up or organizational costs by the months incost other than a start-up cost. You can file thechange in ownership or use. See Anti-Churningthe amortization period. The result is the amountrevised statement with a return filed after theRules, later.you can deduct for each month. return on which you elected to amortize yourYour amortization deduction each year is thestart-up costs. applicable part of the intangible’s adjusted basisCash method partnership.A partnership us-
(for purposes of determining gain), figured bying the cash method of accounting cannot de-Organizational costs election statement.If amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months).duct an organizational cost it has not paid by theyou elect to amortize your corporation’s orThe 15-year period begins with the later of:end of the tax year. However, any cost the part-partnership’s organizational costs, attach a sep-
nership could have deducted as an organiza-arate statement that contains the following infor-• The month the intangible is acquired, or
tional cost in an earlier tax year (if it had beenmation. • The month the trade or business or activitypaid that year) can be deducted in the tax year of
• A description of each cost. engaged in for the production of incomepayment.
begins.• The amount of each cost.
You cannot deduct amortization for the month• The date each cost was incurred.How To Make the Election you dispose of the intangible.
• The month your corporation or partnershipIf you pay or incur an amount that increasesTo elect to amortize start-up or organizationalbegan active business (or acquired thethe basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi-costs, you must complete and attach Form 4562business). ble after the 15-year period begins, amortize itand an accompanying statement (explained
• The number of months in your amortiza-over the remainder of the 15-year period begin-later) to your return for the first tax year you are
tion period. ning with the month the basis increase occurs.in business. If you have both start-up and orga-
You are not allowed any other depreciationnizational costs, attach a separate statement to
Partnerships. The statement prepared foror amortization deduction for an amortizableyour return for each type of cost.
a cash basis partnership must also indicate thesection 197 intangible.Generally, you must file the return by the due
amount paid before the end of the year for eachdate (including any extensions). However, if you Tax-exempt use property subject to a lease.cost.timely filed your return for the year without mak- For leases after October 22, 2004, the amortiza-You do not need to separately list any part-ing the election, you can still make the election tion period for any section 197 intangible that isnership organizational cost that is less than $10.by filing an amended return within 6 months of tax-exempt use property (as defined in sectionInstead, you can list the total amount of thesethe due date of the return (excluding exten- 168(h) of the Internal Revenue Code) shall notcosts with the dates the first and last costs weresions). For more information, see the instruc- be less than 125 percent of the lease term.incurred.tions for Part VI of Form 4562.
After a partnership makes the election toCost attributable to other property.TheOnce you make the election to amortizeamortize organizational costs, it can later file anrules for section 197 intangibles do not apply tostart-up or organizational costs, you cannot re-amended return to include additional organiza-any amount that is included in determining thevoke it.
tional costs not included in the partnership’scost of property that is not a section 197 intangi-If your business is organized as a corpora-original return and statement. ble. For example, if the cost of computertion or partnership, only your corporation or part- software is not separately stated from the cost ofnership can elect to amortize its start-up or hardware or other tangible property and youorganizational costs. A shareholder or partner consistently treat it as part of the cost of thecannot make this election. You, as shareholder hardware or other tangible property, these rulesGetting a Leaseor partner, cannot amortize any costs you incur do not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac-in setting up your corporation or partnership. quiring real property held for the production ofIf you get a lease for business property, youThe corporation or partnership can amortize rental income is considered the cost of goodwill,recover the cost by amortizing it over the term ofthese costs. going concern value, or any other section 197the lease. The term of the lease for amortizationHowever, you, as an individual, can elect to intangible.purposes generally includes all renewal optionsamortize costs you incur to investigate an inter-(and any other period for which you and theest in an existing partnership. These costs qual-lessor reasonably expect the lease to be re-Section 197ify as business start-up costs if you acquire thenewed). However, renewal periods are not in-partnership interest. Intangibles Definedcluded if 75% or more of the cost of getting the
lease is for the term of the lease remaining onThe following assets are section 197 in-Start-up costs election statement.If you the acquisition date (not including any period fortangibles.elect to amortize your start-up costs, attach awhich you may choose to renew, extend, orseparate statement that contains the followingcontinue the lease). 1. Goodwill.information. Enter your deduction in Part VI of Form 45622. Going concern value.• A description of the business to which theif you are deducting amortization that begins
start-up costs relate. during the current year, or on the appropriate 3. Workforce in place.
Page 32 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 33 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. Business books and records, operating other similar property, except as discussed laterProfessional sports franchise.For acqui-
systems, or any other information base, under Assets That Are Not Section 197 In-sitions after October 22, 2004, a franchise en-
including lists or other information concern-tangibles. gaged in professional sports and any intangible
ing current or prospective customers. assets acquired in connection with acquiring theCustomer-based intangible.This is the com-franchise (including player contracts) is a sec-5. A patent, copyright, formula, process, de-position of market, market share, and any othertion 197 intangible amortizable over a 15-yearsign, pattern, know-how, format, or similarvalue resulting from the future provision ofperiod.item. goods or services because of relationships with
Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, acustomers in the ordinary course of business.6. A customer-based intangible. section 197 intangible. Section 197 in-For example, you must amortize the part of the
tangibles include any right under a license, con-7. A supplier-based intangible. purchase price of a business that is for the
tract, or other arrangement providing for the useexistence of the following intangibles.8. Any item similar to items (3) through (7). of any section 197 intangible. It also includes
• A customer base.9. A license, permit, or other right granted by any term interest in any section 197 intangible,
a governmental unit or agency (including whether the interest is outright or in trust.• A circulation base.
issuances and renewals). • An undeveloped market or market growth.Assets That Are Not10. A covenant not to compete entered into in• Insurance in force.connection with the acquisition of an inter- Section 197 Intangibles
est in a trade or business. • A mortgage servicing contract. The following assets are not section 197 in-11. A franchise, trademark, or trade name (in-• An investment management contract. tangibles.cluding a sports franchise acquired after• Any other relationship with customers in-October 22, 2004, and renewals). 1. Any interest in a corporation, partnership,volving the future provision of goods ortrust, or estate.12. A contract for the use of, or a term interestservices.
in, any item in this list. 2. Any interest under an existing futures con-
tract, foreign currency contract, notionalAccounts receivable or other similar rights to
You cannot amortize any of the in- principal contract, interest rate swap, orincome for goods or services provided to cus-
tangibles listed in items (1) through (8) similar financial contract.tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi-
that you created rather than acquiredness are not section 197 intangibles.
CAUTION
!
3. Any interest in land.unless you created them in acquiring assets that
Supplier-based intangible.This is the valuemake up a trade or business or a substantial part 4. Most computer software. (See Computer
resulting from the future acquisition of goods orof a trade or business. software, later.)
services used or sold by the business because
5. Any of the following assets not acquired inGoodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi-of business relationships with suppliers.
connection with the acquisition of a tradeness based on expected continued customer For example, you must amortize the part of
or business or a substantial part of a tradepatronage due to its name, reputation, or anythe purchase price of a business that is for the
or business.other factor. existence of the following intangibles.
• A favorable relationship with distributors a. An interest in a film, sound recording,Going concern value. This is the additional
(such as favorable shelf or display space video tape, book, or similar property.value of a trade or business that attaches to
at a retail outlet).property because the property is an integral part b. A right to receive tangible property orof an ongoing business activity. It includes value• A favorable credit rating. services under a contract or from a gov-based on the ability of a business to continue to ernmental agency.• A favorable supply contract.function and generate income even though
c. An interest in a patent or copyright.there is a change in ownership (but does not
include any other section 197 intangible). It alsoGovernment-granted license, permit, etc. d. Certain rights that have a fixed durationincludes value based on the immediate use orThis is any right granted by a governmental unitor amount. (See Rights of fixed durationavailability of an acquired trade or business,or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen-or amount, later.)such as the use of earnings during any period intal unit. For example, you must amortize thewhich the business would not otherwise becapitalized costs of acquiring (including issuing6. An interest under either of the following.available or operational. or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal-
a. An existing lease or sublease of tangi-lion or license, or a television or radio broadcast-Workforce in place, etc.This includes the ble property.ing license.composition of a workforce (for example, its ex-
perience, education, or training). It also includes b. A debt that was in existence when theCovenant not to compete. Section 197 in-the terms and conditions of employment, interest was acquired.tangibles include a covenant not to compete (orwhether contractual or otherwise, and any othersimilar arrangement) entered into in connectionvalue placed on employees or any of their attrib- 7. A right to service residential mortgages un-with the acquisition of an interest in a trade orutes. less the right is acquired in connection withbusiness, or a substantial portion of a trade orFor example, you must amortize the part of the acquisition of a trade or business or abusiness. An interest in a trade or businessthe purchase price of a business that is for the substantial part of a trade or business.includes an interest in a partnership or a corpo-existence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, youration engaged in a trade or business. 8. Certain transaction costs incurred by par-must amortize the cost of acquiring an existingAn arrangement that requires the former ties to a corporate organization or reorgan-employment contract or relationship with em-owner to perform services (or to provide prop-ization in which any part of a gain or loss isployees or consultants. erty or the use of property) is not similar to anot recognized.
covenant not to compete to the extent theBusiness books and records, etc.This in- Intangible property that is not amortizableamount paid under the arrangement representscludes the intangible value of technical manuals, under the rules for section 197 intangibles canreasonable compensation for those services ortraining manuals or programs, data files, and be depreciated if it meets certain requirements.for that property or its use.accounting or inventory control systems. It also You generally must use the straight line methodincludes the cost of customer lists, subscriptionFranchise, trademark, or trade name. A over its useful life. For certain intangibles, thelists, insurance expirations, patient or client files,franchise, trademark, or trade name is a section depreciation period is specified in the law andand lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, and197 intangible. You must amortize its purchase regulations. For example, the depreciation pe-television advertisers. or renewal costs, other than certain contingent riod for computer software that is not a section
Patents, copyrights, etc.This includes pack- payments that you can deduct currently. For 197 intangible is generally 36 months.
age design, computer software, and any interest information on currently deductible contingent For more information on depreciating intan-
in a film, sound recording, videotape, book, or payments, see chapter 13. gible property, see Intangible Property under
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 33

Page 34 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Can You Use MACRS To Depreciate Your Prop-rights to books and plays, and other similar• Two corporations that are members of the
erty in chapter 1 of Publication 946. properties for purposes of potential future filmsame controlled group as defined in sec-
development, production, and exploitation. tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue
Computer software. Section 197 intangibles Amortize these costs using the rules of Rev-Code, except that “more than 20%” is sub-
do not include the following types of computerenue Procedure 2004-36. For more information,stituted for “at least 80%” in that definition
software. see Revenue Procedure 2004-36 on page 1063 and the determination is made without re-
of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-24, availablegard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of1. Software that meets all the following re-at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-24.pdf. section 1563. (For an exception, see sec-quirements. tion 1.197-2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.)A change in the treatment of creative
a. It is, or has been, readily available forproperty costs is a change in method of• A trust fiduciary and a corporation if morepurchase by the general public. accounting.CAUTION
!
than 20% of the value of the corporation’s
b. It is subject to a nonexclusive license. outstanding stock is owned, directly or in-
directly, by or for the trust or grantor of theAnti-Churning Rulesc. It has not been substantially modified. trust.This requirement is considered met if
Anti-churning rules prevent you from amortizingthe cost of all modifications is not more • The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci-
most section 197 intangibles if the transaction inthan the greater of 25% of the price of ary and beneficiary, of any trust.which you acquired them did not result in athe publicly available unmodified • The fiduciaries of two different trusts, andsignificant change in ownership or use. Thesesoftware or $2,000. the fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-rules apply to goodwill and going concern value,
ferent trusts, if the same person is theand to any other section 197 intangible that is2. Software that is not acquired in connection
grantor of both trusts.not otherwise depreciable or amortizable.with the acquisition of a trade or business
Under the anti-churning rules, you cannotor a substantial part of a trade or business. • The executor and beneficiary of an estate.use 15-year amortization for the intangible if any
• A tax-exempt educational or charitable or-of the following conditions apply.Computer software defined. Computer
ganization and a person who directly orsoftware includes all programs designed to1. You or a related person (defined later) heldindirectly controls the organization (orcause a computer to perform a desired function.or used the intangible at any time from Julywhose family members control it).It also includes any database or similar item that25, 1991, through August 10, 1993.is in the public domain and is incidental to the • A corporation and a partnership if the
operation of qualifying software. 2. You acquired the intangible from a personsame persons own more than 20% of the
who held it at any time during the period invalue of the outstanding stock of the cor-Rights of fixed duration or amount.Section (1) and, as part of the transaction, the userporation and more than 20% of the capital197 intangibles do not include any right under adid not change. or profits interest in the partnership.contract or from a governmental agency if the3. You granted the right to use the intangibleright is acquired in the ordinary course of a trade • Two S corporations, and an S corporationto a person (or a person related to thator business (or in an activity engaged in for the and a regular corporation, if the same per-person) who held or used it at any timeproduction of income) but not as part of a sons own more than 20% of the value ofduring the period in (1). This applies only ifpurchase of a trade or business and either: the outstanding stock of each corporation.the transaction in which you granted the
• Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or • Two partnerships if the same personsright and the transaction in which you ac-
own, directly or indirectly, more than 20%quired the intangible are part of a series of• Is of a fixed amount that, except for therelated transactions. See Related person, of the capital or profits interests in bothrules for section 197 intangibles, would belater, for information about the kinds ofpartnerships.recovered under a method similar to the persons that are related.unit-of-production method of cost recov- • A partnership and a person who owns,
ery. directly or indirectly, more than 20% of theExceptions. The anti-churning rules do not capital or profits interests in the partner-However, this does not apply to the followingapply in the following situations. ship.intangibles.
• You acquired the intangible from a dece-• Two persons who are engaged in trades• Goodwill. dent and its basis was stepped up to its or businesses under common control (asfair market value.• Going concern value. described in section 41(f)(1) of the Internal
Revenue Code).• The intangible was amortizable as a sec-• A covenant not to compete.
tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans-• A franchise, trademark, or trade name. When to determine relationship.Personsferor you acquired it from. This exception
are treated as related if the relationship existeddoes not apply if the transaction in which• A customer-related information base,
you acquired the intangible and the trans- at the following time.customer-based intangible, or similar item.
action in which the seller or transferor ac-• In the case of a single transaction, imme-quired it are part of a series of related
diately before or immediately after theSafe Harbor for Creative transactions.
transaction in which the intangible was ac-Property Costs • The gain-recognition exception, discussedquired.
later, applies.If you are engaged in the trade or business of • In the case of a series of related transac-
film production, you may be able to amortize the tions (or a series of transactions that com-creative property costs for properties not set forRelated person. For purposes of the prise a qualified stock purchase underproduction within 3 years of the first capitalizedanti-churning rules, the following are related per-section 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenuetransaction. You may amortize these costs rata-sons. Code), immediately before the earliestbly over a 15-year period beginning on the first transaction or immediately after the last• An individual and his or her brothers, sis-day of the second half of the tax year in which transaction.ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,you properly write off the costs for financial ac-ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),counting purposes. If, during the 15-year period, Ownership of stock. In determiningand lineal descendants (children, grand-you dispose of the creative property rights, you whether an individual directly or indirectly ownschildren, etc.).must continue to amortize the costs over the any of the outstanding stock of a corporation, theremainder of the 15-year period. • A corporation and an individual who owns,following rules apply.Creative property costs include costs paid or directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the
Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned byincurred to acquire and develop screenplays, value of the corporation’s outstanding
scripts, story outlines, motion picture production stock. or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust
Page 34 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 35 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is considered owned proportionately by or for its available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/Amended Return
irb04-16.pdf, and Revenue Procedure 2004-57shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
If you did not deduct the correct amortization,on page 498 of Internal Revenue BulletinRule 2. An individual is considered to ownyou can file an amended return to correct the2004-38, available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for hisfollowing. irb04-38.pdf, contain additional guidance.or her family. Family includes only brothers and
• A mathematical error made in any year.sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse,
Disposition ofancestors, and lineal descendants. • A posting error made in any year. Section 197 IntangiblesRule 3. An individual owning (other than by• An amortization deduction for a section
applying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia-197 intangible for which you have not
considered to own the stock directly or indirectly ble property used in your trade or business. Ifadopted a method of accounting.
owned by or for his or her partner. you held the intangible for more than 1 year, any
gain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow-Rule 4. For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2,When to file.If an amended return is allowed,able amortization, is ordinary income (sectionor 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per-you must file it by the later of the following dates.1245 gain). Any remaining gain, or any loss, is ason under Rule 1 as actually owned by that section 1231 gain or loss. If you held the intangi-• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-person. Do not treat stock constructively owned ble 1 year or less, any gain or loss on its disposi-nal return for the year in which you did notby an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by tion is an ordinary gain or loss. For morededuct the correct amount. (A return filedthe individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to make information on ordinary or capital gain or loss onearly is considered filed on the due date.)another person the constructive owner of the business property, see chapter 3 in Publicationstock. • 2 years from the time you paid your tax for544.that year.
Gain-recognition exception.This exception Nondeductible loss.You cannot deduct any
to the anti-churning rules applies if the person loss on the disposition or worthlessness of aChanging Youryou acquired the intangible from (the transferor) section 197 intangible that you acquired in theAccounting Methodmeets both of the following requirements. same transaction (or series of related transac-
tions) as other section 197 intangibles you stillGenerally, you must get IRS approval to change• That person would not be related to you have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis ofyour method of accounting. File Form 3115,(as described under Related person, ear- each remaining amortizable section 197 intangi-Application for Change in Accounting Method, tolier) if the 20% test for ownership of stock ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductiblerequest a change to a permissible method ofand partnership interests were replaced by loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non-accounting for amortization.a 50% test. deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi-The following are examples of a change inble by the following fraction.• That person chose to recognize gain onmethod of accounting for amortization.
the disposition of the intangible and pay • The numerator is the adjusted basis of• A change in the amortization method, pe-income tax on the gain at the highest tax each remaining intangible on the date ofriod of recovery, or convention of an amor-rate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for the disposition.tizable asset.information on making this choice.
• The denominator is the total adjusted ba-• A change in the accounting for amortiz- ses of all remaining amortizable sectionIf this exception applies, the anti-churningable assets from a single asset account to197 intangibles on the date of the disposi-rules apply only to the amount of your adjusteda multiple asset account (pooling), or vicetion.basis in the intangible that is more than the gainversa.
recognized by the transferor.
• A change in the accounting for amortiz-Covenant not to compete.A covenant not toNotification.If the person you acquired theable assets from one type of multiple as-compete, or similar arrangement, is not consid-intangible from chooses to recognize gain underset account to a different type of multipleered disposed of or worthless before you dis-the rules for this exception, that person mustasset account. pose of your entire interest in the trade ornotify you in writing by the due date of the return business for which you entered into the cove-on which the choice is made. Changes in amortization that are not a changenant.in method of accounting include the following.
Anti-abuse rule.You cannot amortize any Nonrecognition transfers.If you acquire a• A change in computing amortization in thesection 197 intangible acquired in a transaction section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans-tax year in which your use of the assetfor which the principal purpose was either of the fer, you are treated as the transferor with respectchanges.following. to the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi-
• An adjustment in the useful life of an am- ble that is not more than the transferor’s ad-• To avoid the requirement that the intangi-ortizable asset. justed basis. You amortize this part of theble be acquired after August 10, 1993. adjusted basis over the intangible’s remaining• Generally, the making of a late amortiza-amortization period in the hands of the trans-• To avoid any of the anti-churning rules. tion election or the revocation of a timelyferor. Nonrecognition transfers include transfersvalid amortization election. to a corporation, partnership contributions andMore information. For more information • Any change in the placed-in-service datedistributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun-about the anti-churning rules, including addi-of an amortizable asset. tary conversions.tional rules for partnerships, see section In a like-kind exchange or involuntary con-1.197-2(h) of the regulations. See section 1.446-1T(e)(2)(d)(ii) of the regu-version of a section 197 intangible, you must
lations for more information and examples.continue to amortize the part of your adjusted
Incorrect Amount of basis in the acquired intangible that is not more
Automatic approval.In some instances, youthan your adjusted basis in the exchanged orAmortization Deducted
may be able to get automatic approval from theconverted intangible over the remaining amorti-
If you did not deduct the correct amortization forIRS to change your method of accounting forzation period of the exchanged or converted
a section 197 intangible in any year, you may beamortization. For a list of automatic accountingintangible. Amortize over a new 15-year period
able to make a correction for that year by filing method changes, see the Instructions for Formthe part of your adjusted basis in the acquired
3115. Also see the Instructions for Form 3115an amended return. See Amended Return, next. intangible that is more than your adjusted basis
for more information on getting approval, auto-If you are not allowed to make the correction on in the exchanged or converted intangible.
matic approval procedures, and a list of excep-an amended return, you can change your ac-
tions to the automatic approval process.counting method to claim the correct amortiza- Example. You own a section 197 intangible
tion. See Changing Your Accounting Method, In addition, Revenue Procedure 2004-23 on you have amortized for 4 full years. It has a
later. page 785 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-16, remaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 35

Page 36 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1120 Line 26exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kind in, the commercial production of timber
section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro- products. Form 1120-A Line 22visions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor-• It consists of at least one acre planted withtize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of the Form 1120S Schedules K and K-1tree seedlings in the manner normallyacquired intangible over the 11 years remainingused in forestation or reforestation.Form 1065 Schedules K and K-1in the original 15-year amortization period for the
transferred asset. You amortize the other None of the Line 35 of Form 1040Qualified timber property does not include$10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-year above (identify as “RFST”)property on which you have planted shelter beltsperiod. or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees.
You cannot report your amortization deductionAmortization period.The 84-month amorti- on Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040).zation period starts on the first day of the first
Partner or shareholder.If you are a part-month of the second half of the tax year youReforestation Costs ner in a partnership or a shareholder in an Sincur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax-
corporation, see the instructions for Schedulepayer), regardless of the month you actuallyGenerally, you can elect to amortize up to K-1 (Form 1065 or Form 1120S) for informationincur the costs. You can claim amortization de-$10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately) of on where to report any allocated amortization forductions for no more than 6 months of the firstqualifying reforestation costs paid or incurred qualifying reforestation costs. If you have quali-and last (eighth) tax years of the period.before October 23, 2004, for qualified timber fying reforestation costs from other sources,property over an 84-month period. You can electLife tenant and remainderman.If one per- your total deduction for costs paid or incurredto deduct a limited amount of reforestation costsson holds the property for life with the remainderbefore October 23, 2004, may be limited.paid or incurred after October 22, 2004. Seegoing to another person, the life tenant is entitledReforestation Costs in chapter 8. You can elect Estate. If the estate does not file Scheduleto the full amortization for qualifying reforesta-to amortize the qualifying costs that are not C or F for the activity in which the qualifyingtion costs incurred by the life tenant. Any re-deducted currently over an 84-month period. reforestation costs were incurred, include themainder interest in the property is ignored forThere is no limit on the amount of your amortiza- amortization deduction on line 15a of Formamortization purposes.tion deduction for reforestation costs paid or 1041.
Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timberincurred after October 22, 2004.
property within 10 years after the tax year youThe election to amortize reforestation costs Revoking the election.You must get IRS ap-incur qualifying reforestation expenses, reportincurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es- proval to revoke your election to amortize quali-any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-tate must be made by the partnership, corpora- fying reforestation costs. Your application totion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544tion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, or revoke the election must include your name,for more information.beneficiary cannot make that election. address, the years for which your election was in
effect, and your reason for revoking it. You, orA partner’s or shareholder’s share of amor-Investment credit.Amortizable reforestation
your duly authorized representative, must signtizable costs is figured under the general rulescosts qualify for the investment credit, whether
the application and file it at least 90 days beforefor allocating items of income, loss, deduction,or not they are amortized. See the instructions
the due date (without extensions) for filing youretc., of a partnership or S corporation. The am-for Form 3468 for information on the investment
income tax return for the first tax year for whichortizable costs of an estate are divided betweencredit.
your election is to end.the estate and the income beneficiary based on
How to make the election.To elect to amor-the income of the estate allocable to each.
tize qualifying reforestation costs, complete Part
A trust cannot elect to amortize refor-VI of Form 4562 and attach a statement that
Send the application to:estation costs and cannot deduct itscontains the following information.
share of any amortizable reforestationCAUTION
!
• A description of the costs and the datescosts of a partnership, S corporation, or estate.
you incurred them. Internal Revenue Service
Associate Chief CounselQualifying costs.Reforestation costs are the• A description of the type of timber being
Passthroughs and Special Industriesdirect costs of planting or seeding for forestationgrown and the purpose for which it is
CC:PSIor reforestation. Qualifying costs include onlygrown.
1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300those costs you must capitalize and include inAttach a separate statement for each propertyWashington, DC 20224the adjusted basis of the property. They includefor which you amortize reforestation costs.costs for the following items.
Generally, you must make the election on a• Site preparation. timely filed return (including extensions) for the
tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-• Seeds or seedlings. Pollutionever, if you timely filed your return for the year• Labor. without making the election, you can still makeControl Facilitiesthe election by filing an amended return within 6• Tools.
months of the due date of the return (excludingYou can elect to amortize over 60 months the• Depreciation on equipment used in plant-extensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state-cost of a certified pollution control facility.ing and seeding. ment to the amended return and write “Filed
pursuant to section 301.9100-2” on Form 4562.Certified pollution control facility.A certi-Qualifying costs do not include costs for whichFile the amended return at the same addressfied pollution control facility is a new identifiablethe government reimburses you under a you filed the original return. treatment facility used in connection with a plantcost-sharing program, unless you include the
or other property in operation before 1976, toreimbursement in your income. Where to report.The following chart shows
reduce or control water or atmospheric pollutionwhere to report your amortization deduction for
or contamination. The facility must do so byQualified timber property.Qualified timberqualifying reforestation costs after you enter it
removing, changing, disposing, storing, orproperty is property that contains trees in signifi-on Form 4562.
preventing the creation or emission of pollu-cant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlotIf you file . . . The deduction goes on . . .tants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facilityor other site that you own or lease. The property
must be certified by state and federal certifyingqualifies only if it meets all the following require-Schedule C
authorities.ments. (Form 1040) Line 27
The facility must not significantly increaseSchedule F• It is located in the United States. the output or capacity, extend the useful life, or(Form 1040) Line 34• It is held for the growing and cutting of reduce the total operating costs of the plant or
timber you will either use in, or sell for use other property. Also, it must not significantly
Page 36 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 37 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
change the nature of the manufacturing or pro- within 6 months of the due date of the return• You have a legal right to income from the
duction process or facility. (excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the extraction of the mineral or cutting of the
The federal certifying authority will not certify amended return and write “Filed pursuant to timber to which you must look for a return
your property to the extent it appears you will section 301.9100-2” on Form 4562. File the of your capital investment.
recover (over the property’s useful life) all or part amended return at the same address you filedA contractual relationship that allows you anof its cost from the profit based on its operation the original return. economic or monetary advantage from products(such as through sales of recovered wastes).Your election is binding for the year it isof the mineral deposit or standing timber is not,The federal certifying authority will describe themade and for all later years unless you get IRSin itself, an economic interest. A production pay-nature of the potential cost recovery. You mustapproval to change to a different method.ment carved out of, or retained on the sale of,then reduce the amortizable basis of the facility mineral property is not an economic interest.by this potential recovery.
You can claim a special depreciation Individuals, corporations, estates, and
allowance on a certified pollution con- trusts who claim depletion deductions
trol facility that is qualified property may be liable for alternative minimum
TIP
CAUTION
!
even if you elect to amortize its cost. You must tax.
10.reduce its cost (amortizable basis) by the
amount of any special allowance you claim. See
chapter 3 of Publication 946.
Mineral PropertyNew identifiable treatment facility.A new Depletion
identifiable treatment facility is tangible depre-
Mineral property includes oil and gas wells,ciable property that is identifiable as a treatment
mines, and other natural deposits (including ge-facility. It does not include a building and its
What’s New othermal deposits). For this purpose, the termstructural components unless the building is ex-
“property” means each separate interest youclusively a treatment facility.
own in each mineral deposit in each separateElective safe harbor for owners of oil and gasBasis reduction for corporations.A corpo- tract or parcel of land. You can treat two or moreproperty. For tax years ending after March 7,ration must reduce the amortizable basis of a separate interests as one property or as sepa-2004, owners of oil and gas property may use anpollution control facility by 20% before figuring rate properties. See section 614 of the Internalelective safe harbor in determining thethe amortization deduction. Revenue Code and the related regulations forproperty’s recoverable reserves for purposes of
rules on how to treat separate mineral interests.computing cost depletion. For more information,More information. For more information on
There are two ways of figuring depletion onsee Elective safe harbor for owners of oil andthe amortization of pollution control facilities,
mineral property.gas property, under Cost Depletion, later.see section 169 of the Internal Revenue Code
and the related regulations. • Cost depletion.
• Percentage depletion.
Introduction Generally, you must use the method that gives
Research and you the larger deduction. However, unless youDepletion is the using up of natural resources by
are an independent producer or royalty owner,mining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The deple-Experimental Costs you generally cannot use percentage depletiontion deduction allows an owner or operator to
for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells,account for the reduction of a product’sYou can amortize your research and experimen- later.reserves.tal costs, deduct them as current business ex-
There are two ways of figuring depletion:penses, or write them off over a 10-year period. Cost Depletioncost depletion and percentage depletion. ForIf you elect to amortize these costs, deduct them
mineral property, you generally must use thein equal amounts over 60 months or more. The To figure cost depletion you must first determinemethod that gives you the larger deduction. Foramortization period begins the month you first the following.standing timber, you must use cost depletion.receive an economic benefit from the expendi-
tures. For a definition of “research and experi- • The property’s basis for depletion.
Topicsmental costs” and information on deducting • The total recoverable units of mineral inthem as current business expenses, see chap-This chapter discusses: the property’s natural deposit.ter 8.
• The number of units of mineral sold during• Who can claim depletionOptional write-off method. Rather than the tax year.amortize these costs or deduct them as a cur-• Mineral property
rent expense, you have the option of deducting• Timber Basis for depletion.To figure the property’s(writing off) research and experimental costs
basis for depletion, subtract all the followingratably over a 10-year period beginning with the
from the property’s adjusted basis.tax year in which you incurred the costs.
Costs you can amortize. You can amortize 1. Amounts recoverable through:
costs chargeable to a capital account if you meet
Who Can a. Depreciation deductions,both the following requirements.
b. Deferred expenses (including deferred• You paid or incurred the costs in yourClaim Depletion?
exploration and development costs),trade or business.
andIf you have an economic interest in mineral prop-• You are not deducting the costs currently.erty or standing timber, you can take a deductionc. Deductions other than depletion.for depletion. More than one person can have an
How to make the election.To elect to amor-economic interest in the same mineral deposit or2. The residual value of land and improve-tize research and experimental costs, completetimber. ments at the end of operations.Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it to your in-You have an economic interest if both thecome tax return. Generally, you must file the 3. The cost or value of land acquired for pur-following apply.return by the due date (including extensions). poses other than mineral production.
However, if you timely filed your return for the• You have acquired by investment any in-
year without making the election, you can still terest in mineral deposits or standing tim-Adjusted basis.The adjusted basis of your
make the election by filing an amended return ber. property is your original cost or other basis, plus
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 37

Page 38 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
certain additions and improvements, and minus Procedure 2004-19 on page 563 of Internal Rev-• Corporations do not deduct charitable con-
certain deductions such as depletion allowed or tributions from the gross income from theenue Bulletin 2004-10, available at www.irs.gov/
allowable and casualty losses. Your adjusted property.pub/irs-irbs/irb04-10.pdf.
basis can never be less than zero. See Publica- • If, during the year, you dispose of an itemtion 551, Basis of Assets, for more informationPercentage Depletion of section 1245 property that was used inon adjusted basis. connection with mineral property, reduceTo figure percentage depletion, you multiply aany allowable deduction for mining ex-Total recoverable units.The total recover-certain percentage, specified for each mineral,penses by the part of any gain you mustable units is the sum of the following. by your gross income from the property duringreport as ordinary income that is allocable• The number of units of mineral remainingthe tax year. to the mineral property. See sectionat the end of the year (including units re-The rates to be used and other conditions 1.613-5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor-covered but not sold). and qualifications for oil and gas wells are dis-mation on how to figure the ordinary gain
cussed later under Independent Producers and allocable to the property.• The number of units of mineral sold during
Royalty Owners and under Natural Gas Wells.the tax year (determined under your
Rates and other rules for percentage depletionmethod of accounting, as explained next). Oil and Gas Wellsof other specific minerals are found later in
Mines and Geothermal Deposits.You must estimate or determine recoverable You cannot claim percentage depletion for an oilunits (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousands or gas well unless at least one of the followingof cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod-Gross income. When figuring your percent-applies.ucts using the current industry method and theage depletion, subtract from your gross income
most accurate and reliable information you can • You are either an independent producer orfrom the property the following amounts.
obtain. a royalty owner.
• Any rents or royalties you paid or incurred
• The well produces natural gas that is ei-Number of units sold. You determine the for the property.
ther sold under a fixed contract or pro-number of units sold during the tax year based
• The part of any bonus you paid for a leaseduced from geopressured brine.on your method of accounting. Use the following
on the property allocable to the producttable to make this determination.
sold (or that otherwise gives rise to grossIf you are an independent producer or royalty
income) for the tax year. owner, see Independent Producers and RoyaltyIF you THEN the units sold
use ... during the year are ... Owners, next.A bonus payment includes amounts you paid as
For information on the depletion deductiona lessee to satisfy a production payment re-The cash The units sold for which for wells that produce natural gas that is eithertained by the lessor.method of you receive payment sold under a fixed contract or produced fromaccounting during the tax year Use the following fraction to figure the part ofgeopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells,(regardless of the year ofthe bonus you must subtract. later.sale).
No. of units sold in the tax yearAn accrual The units sold based on BonusRecoverable units from the ×method of your inventories and Independent Producers andPaymentspropertyaccounting method of accounting for Royalty Ownersinventory. For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos-If you are an independent producer or royaltyits, gross income from the property is definedowner, you figure percentage depletion using aThe number of units sold during the tax yearlater under Oil and Gas Wells. For property otherrate of 15% of the gross income from the prop-does not include any for which depletion deduc-than a geothermal deposit or an oil and gas well,erty based on your average daily production oftions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.gross income from the property is defined laterdomestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up toFiguring the cost depletion deduction. under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-Once you have figured your property’s basis for ever, certain refiners, as explained next, anddepletion, the total recoverable units, and theTaxable income limit.The percentage deple-certain retailers and transferees of proven oilnumber of units sold during the tax year, you cantion deduction generally cannot be more thanand gas properties, as explained later, cannotfigure your cost depletion deduction by taking50% (100% for oil and gas property) of yourclaim percentage depletion. For information onthe following steps. taxable income from the property figured withoutfiguring the deduction, see Figuring percentage
the depletion deduction. depletion, later.Step Action Result Taxable income from the property means
Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-gross income from the property minus all allowa- 1 Divide your property’s Rate per
pletion.You cannot claim percentage deple-basis for depletion by unit. ble deductions (excluding any deduction for de-
tion if you or a related person refine crude oil andtotal recoverable units. pletion) attributable to mining processes,
you and the related person refined more thanincluding mining transportation. These deducti- 2 Multiply the rate per Cost 50,000 barrels on any day during the tax year.ble items include the following.unit by units sold depletion
Related person. You and another personduring the tax year. deduction. • Operating expenses. are related persons if either of you holds a signif-
• Certain selling expenses. icant ownership interest in the other person or if
a third person holds a significant ownership in-Note. You must keep accounts for the de-• Administrative and financial overhead.terest in both of you.pletion of each property and adjust these ac-
• Depreciation. For example, a corporation, partnership, es-counts each year for units sold and depletion
tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significantclaimed. • Intangible drilling and development costs.
ownership interest in it are related persons. AElective safe harbor for owners of oil and gas• Exploration and development expendi- partnership and a trust are related persons if oneproperty. For tax years ending after March 7,tures. person holds a significant ownership interest in2004, owners of oil and gas property may use an each of them.elective safe harbor in determining the The following rules apply when figuring yourFor purposes of the related person rules,property’s recoverable reserves for purposes oftaxable income from the property for purposessignificant ownership interest means direct orcomputing cost depletion. To make the election,of the taxable income limit. indirect ownership of 5% or more in any one ofattach a statement to a timely filed (including the following.• Do not deduct any net operating loss de-extensions) original federal income tax return for
duction from the gross income from thethe first taxable year for which the safe harbor is • The value of the outstanding stock of a
property.elected. For more information, see Revenue corporation.
Page 38 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 39 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The interest in the profits or capital of a• There are no arrangements for the retailer oil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar-
partnership. rels × 11%).to acquire oil or natural gas you produced
for resale or made available for purchase• The beneficial interests in an estate or Depletable oil or natural gas quantity.Gen-by the retailer.trust. erally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar-• Neither you nor the retailer knows of orrels. Your depletable natural gas quantity isAny interest owned by or for a corporation,controls the final disposition of the oil or6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number ofpartnership, trust, or estate is considered to benatural gas you sold or the original sourcebarrels of your depletable oil quantity that youowned directly both by itself and proportionatelyof the petroleum products the retailer ac-choose to apply. If you claim depletion on bothby its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.quired for resale. oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de-
pletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num-Retailers who cannot claim percentage de- ber of barrels you use to figure your depletableTransferees who cannot claim percentagepletion.You cannot claim percentage deple- natural gas quantity.depletion. You cannot claim percentage de-tion if both the following apply. pletion if you received your interest in a proven
Example. You have both oil and natural gasoil or gas property by transfer after 1974 and1. You sell oil or natural gas or their by-prod-
production. To figure your depletable naturalbefore October 12, 1990. For a definition of theucts directly or through a related person in
gas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels ofterm “transfer,” see section 1.613A-7(n) of theany of the following situations.
your 1000-barrel depletable oil quantity. Yourregulations. For a definition of the term “interest
a. Through a retail outlet operated by you depletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 millionin proven oil or gas property,” see section
or a related person. cubic feet of gas (360 × 6000). You must reduce1.613A-7(p) of the regulations.
your depletable oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000b. To any person who is required under an − 360).Figuring percentage depletion.Generally,agreement with you or a related personas an independent producer or royalty owner, If you have production from marginal wells,to use a trademark, trade name, or you figure your percentage depletion by comput-see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenueservice mark or name owned by you oring your average daily production of domestic oilCode to figure your depletable oil or natural gasa related person in marketing or distrib-or gas and comparing it to your depletable oil orquantity.uting oil, natural gas, or their by-prod-gas quantity. If your average daily productionucts. Business entities and family members.does not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan-You must allocate the depletable oil or gasc. To any person given authority under antity, you figure your percentage depletion byquantity among the following related persons inagreement with you or a related personmultiplying the gross income from the oil or gasproportion to each entity’s or family member’sto occupy any retail outlet owned, property (defined later) by 15%. If your averageproduction of domestic oil or gas for the year.leased, or controlled by you or a relateddaily production of domestic oil or gas exceeds
person. your depletable oil or gas quantity, you must• Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% or
make an allocation as explained later under Av- more of the beneficial interest is owned by2. The combined gross receipts from saleserage daily production exceeds depletable the same or related persons (considering(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, orquantities. only persons that own at least 5% of thetheir by-products by all retail outlets taken beneficial interest).In addition, there is a limit on the percentageinto account in (1) are more than $5 milliondepletion deduction. See Taxable income limit, • You and your spouse and minor children.for the tax year. later.
For purposes of this allocation, a related personFor the purpose of determining if this rule
Average daily production.Figure your aver-is anyone mentioned under Related persons inapplies, do not count the following.
age daily production by dividing your total do- chapter 12 except that item (1) in that discussion
• Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities) includes only an individual, his or her spouse,mestic production for the tax year by the number
of oil or natural gas to commercial or in- and minor children.of days in your tax year.
dustrial users.
Controlled group of corporations.Mem-Partial interest.If you have a partial inter-
• Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart- bers of the same controlled group of corpora-est in the production from a property, figure your
ment of Defense. tions are treated as one taxpayer when figuringshare of the production by multiplying total pro-
the depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Theyduction from the property by your percentage of• Sales of oil or natural gas or their by-prod-
share the depletable quantity. Under this rule, ainterest in the revenues from the property.ucts outside the United States if none of
controlled group of corporations is defined inYou have a partial interest in the productionyour domestic production or that of a re-
section 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,from a property if you have a net profits interestlated person is exported during the tax
except that the stock ownership requirement inin the property. To figure the share of productionyear or the prior tax year.
that definition is “more than 50%” rather than “atfor your net profits interest, you must first deter-
least 80%.”mine your percentage participation (as mea-Related person. To determine if you and
sured by the net profits) in the gross revenueanother person are related persons, see Re-
Gross income from the property.For pur-from the property. To figure this percentage, youlated person under Refiners who cannot claim
poses of percentage depletion, gross incomedivide the income you receive for your net profitspercentage depletion, earlier.
from the property (in the case of oil and gasinterest by the gross revenue from the property.Sales through a related person.You are wells) is the amount you receive from the sale ofThen multiply the total production from the prop-considered to be selling through a related per- the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well.erty by your percentage participation to figureson if any sale by the related person produces If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property,your share of the production.gross income from which you may benefit be- but manufacture or convert it into a refined prod-
cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter- uct before sale or transport it before sale, theExample. John Oak owns oil property inest in the person. gross income from the property is the represen-which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest.You are not considered to be selling through tative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil orDuring the year, the property produced 10,000a related person who is a retailer if all the follow- gas, before conversion or transportation.barrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000.ing apply. If you sold gas after you removed it from theJohn had expenses of $90,000 attributable to
premises for a price that is lower than the RMFP,the property. The property generated a net profit• You do not have a significant ownership
determine gross income from the property forof $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re-interest in the retailer.
percentage depletion purposes without regardceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 × .20) for• You sell your production to persons who to the RMFP.his net profits interest.are not related to either you or the retailer.Paul determined his percentage participationGross income from the property does not
to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income he• The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas include lease bonuses, advance royalties, or
received) by $200,000 (the gross revenue fromfrom your customers or persons related to other amounts payable without regard to pro-
the property). Paul determined his share of theyour customers. duction from the property.
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 39

Page 40 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Average daily production exceeds deplet- according to the partner’s interest in partnership ends. Average daily production is dis-
able quantities.If your average daily produc-income. cussed earlier.
tion for the year is more than your depletable oilThe partnership or S corporation adjusts the
or natural gas quantity, figure your allowance forpartner’s or shareholder’s share of the adjustedNatural Gas Wellsdepletion for each domestic oil or natural gasbasis of the oil and gas property for any capital
property as follows. expenditures made for the property and for anyYou can use percentage depletion for a well that
change in partnership or S corporation interests.produces natural gas either sold under a fixed1. Figure your average daily production of oil contract or produced from geopressured brine.Each partner or shareholder must sep-or natural gas for the year.
arately keep records of his or her share2. Figure your depletable oil or natural gas Natural gas sold under a fixed contract.of the adjusted basis in each oil andRECORDS
quantity for the year. Natural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifiesgas property of the partnership or S corporation.
for a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This isThe partner or shareholder must reduce his or3. Figure depletion for all oil or natural gas domestic natural gas sold by the producer underher adjusted basis by the depletion allowed orproduced from the property using a per- a contract that does not provide for a price in-allowable on the property each year. The part-centage depletion rate of 15%. crease to reflect any increase in the seller’s taxner or shareholder must use that reduced ad-4. Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac- liability because of the repeal of percentage de-justed basis to figure cost depletion or his or hertion, the numerator of which is the result pletion for gas. The contract must have been ingain or loss if the partnership or S corporationfigured in (2) and the denominator of which effect from February 1, 1975, until the date ofdisposes of the property.is the result figured in (1). This is your sale of the gas. Price increases after February 1,
depletion allowance for that property for 1975, are presumed to take the increase in taxReporting the deduction. Information thatthe year. liability into account unless demonstrated other-you, as a partner or shareholder, use to figurewise by clear and convincing evidence.your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper-
Taxable income limit.If you are an indepen-ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora-Natural gas from geopressured brine.Qual-dent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas,tion on line 20 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) orified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli-your deduction for percentage depletion is lim-on line 17 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). De-gible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%.ited to the smaller of the following. duct oil and gas depletion for your partnership orThis is natural gas that is both the following.S corporation interest on line 20 of Schedule E• 100% of your taxable income from the (Form 1040). The depletion deducted on Sched-• Produced from a well you began to drillproperty figured without the deduction forule E is included in figuring income or loss fromafter September 1978 and before 1984.depletion. For a definition of taxable in-rental real estate or royalty properties. The in-come from the property, see Taxable in- • Determined in accordance with sectionstructions for Schedule E explain where to re-come limit, earlier, under Mineral Property. 503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978port this income or loss and whether you need to
to be produced from geopressured brine.file either of the following forms.• 65% of your taxable income from all
sources, figured without the depletion al-• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.lowance, any net operating loss carryback, Mines andand any capital loss carryback. • Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-Geothermal Depositstions.You can carry over to the following year any
amount you cannot deduct because of the Certain mines, wells, and other natural deposits,
65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de-Electing large partnerships must figure de-including geothermal deposits, qualify for per-
pletion allowance (before applying any limits) forpletion allowance.An electing large partner-centage depletion.
the following year. ship, rather than each partner, generally must
figure the depletion allowance. The partnershipMines and other natural deposits.For a nat-Currently, depletion on the marginal produc-figures the depletion allowance without takingural deposit, the percentage of your gross in-tion of oil or natural gas is not limited to yourinto account the 65-percent-of-taxable-incomecome from the property that you can deduct astaxable income from the property figured withoutlimit and the depletable oil or natural gas quan-depletion depends on the type of deposit.the depletion deduction. For information on mar-tity. Also, the adjusted basis of a partner’s inter-The following is a list of the percentage de-ginal production, see section 613A(c)(6) of theest in the partnership is not affected by thepletion rates for the more common minerals. Internal Revenue Code. depletion allowance.
DEPOSITS RATEAn electing large partnership is one that
meets both the following requirements.Partnerships and S Corporations
Sulphur, uranium, and, if from
• The partnership had 100 or more partnersdeposits in the United States,Generally, each partner or shareholder, and not
in the preceding year. asbestos, lead ore, zinc ore, nickelthe partnership or S corporation, figures the de-
ore, and mica............. 2 2 %pletion allowance separately. (However, see• The partnership chooses to be an electing
Electing large partnerships must figure deple- Gold, silver, copper, iron ore, andlarge partnership.
tion allowance, later.) Each partner or share- certain oil shale, if from deposits in
holder must decide whether to use cost or the United States........... 1 5 %Disqualified persons.An electing large
percentage depletion. If a partner or shareholderpartnership does not figure the depletion allow-Borax, granite, limestone, marble,uses percentage depletion, he or she must ap-ance of its partners that are disqualified per-mollusk shells, potash, slate,ply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit using his orsons. Disqualified persons must figure itsoapstone, and carbon dioxideher taxable income from all sources. themselves, as explained earlier. produced from a well........ 1 4 %
All the following are disqualified persons.Coal, lignite, and sodium chloride 10%Partner’s or shareholder’s adjusted basis.
The partnership or S corporation must allocate• Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-Clay and shale used or sold for
to each partner or shareholder his or her share use in making sewer pipe or brickspletion (discussed under Independent Pro-
of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas property or used or sold for use as sinteredducers and Royalty Owners, earlier).
held by the partnership or S corporation. The or burned lightweight aggregates 71/2%• Retailers who cannot claim percentagepartnership or S corporation makes the alloca- Clay used or sold for use indepletion (discussed under Independenttion as of the date it acquires the oil or gas making drainage and roofing tile,Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier).property. flower pots, and kindred products,
• Any partner whose average daily produc-Each partner’s share of the adjusted basis of and gravel, sand, and stone (other
tion of domestic crude oil and natural gasthe oil or gas property generally is figured ac- than stone used or sold for use by
is more than 500 barrels during the taxcording to that partner’s interest in partnership a mine owner or operator as
dimension or ornamental stone) 5%year in which the partnership tax yearcapital. However, in some cases, it is figured
Page 40 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 41 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can find a complete list of minerals and may use the percentage rates discussed earlier
Internal Revenue Service under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Any bo-their percentage depletion rates in section
Associate Chief Counsel nus or advanced royalty payments are generally613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Passthroughs and Special Industries part of the gross income from the property toCorporate deduction for iron ore and coal. CC:PSI:FO which the rates are applied in making the calcu-
The percentage depletion deduction of a corpo-1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300 lation. However, in the case of independent pro-
ration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) isWashington, DC 20224 ducers and royalty owners of oil and gas
reduced by 20% of: property, bonuses and advance royalty pay-
Disposal of coal or iron ore.You cannot take ments are not a part of gross income.
• The percentage depletion deduction fora depletion deduction for coal (including lignite)Terminating the lease.If you receive a bo-or iron ore mined in the United States if both thethe tax year (figured without regard to this nus on a lease that expires, terminates, or isfollowing apply.reduction), minus abandoned before you derive any income from
• You disposed of it after holding it for more• The adjusted basis of the property at the the extraction of mineral, include in income for
than 1 year. the year of expiration, termination, or abandon-close of the tax year (figured without the
ment, the depletion deduction you took. Alsodepletion deduction for the tax year). • You disposed of it under a contract underincrease your adjusted basis in the property towhich you retain an economic interest inrestore the depletion deduction you previouslythe coal or iron ore.Gross income from the property.For prop- subtracted.
erty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil orTreat any gain on the disposition as a capitalFor advanced royalties, include in income forgain.gas well, gross income from the property means the year of lease termination, the depletion
the gross income from mining. Mining includes claimed on minerals for which the advancedDisposal to related person.This rule does
all the following. royalties were paid if the minerals were not pro-not apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore to
duced before termination. Increase your ad-one of the following persons.• Extracting ores or minerals from the justed basis in the property by the amount you• A related person (as listed in chapter 12).ground. include in income.
• A person owned or controlled by the same• Applying certain treatment processes.
Delay rentals.These are payments for defer-interests that own or control you.• Transporting ores or minerals (generally, ring development of the property. Since delay
not more than 50 miles) from the point of rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in-Geothermal deposits. Geothermal depositsextraction to the plants or mills in which come that is not subject to depletion. Theselocated in the United States or its possessionsthe treatment processes are applied. rentals can be avoided by either abandoning thequalify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. Alease, beginning development operations, orgeothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir ofExcise tax. Gross income from mining in- obtaining production.natural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquidcludes the separately stated excise tax receivedor vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, a
by a mine operator from the sale of coal togeothermal deposit is not considered a gas well.
compensate the operator for the excise tax theFigure gross income from the property for a
Timbermine operator must pay to finance black lunggeothermal steam well in the same way as for oil
and gas wells. See Gross income from the prop-benefits.
You can figure timber depletion only by the costerty, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells. Percent-Extraction. Extracting ores or minerals method. Percentage depletion does not apply toage depletion on a geothermal deposit cannotfrom the ground includes extraction by mine timber. Base your depletion on your cost or otherbe more than 50% of your taxable income from
owners or operators of ores or minerals from the basis in the timber. Your cost does not includethe property.
the cost of land or any amounts recoverablewaste or residue of prior mining. This does not
through depreciation.apply to extraction from waste or residue of priorLessor’s Gross Income
Depletion takes place when you cut standingmining by the purchaser of the waste or residue
timber. You can figure your depletion deductionA lessor’s gross income from the property thator the purchaser of the rights to extract ores or
when the quantity of cut timber is first accuratelyqualifies for percentage depletion usually is theminerals from the waste or residue. measured in the process of exploitation.total of the royalties received from the lease.
Treatment processes. The processes in- However, for oil, gas, or geothermal property,
cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineralgross income does not include lease bonuses,Figuring cost depletion.To figure your cost
mined. To qualify as mining, the treatmentadvanced royalties, or other amounts payabledepletion allowance, you multiply the number of
without regard to production from the property.timber units cut by your depletion unit.processes must be applied by the mine owner or
operator. For a listing of treatment processes Timber units. When you acquire timberBonuses and advanced royalties.Bonusesconsidered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) of property, you must make an estimate of theand advanced royalties are payments a lessee
the Internal Revenue Code and the related regu- quantity of marketable timber that exists on themakes before production to a lessor for the grant
lations. property. You measure the timber using boardof rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil to
feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you laterbe extracted from leased property. If you are theTransportation of more than 50 miles.If determine that you have more or less units oflessor, your income from bonuses and ad-the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must be timber, you must adjust the original estimate.vanced royalties received is subject to an allow-transported more than 50 miles to plants or millsance for depletion. The term “timber property” means your eco-to be treated because of physical and other nomic interest in standing timber in each tract orFiguring cost depletion.To figure cost de-requirements, the additional authorized trans- block representing a separate timber account.pletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted basisportation is considered mining and included inin the property by a fraction, the numerator ofDepletion unit.You figure your depletionthe computation of gross income from mining.which is the bonus and the denominator of whichunit each year by taking the following steps.
If you wish to include transportation ofis the total bonus and royalties expected to be
more than 50 miles in the computation 1. Determine your cost or adjusted basis ofreceived. To figure cost depletion on advanced
of gross income from mining, file an the timber on hand at the beginning of theroyalties, use the computation explained earlier
application in duplicate with the IRS. Include on year. Adjusted basis is defined under Costunder Cost Depletion, treating the number of
Depletion in the discussion on Mineralunits for which the advanced royalty is receivedthe application the facts concerning the physical
Property.as the number of units sold.and other requirements which prevented the
construction and operation of the plant within 50 2. Add to the amount determined in (1) theFiguring percentage depletion. In the
miles of the point of extraction. Send this appli- cost of any timber units acquired duringcase of mines, wells, and other natural deposits
cation to: the year and any additions to capital.other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, you
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 41

Page 42 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Figure the number of timber units to take The bad debts of a corporation are always
into account by adding the number of tim- business bad debts.
ber units acquired during the year to the
11.number of timber units on hand in the ac- Credit sales.Business bad debts are mainly
count at the beginning of the year and then the result of credit sales to customers. Goods
adding (or subtracting) any correction to and services customers have not paid for are
the estimate of the number of timber units recorded in your books as either accounts re-Businessremaining in the account. ceivable or notes receivable. If you are unable to
collect any part of these receivables, the uncol-4. Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3).
Bad Debts lectible part is a business bad debt.This is your depletion unit.
 Accounts or notes receivable valued at fair
market value when received are deductible onlyExample. You bought a timber tract for at that value, even though the fair market valueIntroduction$160,000 and the land was worth as much as may be less than face value. If you bought anthe timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000.If someone owes you money you cannot collect,account receivable for less than its face value,Based on an estimated one million board feetyou have a bad debt. There are two kinds of badthe amount you can deduct if it becomes worth-(1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure yourdebts—business and nonbusiness. This chap-less is the amount you paid for it.depletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷ ter covers business bad debts.
1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple- You can take a bad debt deductionGenerally, a business bad debt is one thattion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF × only if the amount owed you was previ-comes from operating your trade or business.$80). ously included in gross income. ThisCAUTION
!
You can deduct business bad debts on your
applies to amounts owed you from all sources ofbusiness tax return.When to claim depletion.Claim your deple- taxable income, including sales, services, rents,All other bad debts are nonbusiness badtion allowance as a deduction in the year of sale and interest.debts and are deductible only as short-term cap-or other disposition of the products cut from the
ital losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For moretimber, unless you choose to treat the cutting of Accrual method. If you use an accrualinformation on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub-timber as a sale or exchange. Include allowable method of accounting, you generally report in-lication 550.depletion for timber products not sold during the come as you earn it. You can only take a badtax year the timber is cut as a cost item in the debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable ifclosing inventory of timber products for the year.Topics you have previously included the uncollectibleThe inventory is your basis for determining gainThis chapter discusses: amount in income.or loss in the tax year you sell the timber prod- If you qualify, you can use theucts. • Definition of business bad debt nonaccrual-experience method of accounting
• When a debt becomes worthless discussed later. Under this method, you do notExample. Assume the same facts as in the
have to accrue income that, based on your ex-previous example except that you sold only half• How to treat business bad debts perience, you do not expect to collect.of the timber products in the cutting year. You• Recovery of a business bad debtwould deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletion Cash method. If you use the cash method
that year. You would add the remaining $20,000• Where to deduct business bad debts of accounting, you generally report incomedepletion to your closing inventory of timber when you receive payment. You cannot take aproducts. bad debt deduction for amounts owed to youUseful Items
because you never included those amounts inElecting to treat the cutting of timber as aYou may want to see: income. For example, a cash basis architectsale or exchange.You can elect, under cer-
tain circumstances, to treat the cutting of timber cannot take a bad debt deduction if a client doesPublicationheld for more than 1 year as a sale or exchange. not pay the bill because the architect’s fee was
You must make the election on your income tax not previously included in income.❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
return for the tax year to which it applies. If you❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) formake this election, subtract the adjusted basis Debts from a former business. If you sellIndividuals, Estates, and Trustsfor depletion from the fair market value of the your business but keep its receivables, these
timber on the first day of the tax year in which❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of debts are business debts since they arose out of
you cut it to figure the gain or loss on the cutting.Assets your trade or business. If one of these debts
You generally report the gain as long-term capi- later becomes worthless, the loss is still a busi-❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensestal gain. The fair market value then becomes ness bad debt. These debts would also be busi-
your basis for figuring your ordinary gain or loss❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal ness debts if sold to the new owner of the
on the sale or other disposition of the products Rights, and Claims for Refund business.
cut from the timber. For more information, see If you sell your business to one person andTimber in chapter 2 of Publication 544, SalesSee chapter 14 for information about gettingsell your receivables to someone else, the activi-and Other Dispositions of Assets. publications and forms. ties of the new holder of the debts determine
whether they are business or nonbusiness debtsForm T. Complete and attach Form T (Tim-
for that person. A loss from the debts is a busi-ber), Forest Activities Schedule, to your income
ness bad debt to the new holder if that persontax return if you are claiming a deduction for
Business Bad Debt acquired the debts in his or her trade or businesstimber depletion or choosing to treat the cutting
or if the debts were closely related to the newof timber as a sale or exchange. Defined holder’s trade or business when they became
worthless. Otherwise, a loss from these debts isA business bad debt is a loss from the worth-a nonbusiness bad debt.lessness of a debt that was either:
Debt acquired from a decedent.The char-• Created or acquired in your trade or busi-acter of a loss from debts of a business acquiredness, or from a decedent is determined in the same way
as debts sold by a business. If you are in a trade• Closely related to your trade or business
or business, a loss from the debts is a businesswhen it became partly or totally worthless.
bad debt if the debts were closely related to your
trade or business when they became worthless.A debt is closely related to your trade or busi-
Otherwise, a loss from these debts is a nonbusi-ness if your primary motive for incurring the debt
ness bad debt.is business related.
Page 42 Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts

Page 43 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1.  In 2003, Arnie died leaving his dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of• You made the guarantee in the course ofbusiness, including the accounts receivable, to an unsecured and unpreferred debt.your trade or business.his son Carl. Certain receivables become worth-
Property received for debt.If you receive• You have a legal duty to pay the debt.less in 2004. Carl can deduct the loss as a
property in partial settlement of a debt, reducebusiness bad debt because the debt was closely• You made the guarantee before the debtthe debt by the fair market value of the propertyrelated to his business when it became worth-became worthless. You meet this require-received. You can deduct the remaining debt asless. ment if you reasonably expected you a bad debt if and when it becomes worthless.would not have to pay the debt without fullExample 2.  In 2003, Charlie died leaving If you later sell the property, any gain on thereimbursement from the issuer.his business to his son George, but leaving the sale is due to the appreciation of the property. It
receivables to his daughter Diane. The receiv-• You receive reasonable consideration foris not a recovery of a bad debt. For information
ables become worthless in 2004. Diane is notmaking the guarantee. You meet this re-on the sale of an asset, see Publication 544.
engaged in any trade or business during 2003 orquirement if you made the guarantee in
2004. Therefore, Diane’s loss is a nonbusinessaccord with normal business practice orExample. Patti owed Margaret $5,000. In
bad debt even though the original debt was for a good faith business purpose. partial satisfaction of the debt, Patti gave Mar-
incurred in a business. garet property worth $2,000. Margaret deducted
the remaining $3,000 as a bad debt but did notExample. Jane Zayne owns the ZayneLiquidation.If you liquidate your business get a tax benefit from the deduction as she hadDress Company. She guaranteed payment of aand some of your accounts receivable become no taxable income. Margaret later sold the prop-$20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out-worthless, they are business bad debts. erty for a $1,000 gain. Even though Margaret didlet. Elegant Fashions is one of Zayne’s largestnot get a tax benefit from the earlier bad debtclients. Elegant Fashions later filed for bank-Types of Business Bad deduction, she must include the $1,000 gain inruptcy and defaulted on the loan. Ms. ZayneDebts her income. It is not a recovery of her bad debt.made full payment to the bank. She can take a
business bad debt deduction, since her guaran-The following are situations that may result in atee was made in the course of her trade orbusiness bad debt. business for a good faith business purpose. She
How To Treatwas motivated by the desire to retain one of herLoans to clients and suppliers.If you make
better clients and keep a sales outlet.a loan to a client, supplier, employee, or distribu-
There are two ways to treat business bad debts.tor for a business reason and it becomes worth-Employee. Any guarantee you make to pro-less, you have a business bad debt. tect or improve your job is closely related to your• The specific charge-off method.
trade or business as an employee.Example. John Smith, an advertising agent, • The nonaccrual-experience method.
Deductible in the year paid.If you make amade loans to certain clients to keep their busi- Generally, you must use the specific charge-offpayment on a loan you guaranteed, you canness. One of these clients went bankrupt and method. However, you can use thededuct it in the year paid, unless you have rightscould not repay him. Since the main reason for nonaccrual-experience method if you meet theagainst the borrower.making the loan was business related, the debt requirements discussed later underwas a business debt and John can take a busi-Rights against a borrower. When you Nonaccrual-Experience Method.ness bad debt deduction. make payment on a loan you guaranteed, you
may have the right to take the place of theDebts of political parties.If a political party Specific Charge-Off Methodlender. The debt is then owed to you. If you have(or other organization that accepts contributionsthis right, or some other right to demand pay-If you use the specific charge-off method, youor spends money to influence elections) owesment from the borrower, you cannot take a badcan deduct specific business bad debts thatyou money and the debt becomes worthless,debt deduction until these rights become partlybecome either partly or totally worthless duringyou can take a bad debt deduction only if youor totally worthless. the tax year.use an accrual method of accounting and meet
all the following tests. Joint debtor. If two or more debtors jointlyPartly worthless debts.You can deduct spe-owe you money, your inability to collect from onecific bad debts that become partly uncollectible.1. The debt arose from the sale of goods ordoes not enable you to deduct a proportionateYour tax deduction is limited to the amount youservices in the ordinary course of youramount as a bad debt. charge off on your books during the year. You dotrade or business.
not have to charge off and deduct your partlyBankruptcy claim. If a person who owes you2. More than 30% of your receivables ac- worthless debts annually. You can delay themoney becomes bankrupt, the amount you cancrued in the year of the sale were from charge off until a later year. You cannot, how-deduct as a bad debt is the amount owed to yousales to political parties. ever, deduct any part of a debt after the year itminus the amount you receive from distribution
becomes totally worthless.3. You made substantial continuing efforts toof the bankrupt person’s assets.
collect on the debt. Significantly modified debt. An exceptionSale of mortgaged property.If mortgaged orto the charge-off rule exists for debt which haspledged property is sold for less than the debt,Loan or capital contribution.You cannot been significantly modified and on which thethe unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is atake a bad debt deduction for a loan you made to holder recognized gain. For more information,bad debt.a corporation if, based on the facts and circum- see section 1.166-(3)(a)(3) of the regulations.
stances, the loan is actually a contribution to
Deduction disallowed.You can generallycapital.
take a partial bad debt deduction only in the year
you make the charge-off on your books. If, underWhen Debt IsDebts of an insolvent partner.If your busi-
audit, the IRS does not allow your deduction andness partnership breaks up and one of your
Worthless the debt becomes partly worthless in a later taxformer partners is insolvent and cannot pay any
year, you can deduct the amount you charge offof the partnership’s debts, you may have to pay
You do not have to wait until a debt is due toin that year plus the disallowed amountmore than your share. If you pay any part of the
determine whether it is worthless. A debt be-charged-off in the earlier year. The charge off ininsolvent partner’s share of the debts, you can
comes worthless when there is no longer anythe earlier year, unless reversed on your books,take a bad debt deduction for the amount you
chance the amount owed will be paid. fulfills the charge-off requirement for the laterpay.
It is not necessary to go to court if you canyear.
Business loan guarantee.If you guarantee a show that a judgment from the court would be
debt that becomes worthless, the debt can qual- uncollectible. You must only show that you haveTotally worthless debts.If a debt becomes
ify as a business bad debt if all the following taken reasonable steps to collect the debt. totally worthless, you can deduct the entire
requirements are met. Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi- amount, except any amount deducted in an ear-
Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts Page 43

Page 44 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lier tax year when the debt was only partly worth-Service related income.You can use the A bad debt deduction that contributes to a net
nonaccrual-experience method only for operating loss helps lower taxes in the year toless.
amounts earned by performing services. You which you carry the net operating loss.You do not have to make an actual
cannot use this method for amounts owed to youcharge-off on your books to claim a bad debt More information.See Publication 536 forfrom activities such as lending money, sellingdeduction for a totally worthless debt. However, more information about net operating losses.goods, or acquiring receivables or other rights toyou may want to do so. If you do not and the IRSreceive payment.later rules the debt is only partly worthless, you
will not be allowed a deduction for the debt inGross receipts test. You meet the gross re-
that tax year. A deduction of a partly worthlessceipts test if your average annual gross receiptsWhere To Deduct
bad debt is limited to the amount actuallyfor the 3 prior tax years does not exceed
charged off. $5,000,000. Use the following table to find where to deduct
your business bad debts.Interest or penalty charged.Generally, youFiling a claim for refund.If you did not deductcannot use the nonaccrual-experience methodTable 11-2. Where To Deduct a Bada bad debt on your original return for the year itfor amounts due on which you charge interest orDebtbecame worthless, you can file a claim for aa late payment penalty. However, do not treat acredit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth-discount offered for early payment as the charg-IF you file as THEN deduct your badless, you must file the claim by the later of theing of interest or a penalty if both the followinga... debt on...following dates. apply.
Sole proprietor  Line 27 of Schedule C• 7 years from the date your original return• You otherwise accrue the full amount due (Form 1040)was due (not including extensions). as gross income at the time you provide
Farmer  Line 34 of Schedule Fthe services.• 2 years from the date you paid the tax. (Form 1040)
• You treat the discount allowed for early
If the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt, Corporation  Line 15 of Form 1120payment as an adjustment to gross in-
you must file the claim by the later of the follow- or Form 1120-Acome in the year of payment.
ing dates. S corporation  Line 10 of Form 1120S
Methods available.You can use any of the• 3 years from the date you filed your origi- Partnership  Line 12 of Form 1065following nonaccrual-experience methods.nal return.
• 6-year moving average method.• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.
• Actual experience method.You may have longer to file the claim if you were
physically or mentally unable to handle your• Modified Black Motor method.
financial affairs for a time. For details and more
• Modified 6-year moving average method.information about filing a claim, see Publication
556. • Alternative nonaccrual-experience 12.
method.Use one of the following forms to file a claim.
Apply the nonaccrual-experience method sepa-
Table 11-1. Forms Used To File a rately to each account receivable.
Electric andClaim You generally cannot change from one
method to another without IRS approval. YouIF you filed as Clean-Fuelmay be able to obtain automatic consent toa... THEN file...
change your method of accounting. See section
Sole proprietor 1.448-2T(g) of the regulations for more informa- Form 1040X Vehiclesor farmer tion on obtaining consent to change to a
nonaccrual-experience method or to changeCorporation  Form 1120X
from one method to another.
S corporation  Form 1120S For more information about the What’s New(check box F(5)) nonaccrual-experience method, including the $5
million gross receipts test, see section 448(d)(5)Maximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction.Partnership  Form 1065 of the Internal Revenue Code and section(check box G(5)) The maximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction and1.448-2T of the regulations. qualified electric vehicle credit were scheduled
to be reduced by 25% for 2004 and scheduled to
be completely phased out by 2007. The fullNonaccrual-Experience deduction and credit are now allowed for quali-Method Recovery fied property placed in service in 2004 and 2005.
The deduction and the credit will be 25% of theIf you use an accrual method of accounting andIf you deduct a bad debt on your tax return andotherwise allowable amount in 2006.qualify under the rules explained in this section,later recover (collect) all or part of it, you may
you can use the nonaccrual-experience methodhave to include all or part of the recovery in
for bad debts. Under this method, you do notgross income. The amount you include is limited
accrue service related income you expect to beto the amount you actually deducted. However,Introductionuncollectible. you can exclude the amount deducted that did
not reduce your tax. Report the recovery as You are allowed a limited deduction for the costYou generally can use the nonaccrual-expe-
“Other income” on the appropriate business of clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-fuel ve-rience method for accounts receivable for serv-
form or schedule. hicle refueling property you place in service dur-ices you performed only if:
See  Recoveries in Publication 525 for more ing the tax year. Also, you are allowed a tax
• The services are provided in the fields ofinformation. credit of 10% of the cost of any qualified electric
accounting, actuarial science, architecture, vehicle you place in service during the tax year.Net operating loss (NOL) carryover.If aconsulting, engineering, health, law, or thebad debt deduction increases an NOL carryover You can take the electric vehicle creditperforming arts, or that has not expired before the beginning of theor the deduction for clean-fuel vehicle
• You meet the $5 million gross receipts testtax year in which the recovery takes place, you property regardless of whether you use
TIP
for all prior years. treat the deduction as having reduced your tax.the vehicle in a trade or business. However, you
Page 44 Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles

Page 45 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can take a deduction for clean-fuel vehicle re- 2. Its original use must begin with you.
fueling property only if you use the property inDeductions for 3. Either—your trade or business.
Clean-Fuel Vehicle a. The motor vehicle of which it is a part
must satisfy any federal or state emis-Topics and Refueling Property sions standards that apply to each fuelThis chapter discusses:
by which the vehicle is designed to be
You are allowed a limited deduction for the costpropelled, or• The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle prop-of clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-fuel ve-erty b. It must satisfy any federal and statehicle refueling property. These deductions are
emissions certification, testing, and war-allowed only in the tax year you place the prop-• The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle refuel-
ranty requirements that apply.erty in service.ing property
You cannot claim these deductions for the• Recapture of the deductions 4. It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-part of the property’s cost you claim as a section
fined earlier.179 deduction. For information on the section• The electric vehicle credit
179 deduction, see Publication 946.• Recapture of the credit Deduction limit. The maximum deduction
you can claim for qualified clean-fuel vehicleDeduction for Clean-Fuel property with respect to any motor vehicle is oneUseful Items Vehicle Property of the following.You may want to see:
The deduction for this property may be claimed1. $50,000 for a truck or van with a gross
Publication regardless of whether the property is used in avehicle weight rating over 26,000 pounds
trade or business. or for a bus with a seating capacity of at❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car least 20 adults (excluding the driver).Expenses Clean-fuel vehicle property.Clean-fuel vehi-
2. $5,000 for a truck or van with a gross vehi-cle property is either of the following kinds of❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of cle weight rating over 10,000 pounds butproperty.Assets not more than 26,000 pounds.
1. A motor vehicle (defined earlier) produced❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property 3. $2,000 for a vehicle not included in (1) orby an original equipment manufacturer and
(2).designed to be propelled by a clean-burn-Form (and Instructions)
ing fuel. These include designated hybrid
❏ 8834 Qualified Electric Vehicle Credit gas-electric automobiles which, at thisDeduction for Clean-Fueltime, only include the Ford Escape, Honda
Vehicle Refueling PropertySee chapter 14 for information about gettingInsight, Honda Civic Hybrid, and Toyota
publications and forms. Prius. Those designated automobiles doYour property must meet the following require-not qualify for the electric vehicle credit.ments to qualify for this deduction.For other than those designated automo-
biles, the only part of a vehicle’s basis that1. It must be depreciable property.
qualifies for the deduction is the part attrib-Definitions 2. Its original use must begin with you.utable to:
The following definitions apply throughout this 3. It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-a. A clean-fuel engine that can use achapter. fined earlier.clean-burning fuel,
b. The property used to store or deliverClean-fuel vehicle refueling property.Clean-burning fuels. The following are the fuel to the engine, or Clean-fuel vehicle refueling property is anyclean-burning fuels. property (other than a building or its structuralc. The property used to exhaust gasescomponents) used to do either of the following.1. Natural gas. from the combustion of the fuel.
1. Store or dispense a clean-burning fuel (de-2. Liquefied natural gas. 2. Any property installed on a motor vehiclefined earlier) into the fuel tank of a motor3. Liquefied petroleum gas. (including installation costs) to enable it tovehicle propelled by the fuel, but only if thebe propelled by a clean-burning fuel if: storage or dispensing is at the point where4. Hydrogen.
the fuel is delivered into the tank.a. The property is an engine (or modifica-5. Electricity.
tion of an engine) that can use a 2. Recharge motor vehicles propelled by6. Any other fuel that is at least 85% alcoholclean-burning fuel, or electricity, but only if the property is lo-(any kind) or ether. cated at the point where the vehicles areb. The property is used to store or deliverrecharged.that fuel to the engine or to exhaust
gases from the combustion of that fuel.Motor vehicle.A motor vehicle is any vehicle Recharging property. This property in-that has four or more wheels and is manufac- cludes any equipment used to provide electricityFor vehicles that may be propelled by both atured primarily for use on public streets, roads, to the battery of a motor vehicle propelled byclean-burning fuel and any other fuel, your de-and highways. It does not include a vehicle oper- electricity. It includes low-voltage rechargingduction is generally the additional cost of permit-ated exclusively on a rail or rails. equipment, high-voltage (quick) charging equip-ting the use of the clean-burning fuel. ment, and ancillary connection equipment such
Clean-fuel vehicle property does notas inductive charging equipment. It does notNonqualifying property. This is property
include an electric vehicle that qualifiesinclude property used to generate electricity,used in the following ways.
for the electric vehicle credit, dis-such as solar panels or windmills, and does notCAUTION
!
cussed later. include the battery used in the vehicle.1. Predominantly outside the United States.
Deduction limit. The maximum deduction2. Predominantly to furnish lodging or in con-Qualified property.Your property must meet
you can claim for clean-fuel vehicle refuelingnection with the furnishing of lodging.the following requirements to qualify for the de-
property placed in service at one location isduction.3. By certain tax-exempt organizations. $100,000. To figure your maximum deduction
4. By governmental units or foreign persons 1. It must be acquired for your own use and for any tax year, subtract from $100,000 the total
or entities. not for resale. you (or any related person or predecessor)
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel VehiclesPage 45

Page 46 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
claimed for clean-fuel vehicle refueling property Sales or other dispositions.If you sell orHow To Claim
placed in service at that location for all earlier otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3 yearsthe Deductionsyears. after the date you placed it in service and know
or have reason to know that it will be changed inHow you claim the deductions for clean-fuelIf the deduction limit applies, you must any of the ways described above, you are sub-vehicle property and clean-fuel vehicle refuelingspecify on your tax return the property ject to the recapture rules. In other dispositionsproperty depends on the use of the property and(and the portion of the property’s cost)CAUTION
!
(including a disposition by reason of an accidentthe kind of income tax return you file.you are using as a basis for the deduction. or other casualty), the recapture rules do not
Deduction for nonbusiness clean-fuel vehi-apply.Related persons. For this purpose, the fol-
cle property by individuals.Individuals can If the vehicle was subject to depreciation, thelowing are considered related persons.
claim the deduction for clean-fuel vehicle prop-deduction (minus any recapture) is considered
erty used for nonbusiness purposes by including1. An individual and his or her brothers and depreciation when figuring the part of any gain
the deduction in the total on line 35 of Formsisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, from the disposition that is ordinary income. See
1040. Also, enter the amount of your deductionancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), Publication 544 for more information on disposi-
and “Clean Fuel” on the dotted line next to lineand lineal descendants (children, grand- tions of depreciable property.
35. If you use the vehicle partly for business, seechildren, etc.).
the next two discussions. Recapture amount. Figure your recapture2. An individual and a corporation if the indi- amount by multiplying the deduction by the fol-vidual owns, directly or indirectly, moreDeduction for business clean-fuel vehiclelowing percentage.than 50% in value of the outstanding stockproperty by employees.Employees who use
of the corporation. clean-fuel vehicle property for business, or• 100% if the recapture date is within the
partly for business and partly for nonbusinessfirst full year after the date the vehicle was3. Two corporations that are members of thepurposes, should include the entire deduction inplaced in service.same controlled group as defined in sec-the total on line 35 of Form 1040. Also, enter thetion 267(f) of the Internal Revenue Code. • 662/3% if the recapture date is within theamount of your deduction and “Clean Fuel” onsecond full year after the date the vehicle4. A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust.the dotted line next to line 35. was placed in service.
5. Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if theSole proprietors.Sole proprietors must claim• 331/3% if the recapture date is within thesame person is a grantor of both trusts.deductions for clean-fuel vehicle property andthird full year after the date the vehicleclean-fuel vehicle refueling property used for6. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the same was placed in service.business on the Other expenses line of eithertrust.
Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form Recapture date.The recapture date is gen-7. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two sepa-1040). If clean-fuel vehicle property is usederally the date of the event that causes therate trusts if the same person is a grantorpartly for nonbusiness purposes, claim the non-recapture. However, the recapture date for anof both trusts. business part of the deduction as explained ear-event described in item (3), earlier, is the firstlier under Deduction for nonbusiness clean-fuel8. A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation if day of the recapture year in which the eventvehicle property by individuals.the trust or a grantor of the trust owns, occurs.
directly or indirectly, more than 50% inPartnerships. Partnerships claim the deduc-value of the outstanding stock of the cor- How to report.How you report the recapturetions for clean-fuel vehicle property andporation. amount for clean-fuel vehicle property as in-clean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 20 of
come depends on how you claimed the deduc-Form 1065.9. A person and a tax-exempt educational or tion for that property.charitable organization that is controlled di-S corporations.S corporations claim the de-rectly or indirectly by that person or by Deducted by individuals asductions for clean-fuel vehicle property andmembers of the family of that person. nonbusiness-use property. Include theclean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 19 ofamount on line 21 of Form 1040.10. A corporation and a partnership if theForm 1120S.
same persons own more than 50% in Deducted by employees as business-use
C corporations.C corporations claim the de-value of the outstanding stock of the cor- property. Include the amount on line 21 of
ductions for clean-fuel vehicle property andporation and more than 50% of the capital Form 1040.
clean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 26 ofor profits interest in the partnership. Deducted by sole proprietors asForm 1120 (line 22 of Form 1120-A).
business-use property.Include the amount11. Two S corporations or an S corporation
on the Other income line of either Schedule Cand a regular corporation if the same per-Recapture of (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).sons own more than 50% in value of the
the Deductionsoutstanding stock of each corporation. Partnerships and corporations (including
S corporations).Include the amount on the12. A partnership and a person if the person,If the property ceases to qualify, you may have
Other income line of the form you file.directly or indirectly owns, more than 50%to recapture the deduction. You recapture the
of the capital or profits interests in the part-deduction by including it, or part of it, in your
nership. income.
Clean-Fuel Vehicle13. Two partnerships if the same persons own, Refueling Propertydirectly or indirectly, more than 50% of theClean-Fuel Vehicle Propertycapital or profits interest in both partner- You must recapture the deduction for clean-fuel
ships. vehicle refueling property if the property ceasesYou must recapture the deduction for clean-fuel
to qualify at any time before the end of its depre-vehicle property if the property ceases to qualify14. An executor of an estate and a beneficiary
ciation recovery period. The property will ceasewithin 3 years after the date you placed it inof the estate unless the sale or exchange
to qualify if it is changed in any of the followingservice. The property will cease to qualify if it isis in satisfaction of a pecuniary bequest.
ways.changed in any of the following ways.To determine whether an individual directly
or indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock of1. It is modified so that it can no longer be 1. It ceases to be a clean-fuel vehicle refuel-
a corporation, see Ownership of stock under propelled by a clean-burning fuel. ing property (for example, by being con-
Related Persons in Publication 538. verted to store and dispense gasoline).2. It ceases to be a qualified clean-fuel vehi-
cle property (for example, by failing to 2. It is no longer used 50% or more in your
meet emissions standards). trade or business.
3. It becomes nonqualifying property, defined 3. It becomes nonqualifying property, defined
earlier. earlier.
Page 46 Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles

Page 47 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sales or other dispositions.If you sell or 2. You were the first person to use it.
1. It is modified so that it is no longer prima-otherwise dispose of the property before the end3. You acquired it for your own use and notrily powered by electricity.of its recovery period and know or have reasonfor resale.to know that it will be changed in any of the ways 2. It becomes nonqualifying property, defined
4. It has never been used as a nonelectricdescribed above, you are subject to the recap- earlier.
ture rules. In other dispositions (including a dis- vehicle.
position by reason of an accident or other Sales or other dispositions.If you sell or5. It is not nonqualifying property, definedcasualty), the recapture rules do not apply. otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3 yearsearlier.The deduction (minus any recapture after the date you placed it in service and knowamount) is considered depreciation when figur- or have reason to know that it will be changed inHybrid gas-electric vehicles are noting the part of any gain from the disposition that either of the ways described above, you arequalified electric vehicles. However,is ordinary income. See Publication 544 for subject to the recapture rules. In other disposi-certain of these vehicles may qualifyCAUTION
!
more information on dispositions of depreciable tions (including a disposition by reason of anfor clean-fuel vehicles.property. accident or other casualty), the recapture rules
do not apply.Recapture amount. Figure your recapture Amount of the Credit If the vehicle was subject to depreciation, theamount by multiplying the deduction you credit (minus any recapture amount) is consid-claimed by the following fraction. The credit is generally 10% of the cost of eachered depreciation when figuring the part of anyqualified electric vehicle you place in servicegain from the disposition that is ordinary income.during the year. If your vehicle is a depreciableTotal Recovery See Publication 544 for more information onbusiness asset, you must reduce the cost of therecovery years before dispositions of depreciable property._ vehicle by any section 179 deduction beforeperiod for the the recapture
figuring the 10% credit. If you need informationproperty year Recapture amount. Figure your recapture
on the section 179 deduction, see Publicationamount by multiplying the credit by the following
946.Total recovery period for the property percentage.
• 100% if the recapture date is within theCredit limits.The credit is limited to $4,000How to report.How you report the recapture first full year after the date the vehicle wasfor each vehicle. The total credit is limited to theamount for clean-fuel vehicle refueling property placed in service.excess of your regular tax liability, reduced bydepends on how you claimed the deduction forcertain credits, over your tentative minimum tax.• 662/3% if the recapture date is within thethat property. To figure the credit limit, complete Form 8834second full year after the date the vehicle
Sole proprietors.Include the amount on and attach it to your tax return. was placed in service.
the Other income line of either Schedule C
• 331/3% if the recapture date is within the(Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040). How To third full year after the date the vehiclePartnerships and corporations (includingClaim the Credit was placed in service.S corporations).Include the amount on the
You must complete and attach Form 8834 toOther income line of the form you file. Recapture date.The recapture date is gen-your tax return to claim the electric vehicleerally the date of the event that causes thecredit. Enter your credit on your tax return asBasis Adjustments recapture. However, the recapture date for andiscussed next. event described in item (2), earlier, is the first
You must reduce the basis of your clean-fuel day of the recapture year in which the eventIndividuals.Individuals claim the credit by en-vehicle property or clean-fuel vehicle refueling occurs.tering the amount from line 20 of Form 8834 onproperty by the deduction claimed. If, in a later
line 54 of Form 1040. Check box “c” and specifyHow to report. Report the recapture amountyear, you must recapture part or all of the deduc-
Form 8834. as follows.tion, increase the basis of the property by the
amount recaptured. If the property is deprecia- Individuals.Include the amount on line 62Partnerships. Partnerships enter the amountble property, you can recover this additional of Form 1040. Write “QEVCR” on the dotted linefrom line 20 of Form 8834 on line 15f of Sched-basis over the property’s remaining recovery next to line 62.ule K (Form 1065). The partnership then allo-period beginning with the tax year of recapture.cates the credit to the partners in Box 15, codePartnerships. Include in Box 15, code V,If you were using the percentage tablesU, of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). See the in-Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) the information ato figure your depreciation on the prop-structions for Form 1065. partner needs to figure the recapture of theerty, you will not be able to continue toCAUTION
!
credit.do so. See Publication 946 for information onS corporations. S corporations enter the
S corporations.Include in Box 13, code W,figuring your depreciation without the tables.amount from line 20 of Form 8834 on line 13g of
of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) the information aSchedule K (Form 1120S). The S corporation
shareholder needs to figure the recapture of thethen allocates the credit to the shareholders in
credit.Box 13, code V, of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).
See the instructions for Form 1120S. C corporations.Include the amount on lineElectric Vehicle Credit
10 of Schedule J (Form 1120), or line 4 of Part IC corporations. C corporations claim theYou can choose to claim a tax credit for a quali- (Form 1120-A). Check the box for “Other” andcredit by entering the amount from line 20 offied electric vehicle you place in service during attach the required schedule. See the instruc-Form 8834 in the total for line 6c of Schedule Jthe year. You can make this choice regardless of tions for Form 1120.(Form 1120), checking the “QEV credit” box.whether the property is used in a trade or busi-See the instructions for Form 1120.ness. Basis Adjustments
Recapture of the Credit If you claim a tax credit for a qualified electricQualified Electric Vehicle
vehicle you place in service during the year, youThe electric vehicle credit is subject to recaptureA vehicle is a qualified electric vehicle if it meets must reduce your basis in that vehicle by theif, within 3 years after the date you place theall of the following requirements. lesser of:vehicle in service, it ceases to qualify for the
electric vehicle credit. You recapture the credit1. It is a motor vehicle (defined earlier) pow- 1. $4,000, or
by adding it, or part of it, to your income tax forered primarily by an electric motor drawing 2. 10% of the cost of the vehicle.the year in which the recapture event occurs.current from rechargeable batteries, fuel
The vehicle will cease to qualify if it iscells, or other portable sources of electrical This basis reduction rule applies even if the
changed in either of the following ways.current. credit allowed is less than that amount.
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel VehiclesPage 47

Page 48 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you must recapture part or all of the credit,Table 13-1. Reporting Reimbursements
increase the basis of your vehicle by the amount
IF the type of reimbursement (or otherrecaptured. If the qualified electric vehicle is
expense allowance) arrangement is under THEN the employer reports on Form W-2depreciable property, you can recover the addi-
tional basis over the vehicle’s remaining recov-An accountable plan with:ery period beginning with the tax year of
recapture. Actual expense reimbursement: No amount.
Adequate accounting made and excessIf you were using the percentage tablesreturnedto figure your depreciation on the vehi-
cle, you will not be able to continue toActual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as wages in box 1.
CAUTION
!
do so. See Publication 946 for information onAdequate accounting and return of excess
figuring your depreciation without the tables.both required but excess not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance up to theNo amount.
federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and excess
returned
Per diem or mileage allowance up to theThe excess amount as wages in box 1. The
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only13.
Adequate accounting and return of excess in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.
both required but excess not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds theThe excess amount as wages in box 1. TheOther Expenses federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only
Adequate accounting made up to the federal in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.
rate only and excess not returned
What’s New A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount as wages in box 1.Standard mileage rate.The standard mile-
excess, or both, not required by planage rate for the cost of operating your car, van,
pickup, or panel truck in 2004 is 37.5 cents aNo reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.mile for all business miles. For more information,
see Car and truck expenses, under Miscellane-
ous Expenses. ❏ 526 Charitable Contributions satisfying your established substantiation re-
quirements, you can deduct the allowableMeal expense deduction subject to “hours of❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions amount on your tax return. Because of differ-service” limits.In 2005, this deduction in-
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of ences between accounting methods and taxcreases to 70% of the reimbursed meals your
law, these amounts may not be the same. ForAssetsemployees consume while they are subject to
example, you may deduct 100% of the cost ofthe Department of Transportation’s “hours of❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education meals on your business books and records.service” limits. For more information, see Meal
❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates However, for tax purposes, only 50% of theseexpenses when subject to “hours of service”
costs are allowed by law as a tax deduction.limits, later.
See chapter 14 for information about gettingA reimbursement or allowance arrangementpublications and forms. (including per diem allowances, discussed later)
depends on whether you have: (1) an accounta-
ble plan or (2) a nonaccountable plan. If youIntroduction
reimburse these expenses under an accounta-This chapter covers business expenses thatTravel, Meals, and ble plan, then you can deduct the amount allow-may not have been explained to you, as a busi- able to the extent of the tax law as travel, meal,ness owner, in previous chapters of this publica-Entertainment and entertainment expenses on your tax return.tion.
 If you reimburse these expenses under aTo be deductible for tax purposes, expensesnonaccountable plan, then you must report theTopics incurred for travel, meals, and entertainmentreimbursements as wages on Form W-2, WageThis chapter discusses: must be ordinary and necessary expenses in-and Tax Statement, and deduct them as wagescurred while carrying on your trade or business.on the appropriate line of your tax return. If you• Travel, meals, and entertainment Generally, you also must show that entertain-make a single payment to your employees and itment expenses (including meals) are directly• Bribes and kickbacks includes both wages and an expense reim-
related to, or associated with, the conduct ofbursement, you must specify the amount attribu-• Charitable contributions your trade or business. table to reimbursement and report it accordingly.
The following discussion explains how to• Education expenses See Table 13-1, Reporting Reimbursements.
handle any reimbursements or allowances you• Lobbying expenses may provide for these expenses when incurred
• Penalties and fines Accountable Plansby your employees. If you are self-employed
and report your income and expenses on• Repayments (claim of right) An accountable plan, requires your employeesSchedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040), see Publica-to meet all of the following requirements. They• Other miscellaneous expenses tion 463. must:
ReimbursementsUseful Items 1.  have paid or incurred deductible expenses
You may want to see: while performing services as your employ-A “reimbursement or allowance arrangement” ees,provides for payment of advances, reimburse-Publication ments, and charges for travel, meals, and enter-2.  adequately account to you for these ex-
tainment expenses incurred by your employees❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car penses within a reasonable period of time,
during the ordinary course of business. UponExpenses and
Page 48 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 49 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3.  return any excess reimbursement or al- (Form 1040) or line 2, Schedule C-EZ (Form
1. lodging expense, andlowance within a reasonable period of 1040).
time. If you are filing an income tax return for a2. meal and incidental expense (M & IE).
corporation, the reimbursement should be in-An arrangement under which you advance The rates are different for different locations.cluded with the amount claimed on the Othermoney to employees is treated as meeting (3) Publication 1542 lists the rates in the continentaldeductions line of Form 1120, U.S. Corporationabove only if the following requirements are also United States.Income Tax Return, or Form 1120-A, U.S. Cor-met. poration Short-Form Income Tax Return. If you Standard meal allowance.The federal rate
• The advance is reasonably calculated notare filing any other business income tax return,for meal and incidental expenses (M & IE) is the
to exceed the amount of anticipated ex-such as a partnership or S corporation return,standard meal allowance. You may pay only an
penses. deduct the reimbursement on the appropriateM & IE allowance to employees who travel away
line of the return as provided in the instructionsfrom home if:• You make the advance within a reasona-for that return.ble period of time. • you pay the employee for actual expenses
for lodging based on receipts submitted to
If any expenses reimbursed under this ar- you,Per Diem and Car Allowancesrangement are not substantiated, or an excess
• you provide for the lodging,reimbursement is not returned within a reasona-You may reimburse your employees under anble period of time by an employee, you are not • you pay for the actual expense of the lodg-accountable plan based on travel days, miles, orallowed to deduct these expenses as reim- ing directly to the provider,some other fixed allowance. In these cases,bursed under an accountable plan. Instead,your employee is considered to have accounted• you do not have reasonable belief thattreat the reimbursed expenses as paid under ato you for the amount of the expense that doeslodging expenses were incurred by thenonaccountable plan, discussed later. not exceed the rates established by the federalemployee, orgovernment. Your employee must actually sub-Adequate accounting. Your employees must • the allowance is computed on a basis sim-stantiate to you the other elements of the ex-adequately account to you for their travel, ilar to that used in computing thepense, such as time, place, and businessmeals, and entertainment expenses. They must employee’s wages (that is, number ofpurpose.give you documentary evidence of their travel, hours worked or miles traveled).mileage, and other employee business ex- Federal rate.The federal rate can be figuredpenses. This evidence should include items Internet access. Per diem rates are avail-using any one of the following methods.such as receipts, along with either a statement able on the Internet. You can access per diemof expenses, an account book, a day-planner, or1. For per diem amounts: rates at www.policyworks.gov/perdiem.similar record in which the employee entered
High-low method. This is a simplifiedeach expense at or near the time the expensea. The regular federal per diem rate.
method of computing the federal per diem ratewas incurred. b. The standard meal allowance. for lodging and meal expenses for travelingExcess reimbursement or allowance. An within the continental United States. It elimi-c. The high-low rate.excess reimbursement or allowance is any nates the need to keep a current list of the peramount you pay to an employee that is more diem rate in effect for each city in the continental2. For car expenses:than the business-related expenses for which United States.the employee adequately accounted. The em- a. The standard mileage rate. Under the high-low method, the per diemployee must return any excess reimbursement amount for travel during 2004 is $207 ($46 for Mb. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).or other expense allowance to you within a rea- & IE) for certain high-cost locations. All othersonable period of time. areas have a per diem amount of $126 ($36 for
M & IE). The high-cost locations eligible for theCar allowance. Your employee is consideredReasonable period of time. A reasonable $207 per diem amount under the high-lowto have accounted to you for car expenses thatperiod of time depends on the facts and circum- method are listed in Publication 1542.do not exceed the standard mileage rate. Forstances. Generally, actions that take place
2004, the standard mileage rate is 37.5 centswithin the times specified in the following list will Reporting per diem and car allowances.per mile for each business mile.be treated as taking place within a reasonable The following discussion explains how to reportYou can choose to reimburse your employ-period of time. per diem and car allowances. The manner inees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al-which you report them depends on how the1. You give an advance within 30 days of thelowance. This is an allowance that includes aallowance compares to the federal rate. Seetime the employee incurred the expense.combination of payments covering fixed and va-Table 13-1.riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to2. Your employees adequately account for Allowance less than or equal to the federalcover your employees’ variable operating coststheir expenses within 60 days after the ex- rate. If your allowance for the employee is less(such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to coverpenses were paid or incurred. than or equal to the appropriate federal rate, thatyour employees’ fixed costs (such as deprecia-
3. Your employees return any excess reim- allowance is not included as part of thetion, insurance, etc.). For information on using a
bursement within 120 days after the ex- employee’s pay in box 1 of the employee’s FormFAVR allowance, see Revenue Procedure
penses were paid or incurred. W-2. Deduct the allowance as travel expenses2002-61 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2002-39.
(including meals that may be subject to the 50%You can read Revenue Procedure 2002-61 at4. You give a periodic statement (at least
limit, discussed later). See How to deduct undermany public libraries or online at www.irs.gov.quarterly) to your employees that asks
Accountable Plans, earlier.them to either return or adequately ac-
Per diem allowance. If your employee actu-count for outstanding advances and they Allowance more than the federal rate.Ifally substantiates to you the other elements (dis-comply within 120 days of the date of the your employee’s allowance is more than thecussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursedstatement. appropriate federal rate, you must report theusing the per diem allowance, how you reportallowance as two separate items.and deduct the allowance depends on whetherHow to deduct. You can claim a deduction for Include the allowance amount up to the fed-the allowance is for lodging and meal expensestravel, meals, and entertainment expenses if eral rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee’sor for meal expenses only and whether the al-you reimburse your employees for these ex- Form W-2. Deduct it as travel expenses (aslowance is more than the federal rate.penses under an accountable plan. Generally, explained above). This part of the allowance is
the amount you can deduct for meals and enter-Regular federal per diem rate.The regular treated as reimbursed under an accountable
tainment, is subject to a 50% limit, discussed federal per diem rate is the highest amount the plan.
later. If you are a sole proprietor, or are filing as a federal government will pay to its employees Include the amount that is more than the
single member Limited Liability Company, de- while away from home on travel. It has two federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if they
duct the reimbursement on line 24b, Schedule C components: apply) of the employee’s Form W-2. Deduct it as
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 49

Page 50 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
wages subject to income tax withholding, social additional information on de minimis fringe ben-• The cost of providing meals, entertain-
security, Medicare, and federal unemployment efits. ment, goods and services, or use of facili-
taxes. This part of the allowance is treated as ties you sell to the public. For example, if
Company cafeteria or executive diningreimbursed under a nonaccountable plan as ex- you operate a nightclub, your expense for
room. The cost of food and beverages youplained later under Nonaccountable Plans. the entertainment you furnish to your cus-provide primarily to your employees on your tomers, such as a floor show, is a busi-business premises is deductible. This includesness expense that is fully deductible.the cost of maintaining the facilities for providingMeals and Entertainment • The cost of providing meals, entertain-the food and beverages. These expenses are
Under an accountable plan, you can generally ment, or recreational facilities to the gen-subject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as a
deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible eral public as a means of advertising orde minimis fringe benefit, discussed in Publica-
business-related meal and entertainment ex-tion 15-B, or unless they are compensation topromoting goodwill in the community is
penses you reimburse your employees. The de-your employees and you treat them as providedfully deductible.
duction limit applies even if you reimburse themunder a nonaccountable plan.
for 100% of the expenses.
Employee activities.The expense of provid-Application of the 50% limit.The 50% de- ing recreational, social, or similar activities (in-duction limit applies to reimbursements you Miscellaneouscluding the use of a facility) for your employeesmake to your employees for expenses they incuris deductible. The benefit must be primarily forfor meals while traveling away from home on Expensesyour employees who are not highly compen-business and for entertaining business custom-sated.ers at your place of business, a restaurant, or In addition to travel, meal, and entertainmentFor this purpose, a highly compensated em-another location. It applies to expenses incurred expenses, other miscellaneous expenses thatployee is an employee who meets either of theat a business convention or reception, business are deductible, subject to limitations, include:following requirements.meeting, or business luncheon at a club. The
• Amounts paid for the reasonable cost ofdeduction limit may also apply to meals you1. Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi-furnish on your premises to your employees. advertising that are directly related to yourness during the year or the preceding year.business activities. Generally, amountsAn employee is treated as owning any in-Related expenses. Taxes and tips relating paid to influence legislation (that is, lobby-terest owned by his or her brother, sister,to a meal or entertainment activity you reim- ing) are not deductible for tax purposes.spouse, ancestors, and lineal descend-burse to your employee under an accountable See Lobbying expenses, later.ants.plan are included in the amount subject to the
50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex- • Amounts paid that are directly related to2. Received more than $90,000 in pay for thepenses, such as cover charges for admission to the conduct of business meetings of yourpreceding year. You may choose to in-a nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinner employees, partners, stockholders,clude only employees who were also in theor cocktail party, or the amount you pay for agents, or directors. Some minor socialtop 20% of employees when ranked byparking at a sports arena, are all subject to the activities may be allowed, however thesepay for the preceding year.50% limit. However, the cost of transportation to expenses are subject to the 50% limit. For example, the expenses for food, bever-and from an otherwise allowable business meal
• Amounts paid that are directly related toages, and entertainment for a company-wideor a business-related entertainment activity is
and necessary for attending businesspicnic are not subject to the 50% limit.not subject to the 50% limit.
meetings or conventions of certain tax-ex-
Amount subject to 50% limit.If you provide empt organizations. These organizations
your employees with a per diem allowance onlyNonaccountable Plans include business leagues, chambers offor meal and incidental expenses, the amount commerce, real estates boards, and tradeA nonaccountable plan is an arrangement thattreated as an expense for food and beverages is and professional associations.does not meet the requirements for an account-the lesser of the following.
able plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid,• The per diem allowance. Advertising expenses.You can usually de-under a nonaccountable plan are reported as
duct as a business expense the cost of institu-wages on Form W-2. The payments are subject• The federal rate for M & IE.
to income tax withholding, social security, Medi-tional or goodwill advertising to keep your name
care, and federal unemployment taxes. You canIf you provide your employees with a per diem before the public if it relates to business you
deduct the reimbursement as compensation orallowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci- reasonably expect to gain in the future. For ex-
wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil-dental expenses, you must treat an amount ample, the cost of advertising that encourages
ity tests for employees’ pay in chapter 2. Deductequal to the federal M & IE rate for the area of people to contribute to the Red Cross, to buy
the allowable amount as compensation ortravel as an expense for food and beverages. If U.S. Savings Bonds, or to participate in similar
wages on the appropriate line of your income taxthe per diem allowance you provide is less than causes is usually deductible.
return, as provided in its instructions.the federal per diem rate for the area of travel,
you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance asGenerally, amounts paid for meals, enter-Amortization When you purchase an intangi-the amount for food and beverages. tainment, and amusement provided to individu-ble asset for your business, you may be able to
als who are not your employees are not subjectmake an election to amortize the asset over aMeal expenses when subject to “hours of to the 50% limit. Such activities must be directly15-year period. Examples of such property in-service” limits.For tax years beginning inrelated to the active conduct of your trade orclude the following.2004, 70% of the reimbursed meals your em-business. Examples include:ployees consume while away from their tax • goodwill,home on business during, or incident to, any• Amounts paid for meals, goods, services,
period subject to the Department of • going concern value,or the use of a facility. You are allowed a
Transportation’s hours of service limits are de-deduction only to the extent it is included• workforce in place (for example, the expe-ductible. in the gross income of the recipient as rience, education, or training of aSee Publication 463 for a detailed discussioncompensation for services or as a prize orworkforce),of individuals subject to the Department of award.
Transportation’s hours of service limits. • patent, copyright, formula, computer•  Expenses that exceed $600 and are re- software,De minimis (minimal) fringe benefit.The quired to be reported on an information
50% limit does not apply to an expense for food return, for example, Form 1099-MISC.• licenses and permits (for example, aor beverage that is excluded from the gross See the General Instructions for Forms broadcast license or a taxi-cab medallion),income of an employee because it is a de 1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G for more in-
• covenants not to compete, andminimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15-B for formation about reporting requirements.
Page 50 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 51 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• franchises, trademarks, and trade names. are deductible. For more information on how to additional amount. The deduction is the smaller
(See discussion on Franchise, trademark,figure your deduction, see Publication 463.of the following.
trade name, later, for deductibility) • The amount you received or accrued forCharitable contributions.Cash payments toSee Chapter 9 for additional information regard- damages in the tax year reduced by thean organization, charitable or otherwise, may being amortization. See Form 4562, Depreciation amount you paid or incurred in the year todeductible as business expenses if the pay-and Amortization, for information on how to recover that amount.ments are not charitable contributions or gifts. Ifmake the election and where to deduct yourthe payments are charitable contributions or• Your losses from the injury you have notamortization expense. gifts, you cannot deduct them as business ex-deducted.penses. However, corporations (other than SAnticipated liabilities.Anticipated liabilitiescorporations) can deduct charitable contribu-or reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de- Demolition expenses or losses. Amountstions on their income tax returns, subject toductible. For example, assume you sold 1-year paid or incurred to demolish a structure are notlimitations. See the Instructions for Form 1120TV service contracts this year totaling $50,000. deductible. These amounts are added to theand 1120-A for more information. Sole proprie-From experience, you know you will have ex- basis of the land where the demolished structuretors, partners in a partnership, or shareholderspenses of about $15,000 in the coming year for was located. Any loss for the remaining un-in an S corporation may be able to deduct chari-these contracts. You cannot deduct any of the depreciated basis of a demolished structuretable contributions made by their business on$15,000 this year by charging expenses to a would not be recognized until the property isSchedule A (Form 1040).reserve or liability account. You can deduct your disposed.
expenses only when you actually pay or accrueExample. You paid $15 to a local church forthem, depending on your accounting method. Depreciation.When you purchase real ora half-page ad in a program for a concert it is
personal property for use in your business, and itsponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en-Bribes and kickbacks.Engaging in the pay- has a useful life that extends substantially be-courage readers to buy your products. Your pay-ment of bribes or kickbacks is a serious criminal yond the year it is placed in service, generallyment is not a charitable contribution. However,matter. Such activity could result in criminal the cost must be spread over its useful life. Thisyou may deduct it as an advertising expense.prosecution. Any payments that appear to have method of recovering the cost of business prop-
been made, either directly or indirectly, to an erty is called depreciation. See Publication 946,Example. You made a $100,000 donationofficial or employee of any government or an How to Depreciate Property, for details on:to a committee organized by the local Chamberagency or instrumentality of any government areof Commerce to bring a convention to your city,• What property can be depreciated,not deductible for tax purposes and are in viola-intended to increase business activity, includingtion of the law. yours. Your payment is not a charitable contribu-• When to begin depreciation,
Payments paid directly or indirectly to a per-tion. However, you may deduct it as a business• Which method to use, andson in violation of any federal or state law (butexpense.
only if that state law is generally enforced, de- • How to report your depreciation deduction.See Publication 526 for a discussion of
fined below) that provides for a criminal penaltydonated inventory, including capital gain prop-
or for the loss of a license or privilege to engage For tangible personal property, for example, aerty.
in a trade or business are also not allowed as a desk top computer, you may be able to elect to
deduction for tax purposes. Club dues and membership fees.Generally, deduct the entire cost of the property in the year
amounts paid or incurred for membership in anythat you place it in service in your business. ThisMeaning of “generally enforced.”A state club organized for business, pleasure, recrea-is referred to as the “section 179 deduction.” Seelaw is considered generally enforced unless it istion, or any other social purpose are not deducti-Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortization, andnever enforced or enforced only for infamousble. Clubs organized for business, pleasure,its instructions for details.persons or persons whose violations are ex-recreation, or other social purpose include, buttraordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law isare not limited to country clubs, golf and athleticEducation expenses. Ordinary and neces-generally enforced unless proper reporting of aclubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline clubs,sary expenses paid for the cost of the educationviolation of the law results in enforcement onlyand clubs operated to provide meals under cir-and training of your employees are deductible.under unusual circumstances. cumstances generally considered to be condu-See Education Expenses in chapter 2.
Kickbacks. A kickback is a payment for re-cive to business discussions. You may also deduct the cost of your ownferring a client, patient, or customer. The com- education (including certain related travel) re-Exception. The following organizations aremon kickback situation occurs when money or lated to your trade or business. You must benot treated as clubs organized for business,property is given to someone as payment for able to show the education maintains or im-pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose un-influencing a third party to purchase from, use proves skills required in your trade or business,less one of the main purposes is to conductthe services of, or otherwise deal with the per- or that it is required by law or regulations, forentertainment activities for members or theirson who pays the kickback. In many cases, the keeping your license to practice, status, or job.guests or to provide members or their guestsperson whose business is being sought or en- For example, an attorney can deduct the cost ofwith access to entertainment facilities.joyed by the person who pays the kickback is not attending Continuing Legal Education (CLE)aware of the payment. • Boards of trade. classes that are required by the state bar associ-For example, the Yard Corporation is in the ation to maintain his or her license to practice• Business leagues.business of repairing ships. It engages in the law.• Chambers of commerce.practice of returning 10% of the repair bills as Education expenses you incur to meet thekickbacks to the captains and chief officers of• Civic or public service organizations.minimum requirements of your present trade orthe vessels it repairs. Although this practice is business, or those that qualify you for a new• Professional organizations such as bar as-considered an ordinary and necessary expense trade or business, are not deductible. This is truesociations and medical associations.of getting business, it is clearly a violation of a even if the education maintains or improvesstate law that is generally enforced. These ex-• Real estate boards. skills presently required in your business. Forpenditures are not deductible for tax purposes, more information on education expenses, see• Trade associations.whether or not the owners of the shipyard are Publication 970.subsequently prosecuted.
Damages recovered. Special rules apply toForm 1099-MISC. It does not matter Franchise, trademark, trade name.If you
compensation you receive for damages sus-whether any kickbacks paid during the tax year buy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, you
tained as a result of patent infringement, breachare deductible on your income tax return in re- can deduct the amount you pay or incur as a
of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola-gards to information reporting. See Form business expense only if your payments are part
tions. You must include this compensation in1099-MISC for more information. of a series of payments that are:
your income. However, you may be able to take
1. Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi-Car and truck expenses.The costs of operat- a special deduction. The deduction applies only
ing a car, truck, or other vehicle in your business to amounts recovered for actual injury, not any tion of the item,
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 51

Page 52 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Payable at least annually for the entire ble to business expenses. The portion attributa-Covered executive branch official.For
term of the transfer agreement, and ble to personal matters is the differencepurposes of this discussion, a covered executive
between the total amount and the business por- branch official is any of the following.3. Substantially equal in amount (or payabletion (computed above).under a fixed formula). 1. The President.Legal fees relating to personal tax advice
When determining the term of the transfermay be deductible on Line 22, Schedule A 2. The Vice President.
agreement, include all renewal options and any(Form 1040), if you itemize deductions. How-3. Any officer or employee of the Whiteother period for which you and the transferrerever, the deduction is subject to the 2% limita-House Office of the Executive Office of thereasonably expect the agreement to be re-tion on miscellaneous itemized deductions. SeePresident and the two most senior levelnewed. Publication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions forofficers of each of the other agencies inA franchise includes an agreement that givesmore information. the Executive Office.one of the parties to the agreement the right toTax preparation fees.The cost of hiring adistribute, sell, or provide goods, services, or 4. Any individual who:tax professional, such as a C.P.A., to preparefacilities within a specified area. that part of your tax return relating to your busi-a. Is serving in a position in Level I of the
ness as a sole proprietor is deductible on Sched-Impairment-related expenses.If you are dis- Executive Schedule under section 5312
ule C or Schedule C-EZ. Any remaining costabled, you can deduct expenses necessary for of title 5, United States Code,
may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) ifyou to be able to work (impairment-related ex-
b. Has been designated by the Presidentyou itemize deductions.penses) as a business expense, rather than as a
as having Cabinet-level status, ormedical expense. You can also claim a business deduction for
You are disabled if you have either of theamounts paid or incurred in resolving assertedc. Is an immediate deputy of an individual
following. tax deficiencies for your business operated as alisted in item (a) or (b).
sole proprietorship.• A physical or mental disability (for exam-
ple, blindness or deafness) that function- Exceptions to denial of deduction.TheLicenses and regulatory fees.Licenses andally limits your being employed. general denial of the deduction does not apply toregulatory fees for your trade or business paidthe following.• A physical or mental impairment that sub-annually to state or local governments generally
stantially limits one or more of your major • Expenses of appearing before, or commu-are deductible. Some licenses and fees may
life activities. nicating with, any local council or similarhave to be amortized. See chapter 9 for more
governing body concerning its legislationinformation.
The expense qualifies as a business expense (local legislation) if the legislation is of di-
if all the following apply. rect interest to you or to you and an organ-Lobbying expenses. Generally, lobbying ex-
ization of which you are a member. Anpenses are not deductible. Lobbying expenses• Your work clearly requires the expense for
Indian tribal government is treated as ainclude amounts paid or incurred for any of theyou to satisfactorily perform that work.
local council or similar governing body.following activities.• The goods or services purchased are
• Any in-house expenses for influencing leg-clearly not needed or used, other than in-• Influencing legislation.
islation and communicating directly with acidentally, in your personal activities.• Participating in or intervening in any politi-covered executive branch official if those
• Its treatment is not specifically provided forcal campaign for, or against, any candi- expenses for the tax year do not exceed
under other tax law provisions. date for public office. $2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).
• Attempting to influence the general public,• Expenses incurred by taxpayers engagedExample. You are blind. You must use a or segments of the public, about elections,in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-reader to do your work, both at and away fromlegislative matters, or referendums. fessional lobbyists) on behalf of anotheryour place of work. The reader’s services are person (but does apply to payments by the• Communicating directly with covered ex-only for your work. You can deduct your ex- other person to the lobbyist for lobbyingecutive branch officials (defined later) inpenses for the reader as a business expense. activities).any attempt to influence the official actions
or positions of those officials.Interview expense allowances.Reimburse-
ments you make to job candidates for transpor- Moving machinery. Generally, the cost of• Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-tation or other expenses related to interviews for moving machinery from one city to another is adinating any of the preceding activities.possible employment are not wages. You can deductible expense. So is the cost of moving
deduct the reimbursements as a business ex- machinery from one plant to another, or fromYour expenses for influencing legislation andpense. However, expenses for food, beverages, one part of your plant to another. You can de-communicating directly with a covered execu-and entertainment are subject to the 50% limit duct the cost of installing the machinery in thetive branch official include a portion of your labordiscussed earlier under Meals and Entertain- new location. However, you must capitalize thecosts and general and administrative costs ofment. costs of installing or moving newly purchasedyour business. For information on making this
machinery.allocation, see section 1.162-28 of the regula-Legal and professional fees.Fees charged
tions.by accountants and attorneys that are ordinary Outplacement services. The costs of out-You cannot claim a charitable or businessand necessary expenses directly related to op- placement services you provide to your employ-expense deduction for amounts paid to an or-erating your business are deductible as busi- ees to help them find new employment, such asganization if both of the following apply.ness expenses. However, usually, legal fees career counseling, resum´e assistance, skills as-
you pay to acquire business assets are not de- sessment, etc., are deductible.• The organization conducts lobbying activi-ductible. These costs are added to the basis of The costs of outplacement services mayties on matters of direct financial interestthe property. cover more than one deduction category. Forto your business.Fees that include payments for work of a example, deduct as a utilities expense the cost
personal nature (such as drafting a will, or dam-• A principal purpose of your contribution isof telephone calls made under this service and
ages arising from a personal injury), are notto avoid the rules discussed earlier thatdeduct as rental expense the cost of renting
allowed as a business deduction on Schedule Cprohibit a business deduction for lobbyingmachinery and equipment for this service.
or C-EZ. If the invoice includes both businessexpenses. For information on whether the value of out-
and personal charges, compute the business placement services is includable in your employ-
portion as follows. Multiply the total amount of If a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec-ees’ income, see Publication 15-B.
the bill by a fraction, the numerator of which is tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with a
the amount attributable to business matters, the notice on the part of dues that is allocable toPenalties and fines.Penalties paid for late
denominator of which is the total amount paid. nondeductible lobbying and political expenses, performance or nonperformance of a contract
The result is the portion of the invoice attributa- you cannot deduct that part of the dues. are generally deductible. For instance, you own
Page 52 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 53 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and operate a construction company. You have presentations, parties, and sporting Repayment—over $3,000. If the amount
been contracted to construct a building by aevents) if any of the proceeds from theyou repaid was more than $3,000, you can de-
certain date. Due to construction delays, thefunction are for, or intended for, the use ofduct the repayment, as described earlier. How-
building is not completed and ready for occu-a political party or candidate. ever, you can instead choose to take a tax credit
pancy on the date stipulated in the contract. You for the year of repayment if you included the• Admission to an inaugural ball, gala,are now required to pay an additional amount for income under a “claim of right.” This means thatparade, concert, or similar event if identi-each day that completion is delayed beyond the at the time you included the income, it appearedfied with a political party or candidate.completion date stipulated in the contract. that you had an unrestricted right to it. If youThese additional costs are deductible business qualify for this choice, figure your tax under bothRemoval costs. The cost of retiring and re-expenses. methods and use the method that results in lessmoving a depreciable asset in connection withOn the other hand, penalties or fines paid to tax.the installation or production of a replacementany government agency or instrumentality be-
asset is deductible. However, you must capital-Method 1. Figure your tax for 2004 claimingcause of a violation of any law are not deducti-
ize the cost of removing a component of aa deduction for the repaid amount.ble. These fines or penalties include the
depreciable asset if the replacement adds to thefollowing amounts. Method 2. Figure your tax for 2004 claimingvalue or usefulness of the asset or significantlya credit for the repaid amount. Follow these• Paid because of a conviction for a crime orincreases its useful life. steps.after a plea of guilty or no contest in a
criminal proceeding. Repairs. The cost of repairing or improving
1. Figure your tax for 2004 without deductingproperty used in your trade or business is either• Paid as a penalty imposed by federal, the repaid amount.a deductible or capital expense. Routine mainte-state, or local law in a civil action, includ-
nance that keeps your property in a normal effi-ing certain additions to tax and additional 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year
cient operating condition, but that does notamounts and assessable penalties im- without including in income the amountmaterially increase the value or substantiallyposed by the Internal Revenue Code. you repaid in 2004.prolong the useful life of the property is deducti-
• Paid in settlement of actual or possible 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownble in the year that it is incurred. Otherwise, theliability for a fine or penalty, whether civil on your return for the earlier year. This iscost must be depreciated over the useful life ofor criminal. the amount of your credit.the property. See Form 4562 and its instructions
for how to compute and claim the depreciation• Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro- 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax fordeduction.ceeding that could result in a fine or pen- 2004 figured without the deduction (stepThe cost of repairs includes the costs ofalty. 1).labor, supplies, and certain other items. The
If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct theExamples of nondeductible penalties andvalue of your own labor is not deductible. Exam-
amount repaid as discussed earlier under Typefines include the following. ples of repairs include:
of deduction.• Fines for violating city housing codes.• Reconditioning floors (but not replace-
If Method 2 results in less tax, claim thement),• Fines paid by truckers for violating state credit on line 69 of Form 1040, and write “I.R.C.
maximum highway weight laws. • Repainting the interior and exterior walls1341” next to line 69.
of a building,• Fines for violating air quality laws.
Example. For 2003, you filed a return and• Cleaning and repairing roofs and gutters,• Civil penalties for violating federal laws re- reported your income on the cash method. Inandgarding mining safety standards and dis- 2004, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2003charges into navigable waters. • Fixing plumbing leaks (but not replace-gross income under a claim of right. Your filingment of fixtures). status in 2004 and 2003 is single. Your incomeA fine or penalty does not include any of the and tax for both years are as follows:following. Repayments. If you had to repay an amount
2003 2003you included in your income in an earlier year,• Legal fees and related expenses to defend
With Income Without Incomeyou may be able to deduct the amount repaid foryourself in a prosecution or civil action for
Taxablethe year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amounta violation of the law imposing the fine or
Income $15,000 $10,000you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be ablecivil penalty.
to take a credit against your tax for the year inTax $ 1,904 $ 1,154• Court costs or stenographic and printingwhich you repaid it.charges. 2004 2004Type of deduction.The type of deduction Without Deduction With Deduction• Compensatory damages paid to a govern-you are allowed in the year of repayment de-Taxablement. pends on the type of income you included in theIncome $49,950 $44,950earlier year. For instance, if you repay an
Tax  $9,231  $ 7,981amount you previously reported as a capitalPolitical contributions.Contributions or gifts
gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss onpaid to political parties or candidates are not Your tax under Method 1 is $7,981. Your taxSchedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it asdeductible. In addition, expenses paid or in-
under Method 2 is $8,481, figured as follows:self-employment income, deduct it as a busi-curred to take part in any political campaign of a
ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedulecandidate for public office are not deductible. Tax previously determined for 2003 $ 1,904C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).Indirect political contributions.You can- Less: Tax as refigured.......... − 1,154If you reported the amount as wages, unem-not deduct indirect political contributions and Decrease in 2003 tax $ 750ployment compensation, or other nonbusinessRegular tax liability for 2004....... $9,231costs of taking part in political activities as busi-ordinary income, enter it on Schedule A (FormLess: Decrease in 2003 tax....... − 750ness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex-1040) as a miscellaneous itemized deductionRefigured tax for 2004 $ 8,481penses include the following. that is subject to the 2% limitation. However, if
the repayment is over $3,000 and Method 1• Advertising in a convention program of a Because you pay less tax under Method 1, you
(discussed later) applies, deduct it on Schedulepolitical party, or in any other publication if should take a deduction for the repayment in
A (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized de-any of the proceeds from the publication 2004.
duction that is not subject to the 2% limitation.are for, or intended for, the use of a politi- Repayment does not apply. This discus-cal party or candidate. Repayment—$3,000 or less. If the sion does not apply to the following.
amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it• Admission to a dinner or program (includ-
from your income in the year you repaid it.ing, but not limited to, galas, dances, film • Deductions for bad debts.
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 53

Page 54 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Deductions from sales to customers, such tions, and get more information from the IRS inFax. You can get over 100 of the most
as returns and allowances, and similar several ways. By selecting the method that is requested forms and instructions 24
items. best for you, you will have quick and easy ac- hours a day, 7 days a week, by fax.
cess to tax help. Just call 703-368-9694 from the telephone con-• Deductions for legal and other expenses nected to your fax machine. When you call, youof contesting the repayment. Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you will hear instructions on how to use the service.
have attempted to deal with an IRS problemThe items you request will be faxed to you.Year of deduction (or credit).If you use unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-For help with transmission problems, callthe cash method of accounting, you can take thepayer Advocate. 703-487-4608.deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the taxThe Taxpayer Advocate independently rep- Long-distance charges may apply.year in which you actually make the repayment.resents your interests and concerns within the
If you use any other accounting method, you canIRS by protecting your rights and resolving Phone. Many services are available bydeduct the repayment or claim a credit for it onlyproblems that have not been fixed through nor- phone.for the tax year in which it is a proper deductionmal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-
under your accounting method. For example, ifnot change the tax law or make a technical tax
you use the accrual method, you are entitled todecision, they can clear up problems that re-
the deduction or credit in the tax year in which • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-sulted from previous contacts and ensure that
the obligation for the repayment accrues. tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to orderyour case is given a complete and impartial
current-year forms, instructions, and publi-review.Subscriptions. Subscriptions to professional, cations and prior-year forms and instruc-To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:technical, and trade journals that deal with your tions. You should receive your order withinbusiness field are deductible. • Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at 10 days.1-877-777-4778.Supplies and materials.Unless you have de- • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocateducted the cost in any earlier year, you generally your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.office in your area.can deduct the cost of materials and supplies
• Solving problems. You can getactually consumed and used during the tax year.• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a face-to-face help solving tax problemsIf you keep incidental materials and suppliesTTY/TDD user. every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden-
• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. sistance Centers. An employee can ex-tal materials and supplies you bought during the
plain IRS letters, request adjustments totax year if all the following requirements are met.
For more information, see Publication 1546,your account, or help you set up a pay-• You do not keep a record of when they areThe Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS— ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-used. How To Get Help With Unresolved Tax tance Center for an appointment. To find
Problems.• You do not take an inventory of the the number, go to
amount on hand at the beginning and end www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in theFree tax services.To find out what servicesof the tax year. phone book under United States Govern-are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide toment, Internal Revenue Service.• This method does not distort your income.Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accesspublications and an index of tax topics. It also
You can also deduct the cost of books, profes- to TTY/TDD equipment, calldescribes other free tax information services,
sional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor- 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toincluding tax education and assistance pro-
mally use them within a year. However, if the order forms and publications.grams and a list of TeleTax topics.
usefulness of these items extends substantially • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 andInternet. You can access the IRS web-beyond the year they are placed in service, you press 2 to listen to pre-recordedsite 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, atgenerally must recover their costs through de- messages covering various tax topics.www.irs.gov to:preciation. See Depreciation, earlier.
• Refund information. If you would like toUtilities.Business expenses for heat, lights, check the status of your 2004 refund, call• E-file your return. Find out about commer-power, telephone service, and water and sewer- 1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for auto-cial tax preparation and e-file servicesage are deductible. However, any part attributa- mated refund information or callavailable free to eligible taxpayers.ble to personal use is not deductible. 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6• Check the status of your 2004 refund.Telephone. The cost of basic local tele- weeks from the date you filed your returnClick on Where’s My Refund. Be sure tophone service (including any taxes) for the first (3 weeks if you filed electronically). Havewait at least 6 weeks from the date youtelephone line you have in your home, even your 2004 tax return available becausefiled your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-though you have an office in your home is not you will need to know your filing statustronically). Have your 2004 tax returndeductible. However, charges for business and the exact whole dollar amount of youravailable because you will need to knowlong-distance phone calls on that line, as well as refund.your filing status and the exact whole dol-the cost of a second line into your home usedlar amount of your refund.exclusively for business, are deductible busi- Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-• Download forms, instructions, and publica-ness expenses. ices. To ensure that IRS representatives givetions. accurate, courteous, and professional answers,
• Order IRS products online. we use several methods to evaluate the quality
of our telephone services. One method is for a• Research your tax questions online. second IRS representative to sometimes listen
• Search publications online by topic orin on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask
keyword. some callers to complete a short survey at the14.
end of the call.• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)
published in the last few years.
Walk-in. Many products and services• Figure your withholding allowances usingHow To Get Tax are available on a walk-in basis.our Form W-4 calculator.
• Sign up to receive local and national taxHelp
news by email. • Products. You can walk in to many post
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upYou can get help with unresolved tax issues,• Get information on starting and operating
certain forms, instructions, and publica-order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- a small business.
Page 54 Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help

Page 55 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery after your request is received. Use the address• Internal Revenue Bulletins.
stores, copy centers, city and county gov- that applies to your part of the country.
Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical In-ernment offices, credit unions, and office• Western part of U.S.: formation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/supply stores have a collection of productsWestern Area Distribution Center cdorders for $22 (no handling fee) or callavailable to print from a CD-ROM or pho- Rancho Cordova, CA 95743-0001 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the CD-ROM fortocopy from reproducible proofs. Also,
• Central part of U.S.: $22 (plus a $5 handling fee). The first release issome IRS offices and libraries have the
Central Area Distribution Center available in early January and the final release isInternal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter-
P.O. Box 8903 available in late February.nal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative
Bloomington, IL 61702-8903Bulletins available for research purposes.
CD-ROM for small businesses. Pub-
• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign• Services. You can walk in to your local lication 3207, The Small Business Re-
addresses:Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- source Guide, CD-ROM 2004, is a
Eastern Area Distribution Centerness day to ask tax questions or get help must for every small business owner or any
P.O. Box 85074with a tax problem. An employee can ex- taxpayer about to start a business. This handy,
Richmond, VA 23261-5074plain IRS letters, request adjustments to interactive CD contains all the business tax
your account, or help you set up a pay- forms, instructions, and publications needed to
ment plan. You can set up an appointment CD-ROM for tax products. You can successfully manage a business. In addition, the
by calling your local Center and, at the order Publication 1796, IRS FederalCD provides other helpful information, such as
prompt, leaving a message requesting Tax Products CD-ROM, and obtain: how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-
Everyday Tax Solutions help. A represen- ing for your business, and much more. The de-
tative will call you back within 2 business sign of the CD makes finding information easy• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-days to schedule an in-person appoint- and quick and incorporates file formats andlications.ment at your convenience. To find the browsers that can be run on virtually any
number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts • Prior-year forms and instructions. desktop or laptop computer.
or look in the phone book under United It is available in early April. You can get a• Frequently requested tax forms that mayStates Government, Internal Revenue free copy by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visit-be filled in electronically, printed out forService. ing www.irs.gov/smallbiz.submission, or saved for recordkeeping.
Mail. You can send your order for
forms, instructions, and publications to
the Distribution Center nearest to you
and receive a response within 10 business days
Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help Page 55

Page 56 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Charitable: Elderly, improvements Improvements ................ 3A
for ........................ 2 9By lessee.................. 1 6Contributions............... 5 1Accountable plan........... 4 8
For disabled and elderly.... 2 9Election:Circulation costs, newspapersAchievement awards ......... 6
SIMPLE IRA period......... 1 1and periodicals........... 2 8 Income taxes................ 2 2Advertising.................. 5 0
Electric vehicle credit....... 4 7Clean-fuel property......45, 46, Incorrect amount ofAmortization................ 5 0
47 amortization deducted.... 3 5Employee benefitAnti-abuse rule............. 3 5
programs .................. 7Cleanup costs, Individual retirementAnti-churning rules......... 3 4
environmental....... 2 ,  26, 28 arrangements (IRAs)...... 1 4Employees’ pay .............. 6Corporate organization
Club dues ................... 5 1 Insurance:costs.................... 3 1 Employment taxes .......... 2 3
Capitalized premiums....... 2 5Dispositions of section 197 Comments on publication.... 1 Entertainment............... 4 8
Deductible premiums....... 2 3intangibles............... 3 5Commitment fees ........... 1 9Environmental cleanup
NondeductibleExperimental costs......... 3 7 costs................ 2 ,  26, 28Compensation .............. 1 0
premiums ................ 2 5Going into business Environmental remediationComputer software.......... 3 4
costs.................... 3 1 Self-employedcosts (See EnvironmentalConstant-yield method, individuals............... 2 4How to deduct............. 3 0 cleanup costs)OID ....................... 1 9Incorrect amount Intangible drilling costs..... 2 7Excise taxes................ 2 3Contested liability............ 4deducted ................ 3 5 Intangibles, amortization.... 3 2Experimentation costs..... 2 7 ,Contributions:Partnership organization Interest:37Charitable................. 5 1costs.................... 3 1 Allocation of................ 1 7Exploration costs........... 2 7Political.................... 5 3Pollution control facilities.... 3 6 Below-market.............. 2 0Copyrights.................. 3 3Reforestation costs......... 3 6 Business expense for....... 1 6Cost depletion.............. 3 7Reforestation expenses..... 2 9 F Capitalized................. 1 9Cost of getting lease....16, 32Related person............. 3 4 Fees: Carrying charge............ 2 6Cost of goods sold........... 3Research costs............ 3 7 Commitment ............... 1 9 Deductible................. 1 8
Section 197 intangibles Cost recovery................ 3 Legal and professional...... 5 2 Forgone ................... 2 0
defined.................. 3 2Covenant not to Loan origination............ 1 9 Life insurance policies...... 1 9
Start-up costs.............. 3 1 compete .................. 3 3Regulatory................. 5 2Not deductible............. 1 9
Anticipated liabilities........ 5 1 Tax return preparation...... 5 2Credit, electric vehicle....... 4 7 Refunds of................. 2 0
Assessments, local......... 2 2 Fines........................ 5 2When to deduct............ 2 0
Assistance (See Tax help) Forgone interest............ 2 0Interview expenses.......... 5 2
DAt-risk limits................. 4 Form: IRA .......................... 1 4De minimis OID ............. 1 8 1098 ...................... 1 8Attorney fees................ 5 2
Debt-financed: 3115 ..................22, 35Awards:
Distributions............... 1 8 K4562 ...................... 3 0Achievement................ 6
Definitions: 5213 ....................... 5Keogh plan (See QualifiedLength-of-service............ 6
Achievement award......... 6 5304-SIMPLE .............. 1 0 retirement plan)Safety achievement......... 6
5305-S .................... 1 1Business bad debt.......... 4 2 Key person.................. 1 9
5305-SA ................... 1 1Clean-burning fuel.......... 4 5 Kickbacks ................... 5 1
5305-SEP .................. 9B Clean-fuel vehicle
5305-SIMPLE .............. 1 0property................. 4 5Bad debts (See Business bad
8826 ...................... 3 0LClean-fuel vehicle refuelingdebts)
8834 ...................... 4 7property................. 4 5 Leases:Bonuses:
8885 ...................... 2 4Motor vehicle.............. 4 5 Canceling.................. 1 5Employee ................... 7
T .......................... 4 2Necessary expense......... 3 Cost of getting.........16, 32Royalties.................. 4 1
W - 2 ....................... 1 2Nonqualifying property...... 4 5 Improvements by lessee.... 1 6Bribes....................... 5 1
Franchise ...............33, 51Ordinary expense........... 3 Leveraged ................. 1 5Brownfields (See Environmental
Franchise taxes............. 2 3Qualified electric vehicle.... 4 7 Mineral.................... 4 1cleanup costs)
Section 197 intangibles..... 3 2 Oil and gas................ 4 1Free tax services............ 5 4Business:
Sales distinguished......... 1 5Demolition expenses........ 5 1Fringe benefits............... 7Assets...................... 3
Taxes on .................. 1 5Depletion: Fuel taxes................... 2 3Books and records......... 3 3
Legal and professionalMineral property............ 3 7Meal expenses............. 5 0
fees....................... 5 2Oil and gas wells........... 3 8Use of car...............4 ,  5 1 G Licenses ................33, 52Percentage table........... 4 0Use of home................ 3 Gas wells ................... 4 0Timber..................... 4 1 Limit on deductions.......... 5Business bad debts: Geothermal wells........27, 40Who can claim............. 3 7 Line of credit................ 1 8Defined.................... 4 2
Gifts, nominal value.......... 7Depreciation................ 5 1How to treat................ 4 3 Loans:
Going into business......... 3 1Recovery .................. 4 4Development costs, Below-market interest
Goodwill .................... 3 3Types of................... 4 3miners .................... 2 8 rate..................... 2 0
When worthless............ 4 3 Discounted................ 2 0Disabled, improvements
Where to deduct........... 4 4 Origination fees............ 1 9for ........................ 2 9H To employees............... 8Drilling and development Health insurance, deduction forLobbying expenses ......... 5 2costs...................... 2 7self-employed............. 2 4C Lodging and meals........... 7Dues, membership .......... 5 1Heating equipment........... 3Campaign contribution...... 5 3 Long-term careHelp (See Tax help)Capital expenses............. 3 insurance ................. 2 4
ECapitalization of interest.... 1 9 Losses:
Economic interest........... 3 7Car allowance............... 4 9 I At-risk limits................. 4
Economic performance ...... 4Car and truck expenses..... 5 1 Net operating............... 4Impairment-related
Education expenses.......7 ,  5 1Carrying charges............ 2 6 expenses ................. 5 2Passive activities............ 4
Page 56

Page 57 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalties: Per diem................... 4 9Subscriptions...........51, 54M
Deductible................. 5 2Qualifying requirements..... 4 8Suggestions forMachinery parts.............. 3
Nondeductible............. 5 2Related persons: publication ................. 1Meals ....................... 4 8
Prepayment................ 1 8 Anti-churning rules......... 3 4Supplies and materials...... 5 4Meals and entertainment.... 5 0
Per diem and car allowances: Clean-fuel vehicleMeals and lodging............ 7 High-low rate............... 4 9 deduction................ 4 6Medical expenses........... 5 2 TRegular rate............... 4 9 Coal or iron ore............ 4 1Methods of accounting....... 4 Tax help..................... 5 4Reporting allowance........ 4 9 Payments to.............4 ,  2 0Mining: Tax preparation fees........ 5 2Standard meal Refiners ................... 3 8Depletion.................. 4 0 Taxes:allowance................ 4 9 Unreasonable rent.......... 1 4Development costs......... 2 8 Carrying charge............ 2 6Standard mileage rate...... 4 9Removal:Exploration costs........... 2 7 Employment ............... 2 3Percentage depletion........ 3 8 Barrier..................... 2 9Money purchase pension Excise..................... 2 3Costs...................... 5 3Personal property tax....... 2 3plan....................... 1 2 Franchise.................. 2 3Retired asset............... 2 9Points....................... 1 9 Fuel....................... 2 3More information (See Tax help) Rent expense,Political contributions....... 5 3 Income .................... 2 2Mortgage: capitalizing................ 1 6Pollution control Leased property............ 1 5Cost of acquiring........... 1 8 Repairs ..................... 5 3facilities................... 3 6 Personal property.......... 2 3Interest.................... 1 8 Repayments (claim ofPrepaid expense............. 4 Real estate................ 2 2Moving expenses, right)...................... 5 3Extends useful life.......... 2 6 Sales...................... 2 3machinery ................ 5 2 Research costs .........27, 37Interest.................... 2 0 Unemployment fund........ 2 3
Rent....................... 1 5Retirement plans: Taxpayer Advocate.......... 5 4N Defined benefit............. 1 2Prepayment penalty......... 1 8 Telephone ................... 5 4Natural gas.................. 4 0 Defined contribution........ 1 2Presumption of profit......... 5 Timber ..................36, 41I R A........................ 1 4Nonqualifying Profit-sharing plans......... 1 2 Tools......................... 3Money purchase ........... 1 2intangibles................ 3 3Publications (See Tax help) Trademark, trade name..... 3 3 ,Profit-sharing.............. 1 2Not-for-profit activities....... 5 51Qualified................... 1 2Notification requirement: Q Travel....................... 4 8Salary reductionSIMPLE IRA ............... 1 1Qualified retirement plan.... 1 2 TTY/TDD information........ 5 4arrangement.............. 9
S E P ........................ 9
O SIMPLE ................... 1 0RUOffice in home............... 3Rate Worksheet for Unemployment fundOil and gas wells: SSelf-Employed ............ 1 3 taxes...................... 2 3Depletion.................. 3 8 Salaries and wages........... 6Real estate taxes............ 2 2 Unpaid expenses, relatedDrilling costs............... 2 7 person .................... 2 0Sales taxes.................. 2 3Recapture:Partnerships............... 4 0
Clean-fuel deductions...... 4 6 Utilities...................... 5 4Self-employed health insuranceS corporations............. 4 0
Electric vehicle credit....... 4 7 deduction ................. 2 4Organization costs........2 ,  2 6Exploration expenses....... 2 8Self-employment tax........ 2 3Corporate.................. 3 1 VTimber property............ 3 6Self-insurance, reservePartnership................ 3 1 Vacation pay................. 8Recovery of amount for ........................ 2 5Organizational costs........ 2 9 deducted ................... 4SEP plans .................... 9Original issue discount...... 1 8 WReforestation costs...... 2 ,  2 6 ,Sick pay...................... 8Outplacement services...... 5 2 Wages and salaries.......... 629, 36 SIMPLE plans ........10, 11, 12 Welfare benefit funds......... 7Regulatory fees............. 5 2Standard meal allowance.... 4 9P Reimbursements ............ 4 8Standard mileage rate....... 4 9 ■Passive activities............. 4 Accountable plan........... 4 8Standby charges............ 1 9Payments in kind............. 4 Mileage.................... 4 9Start-up costs..... 2 ,  26, 29, 31Nonaccountable plan....... 5 0
Page 57

Page 58 of 58 of Publication 535 12:46 - 21-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Business Taxpayers
General Guides
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Spanish Language Publications
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2005
Highlights of 2004 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
(Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guide
Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide
(Circular A), Agricultural Employer’s
Tax Guide
(Circular SS), Federal Tax Guide For
Employers in the U.S. Virgin Islands,
Guam, American Samoa, and the
Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Circular PR Guía Contributiva Federal
Para Patronos Puertorriqueños
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Excise Taxes for 2005
Withholding of Tax on Nonresident
Aliens and Foreign Entities
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
Residential Rental Property
Self-Employment Tax
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Business Expenses
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Installment Sales
Accounting Periods and Methods
Corporations
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Basis of Assets
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Retirement Plans for Small Business
(SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans)
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Starting a Business and Keeping
Records
The IRS Collection Process
Information on the United States-
Canada Income Tax Treaty
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
How To Depreciate Property
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS—How To Get Help With
Unresolved Tax Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
Tax on Unrelated Business Income of
Exempt Organizations
Wage and Tax Statement
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends*
Profit or Loss From Business*
Net Profit From Business*
Capital Gains and Losses*
Supplemental Income and Loss*
Profit or Loss From Farming*
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled*
Estimated Tax for Individuals*
Self-Employment Tax*
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*
Capital Gains and Losses*
Partner’s Share of Income,
Deductions, Credits, etc.*
U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return*
U.S. Income Tax Return for an S Corporation
Employee Business Expenses*
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses*
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative*
Child and Dependent Care Expenses*
General Business Credit*
Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*
Moving Expenses*
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts*
Installment Sale Income*
Noncash Charitable Contributions*
Change of Address*
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home*
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
Nondeductible IRAs*
Passive Activity Loss Limitations*
15
15-A
51
80
179
926
378
463
505
510
515
517
527
533
534
535
536
537
541
538
542
Partnerships
544
551
556
560
561
583
594
597
598
901
911
925
946
947
908
1544
1546
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
10134
Sch A & B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes*
Sch R
Sch SE
1040-ES
1040X
Sch D
Sch K-1
1120
1120S
1065 U.S. Return of Partnership Income*
2106
2106-EZ
2441
2848
3800
4868
3903
5329
6252
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Specialized Publications
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Employee’s Withholding Allowance Certificate*W-4
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return*
940
940-EZ
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*1040
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return*
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
587
U.S. Tax Treaties
Practice Before the IRS and Power of
Attorney
Tax Incentives for Distressed
CommunitiesEmployer’s Guides
Certification for Reduced Tax Rates in
Tax Treaty Countries
686
954
Capital Gains and Losses and Built-In Gains
Shareholder’s Share of Income,
Deductions, Credits, etc.
Sch D
Sch K-1
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals,
Estates, and Trusts*
2210
Report of Cash Payments Over $10,000 Received
in a Trade or Business*
8300
Depreciation and Amortization*4562
Sales of Business Property*4797
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
U.S. Corporation Short-Form Income
Tax Return*
1120-A
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including by
computer, phone, and mail.
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. Items with an asterisk are available by fax. For these orders only, use the catalog number
when ordering.
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
W-2
10220
11234
10983
17001
11320
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
11346
12187
11358
11340
11360
Employer’s Quarterly Federal Tax Return*941
11359
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen* 25513
11510
Catalog
Number
20604
11744
11862
11980
12392
12490
12906
13086
13141
13329
13601
62299
63966
12081
13232
63704
6213311390
11393
11394
11450
11456
11700
11520
11516
Form Number and Title
Continuation Sheet for Schedule D*Sch D-1 10424
Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits
15-B
Page 58