Userid: DXWOLF00 DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\xcgcb\documents\2008 Publications\Pub 550\P550.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
What's New .................... . 2Department
of the Reminders ..................... . 2
Treasury Investment
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue Chapter 1. Investment Income ....... . 3
Income andService General Information ............. . 3
Interest Income ................ . 5
Discount on Debt Instruments ..... . 13
Expenses When To Report Interest Income ... . 16
How To Report Interest Income .... . 17
Dividends and Other Corporate
Distributions .............. . 19(Including Capital How To Report Dividend Income ... . 23
Stripped Preferred Stock ......... . 25Gains and Losses) REMICs, FASITs, and Other
CDOs ................... . 25
S Corporations ............... . 26For use in preparing Investment Clubs .............. . 26
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other2008 Returns Reportable Transactions ........ . 28
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses ..... . 31
Limits on Deductions ........... . 31
Interest Expenses ............. . 31
Bond Premium Amortization ....... . 34
Expenses of Producing Income .... . 35
Nondeductible Expenses ......... . 36
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................ . 37
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................ . 37
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property ........... . 38
What Is a Sale or Trade? ......... . 38
Basis of Investment Property ...... . 41
How To Figure Gain or Loss ...... . 45
Nontaxable Trades ............. . 45
Transfers Between Spouses ...... . 47
Related Party Transactions ....... . 47
Capital Gains and Losses ........ . 48
Capital or Ordinary Gain or
Loss ................. . 48
Holding Period ............. . 52
Nonbusiness Bad Debts ...... . 53
Short Sales ............... . 54
Wash Sales ............... . 55
Options ................. . 56
Straddles ................ . 58
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives ...... . 61
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded
Securities ............. . 62
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock ......... . 62
Rollover of Gain From Sale
of Empowerment Zone
Assets ............... . 64
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses .................. . 64
Special Rules for Traders in
Securities ................ . 72
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help ..... . 73Get forms and other information
Glossary ...................... . 75faster and easier by:
Index ......................... . 77
Internet www.irs.gov
Jan 02, 2009

Page 2 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the tax, penalties that apply, and interest. For and what investment expenses are deductible. ItWhat's New explains when and how to show these items onmore information, see Publication 515, With-
your tax return. It also explains how to determineholding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and For-
Maximum tax rate on qualified dividends and and report gains and losses on the disposition ofeign Entities.net capital gain reduced. Beginning in 2008, investment property and provides information
the 5% maximum tax rate on qualified dividends Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. on property trades and tax shelters.
and net capital gain (the excess of net long-term citizen with investment income from sources The glossary at the end of this publica-capital gain over net short-term capital loss) is outside the United States (foreign income), you tion defines many of the terms used.reduced to 0 (zero)%. This reduction applies for must report that income on your tax return un-
both regular and alternative minimum tax. The
TIP less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether
15% maximum tax rate on qualified dividends you reside inside or outside the United States
and net capital gain has not changed. and whether or not you receive a Form 1099
Investment income. This generally includesfrom the foreign payer.Tax on child's investment income. Form interest, dividends, capital gains, and other8615 is required to figure the tax for a child with Alien's individual taxpayer identification types of distributions.investment income more than $1,800 if the child: number (ITIN). If you are a nonresident or
Investment expenses. These include interestresident alien and do not have and are not eligi-1. Was under age 18 at the end of 2008, paid or incurred to acquire investment propertyble to get a social security number (SSN), you
2. Was age 18 at the end of 2008 and did not and expenses to manage or collect income frommust apply for an ITIN. For details on how to do
have earned income that was more than investment property.so, see Form W-7, Application for IRS Individualhalf of the child's support, or Taxpayer Identification Number, and its instruc- Comments and suggestions. We welcometions. If you already have an ITIN, enter it wher-3. Was a full-time student over age 18 and your comments about this publication and yourever an SSN is requested on your tax return.under age 24 at the end of 2008 and did suggestions for future editions.not have earned income that was more An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle You can write to us at the following address:than half of the child's support. you to social security benefits or change your
employment or immigration status under U.S.The election to report a child's investment in- Internal Revenue Servicelaw.come on a parent's return and the special rule Individual Forms and Publications Branchfor when a child must file Form 6251 also now Sale of DC Zone assets. Investments in Dis- SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Iapply to the children listed above. For more trict of Columbia Enterprise Zone (DC Zone) 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526information, see Tax on investment income of assets acquired after 1997 and held more than 5 Washington, DC 20224certain children  under General Information  in years will qualify for a special tax benefit. If youchapter 1. sell or trade a DC Zone asset at a gain, you may We respond to many letters by telephone.be able to exclude the qualified capital gain fromLike-kind exchanges. The trade of stock in a Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation company your gross income. This exclusion applies to an clude your daytime phone number, including themay qualify as a like-kind exchange. For more interest in, or property of, certain businesses area code, in your correspondence.information, see Like-Kind Exchanges in chap- operating in the District of Columbia. For more You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Theter 4. information about the exclusion, see the Sched- asterisk must be included in the address.)ule D instructions. For more information about Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-Worthless securities. Worthless securities DC Zone assets, see Publication 954, Tax In- ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-may include stock abandoned after March 12, centives for Distressed Communities. ally to each email, we do appreciate your2008. For more information, see Worthless Se-
feedback and will consider your comments ascurities in chapter 4. Photographs of missing children. The Inter- we revise our tax products.nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- Ordering forms and publications. Visit
dren. Photographs of missing children selected www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
Reminders publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theby the Center may appear in this publication on
address below and receive a response within 10pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
days after your request is received.U.S. property acquired from a foreign per- help bring these children home by looking at the
son. If you acquire a U.S. real property inter- photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
est from a foreign person or firm, you may have (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. Internal Revenue Serviceto withhold income tax on the amount you pay 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayfor the property (including cash, the fair market Bloomington, IL 61705-6613value of other property, and any assumed liabil-
ity). Domestic or foreign corporations, partner- Introduction Tax questions. If you have a tax question,ships, trusts, and estates may also have to
This publication provides information on the tax check the information available on www.irs.govwithhold on certain distributions and other trans-
or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxtreatment of investment income and expenses.actions involving U.S. real property interests. If
questions sent to either of the above addresses.It explains what investment income is taxableyou fail to withhold, you may be held liable for
Page 2 Publication 550 (2008)

Page 3 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See Ordering forms and publications  above by federal tax law to make a return, statement,
for information about getting these publications or other document that relates to you. This in-
and forms. cludes payers of interest and dividends.
1. SSN for joint account. If the funds in a joint
account belong to one person, list that person's
name first on the account and give that person'sGeneral Information SSN to the payer. (For information on who ownsInvestment
the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,A few items of general interest are covered here. later.) If the joint account contains combined
Income funds, give the SSN of the person whose nameRecordkeeping.You should keep a list
is listed first on the account.showing sources and amounts of in-
These rules apply both to joint ownership byvestment income that you receive dur-
RECORDS
a married couple and to joint ownership by othering the year. Also, keep the forms you receiveTopics
individuals. For example, if you open a jointthat show your investment income (FormsThis chapter discusses: savings account with your child using funds be-1099-INT, Interest Income, and 1099-DIV, Divi-
longing to the child, list the child's name first ondends and Distributions, for example) as an im-• Interest income, the account and give the child's SSN.portant part of your records.
• Dividends and other corporate distribu- Custodian account for your child. If yourTax on investment income of certain chil-tions, child is the actual owner of an account that isdren. Part of a child's 2008 investment income• Real estate mortgage investment conduits recorded in your name as custodian for the child,may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. This may(REMICs), financial asset securitization in- give the child's SSN to the payer. For example,happen if all of the following are true.vestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat- you must give your child's SSN to the payer of
eralized debt obligations (CDOs), dividends on stock owned by your child, even1. The child had more than $1,800 of invest-
though the dividends are paid to you as custo-ment income.• S corporations, and dian.2. The child is required to file a tax return.• Investment clubs. Penalty for failure to supply SSN. You will3. The child was: be subject to a penalty if, when required, you fail
to:Useful Items a. Under age 18 at the end of 2008,
You may want to see: • Include your SSN on any return, state-b. Age 18 at the end of 2008 and did not ment, or other document,have earned income that was morePublication
than half of the child's support, or • Give your SSN to another person who has
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income to include it on any return, statement, orc. A full-time student over age 18 and other document, orunder age 24 at the end of 2008 and❏ 537 Installment Sales
did not have earned income that was • Include the SSN of another person on any❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions more than half of the child's support. return, statement, or other document.
❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-4. At least one of the child's parents was(IRAs) mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.alive at the end of 2008.❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules You will not be subject to this penalty if you5. The child does not file a joint return for❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount can show that your failure to provide the SSN2008.(OID) Instruments was due to a reasonable cause and not to willful
A child born on January 1, 1991, is considered neglect.
to be age 18 at the end of 2008; a child bornForm (and Instructions) If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also be
on January 1, 1990, is considered to be age 19 subject to backup withholding.❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and at the end of 2008; a child born on January 1,
Ordinary Dividends Backup withholding. Your investment in-1985, is considered to be age 24 at the end of
come is generally not subject to regular with-2008.❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and
holding. However, it may be subject to backupIf all of these statements are true, Form 8615Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040A
withholding to ensure that income tax is col-must be completed and attached to the child'sFilers
lected on the income. Under backup withhold-tax return. If any of these statements is not true,
❏ 1099 General Instructions for Forms ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,Form 8615 is not required and the child's income
1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G original issue discount (OID), dividends, cashis taxed at his or her own tax rate.
patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,However, the parent can choose to include❏ 3115 Application for Change in
as income tax, 28% of the amount you are paid.the child's interest and dividends on the parent'sAccounting Method
Backup withholding applies if:return if certain requirements are met. Use Form
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax Ð 8814 for this purpose.
1. You do not give the payer your identifica-Individuals For more information about the tax on invest-
tion number (either a social security num-ment income of children and the parents' elec-❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations ber or an employer identification number)tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for Children
❏ 8615 Tax for Certain Children Who Have in the required manner,and Dependents.
Investment Income of More Than 2. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) noti-Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest,$1,800 fies the payer that you gave an incorrectdividends, and other investment income you re-❏ 8814 Parents' Election To Report Child's identification number,ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust isInterest and Dividends generally taxable income. You should receive a 3. The IRS notifies the payer that you are
Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series subject to backup withholding on interest
of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from theEE and I U.S. Savings Bonds or dividends because you have underre-
fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and itsIssued After 1989 ported interest or dividends on your in-
instructions will tell you where to report the in- come tax return, or❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record come on your Form 1040.Redemption of Series EE and I 4. You are required, but fail, to certify that
U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After Social security number (SSN). You must you are not subject to backup withholding
1989 give your name and SSN to any person required for the reason described in (3).
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Certification. For new accounts paying in- this certification. If you fail to make this certifica- • You failed to include any part of a reporta-
terest or dividends, you must certify under pen- ble interest or dividend payment requiredtion, backup withholding may begin immediately
alties of perjury that your social security number to be shown on your return, oron your new account or investment.
is correct and that you are not subject to backup • You were required to file a return and toUnderreported interest and dividends.withholding. Your payer will give you a Form include a reportable interest or dividendYou will be considered to have underreportedW-9, Request for Taxpayer Identification Num- payment on that return, but you failed toyour interest and dividends if the IRS has deter-ber and Certification, or similar form, to make file the return.mined for a tax year that:
How to stop backup withholding due toTable 1-1. Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income underreporting. If you have been notified that
(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this you underreported interest or dividends, you can
publication, especially How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend request a determination from the IRS to preventIncome in chapter 1.) backup withholding from starting or to stop
backup withholding once it has begun. You must
Type of Income If you file Form 1040, If you can file Form If you can file Form show that at least one of the following situations
report on ... 1040A, report on ... 1040EZ, report on ... applies.
• No underreporting occurred.Taxable interest that Line 8a (You may need Line 8a (You may need Line 2
totals $1,500 or less to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as • You have a bona fide dispute with the IRSwell.) well.) about whether underreporting occurred.
Taxable interest that Line 8a; also use Line 8a; also use • Backup withholding will cause or is caus-
totals more than Schedule B Schedule 1 ing an undue hardship, and it is unlikely
$1,500 that you will underreport interest and divi-
dends in the future.
Savings bond interest Schedule B; also use Schedule 1; also use
• You have corrected the underreporting byyou will exclude Form 8815 Form 8815
filing a return if you did not previously filebecause of higher
education expenses one and by paying all taxes, penalties, and
interest due for any underreported interest
Ordinary dividends Line 9a (You may need Line 9a (You may need or dividend payments.
that total $1,500 or to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as
less well.) well.) If the IRS determines that backup withholding
should stop, it will provide you with a certification
Ordinary dividends Line 9a; also use Line 9a; also use and will notify the payers who were sent noticesthat total more than Schedule B Schedule 1 earlier.$1,500
How to stop backup withholding due to an
Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the Line 9b; also use the incorrect identification number. If you have
you do not have to file Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and been notified by a payer that you are subject to
Schedule D) Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax backup withholding because you have provided
Worksheet Worksheet an incorrect SSN or employer identification
number, you can stop it by following the instruc-
Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the You cannot use Form tions the payer gives you.you have to file Qualified Dividends and 1040A.
Schedule D) Capital Gain Tax Reporting backup withholding. If backup
Worksheet or the You cannot use Form withholding is deducted from your interest or
Schedule D Tax 1040EZ dividend income or other reportable payment,Worksheet the bank or other business must give you an
information return for the year (for example, aCapital gain Line 13; also use the Line 10; also use the Form 1099-INT) that indicates the amount with-distributions (if you do Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and held. The information return will show anynot have to file Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax backup withholding as ªFederal income tax with-Schedule D) Worksheet Worksheet
held.º
Capital gain Schedule D, line 13; also Nonresident aliens. Generally, payments
distributions (if you use the Qualified made to nonresident aliens are not subject tohave to file Schedule Dividends and Capital backup withholding. You can use FormD) Gain Tax Worksheet or W-8BEN, Certificate of Foreign Status of Benefi-the Schedule D Tax
cial Owner for United States Tax Withholding, toWorksheet
certify exempt status. However, this does not
exempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with-Gain or loss from sales Line 13; also use
holding rate that may apply to your investmentof stocks or bonds Schedule D and the
Qualified Dividends and income. For information on the 30% rate, seeYou cannot use FormCapital Gain Tax Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.1040AWorksheet or the
Penalties. There are civil and criminal pen-Schedule D Tax
alties for giving false information to avoidWorksheet
backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500.
The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine ofGain or loss from Line 13; also use
exchanges of like-kind Schedule D, Form 8824, up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or
investment property and the Qualified both.
Dividends and Capital
Where to report investment income. TableGain Tax Worksheet or
1-1 gives an overview of the forms and sched-the Schedule D Tax
Worksheet ules to use to report some common types of
investment income. But, see the rest of this
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
publication for detailed information about report- In general, any interest that you receive or Insurance policies and on National Service Life
ing investment income. that is credited to your account and can be Insurance policies.
withdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have to Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).Joint accounts. If two or more persons hold be entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to this Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.property (such as a savings account, bond, or rule are discussed later. Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. Youstock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or generally do not include it in your income untilForm 1099-INT. Interest income is generallytenants in common, each person's share of any you make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi-reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similarinterest or dividends from the property is deter- cation 590 for more information.statement, by banks, savings and loans, andmined by local law.
other payers of interest. This form shows you the
interest you received during the year. Keep this Taxable Interest Ð GeneralExample. You and your husband have a
form for your records. You do not have to attachjoint money market account. Under state law,
Taxable interest includes interest you receiveit to your tax return.half the income from the account belongs to you,
from bank accounts, loans you make to others,Report on your tax return the total amount ofand half belongs to your husband. If you file
and other sources. The following are someinterest income that you receive for the tax year.separate returns, you each report half of the
sources of taxable interest.income. Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT.
Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, you Dividends that are actually interest. CertainIncome from property given to a child. must still report all of your taxable interest in- distributions commonly called dividends are ac-Property you give as a parent to your child under come. For example, you may receive distributive tually interest. You must report as interestthe Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the shares of interest from partnerships or S corpo- so-called ªdividendsº on deposits or on shareUniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law, rations. This interest is reported to you on accounts in:becomes the child's property. Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-1Income from the property is taxable to the • Cooperative banks,(Form 1120S).child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal • Credit unions,Nominees. Generally, if someone receivesobligation to support the child is taxable to the
interest as a nominee for you, that person will • Domestic building and loan associations,parent or guardian having that legal obligation.
give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interestSavings account with parent as trustee. • Domestic savings and loan associations,received on your behalf.Interest income from a savings account opened • Federal savings and loan associations,If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includesfor a child who is a minor, but placed in the name andamounts belonging to another person, see theand subject to the order of the parents as trust- discussion on Nominee distributions , later,ees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the • Mutual savings banks.under How To Report Interest Income.state in which the child resides, both of the
following are true. Incorrect amount. If you receive a Form Money market funds. Generally, amounts1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (or you receive from money market funds should be• The savings account legally belongs to the other incorrect information), you should ask the reported as dividends, not as interest.child. issuer for a corrected form. The new Form
• The parents are not legally permitted to Certificates of deposit and other deferred1099-INT you receive will be marked ªCor-
use any of the funds to support the child. interest accounts. If you open any of theserected.º
accounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervals
Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest income of 1 year or less during the term of the account.Accuracy-related penalty. An accu- may also be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original You generally must include this interest in yourracy-related penalty of 20% can be charged for Issue Discount. For more information about income when you actually receive it or are enti-underpayments of tax due to negligence or dis- amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue tled to receive it without paying a substantialregard of rules or regulations or substantial un- Discount (OID), later in this chapter. penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-derstatement of tax. For information on the ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a singlepenalty and any interest that applies, see Penal- Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest payment at maturity. If interest is deferred forties in chapter 2. dividends you receive from a mutual fund or more than 1 year, see Original Issue Discountother regulated investment company are not in- (OID), later.cluded in your taxable income. (However, see
Interest subject to penalty for early with-Information-reporting requirement , next.) Ex-
drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferredInterest Income empt-interest dividends should be shown in box
interest account before maturity, you may have8 of Form 1099-INT.
to pay a penalty. You must report the totalTerms you may need to know Information-reporting requirement. Al- amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-(see Glossary): though exempt-interest dividends are not tax- count during the year, without subtracting theable, you must show them on your tax return if penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-Accrual method you have to file. This is an information-reporting ings under How To Report Interest Income ,requirement and does not change the ex- later, for more information on how to report theBelow-market loan empt-interest dividends into taxable income. interest and deduct the penalty.Cash method See How To Report Interest Income, later.
Money borrowed to invest in certificate ofDemand loan deposit. The interest you pay on money bor-Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from
rowed from a bank or savings institution to meetspecified private activity bonds may be subjectForgone interest
the minimum deposit required for a certificate ofto the alternative minimum tax. The ex-Gift loan deposit from the institution and the interest youempt-interest dividends subject to the alterna-
earn on the certificate are two separate items.Interest tive minimum tax are shown in box 9 of Form
You must report the total interest you earn on1099-INT. See Form 6251 and its instructionsNominee the certificate in your income. If you itemizefor more information about this tax. ( private ac-
deductions, you can deduct the interest you payOriginal issue discount tivity bonds are discussed later under State or
as investment interest, up to the amount of yourLocal Government Obligations.)Private activity bond net investment income. See Interest Expenses
Interest on VA dividends. Interest on insur- in chapter 3.Term loan
ance dividends that you leave on deposit with
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not Example. You deposited $5,000 with a
This section discusses the tax treatment of dif- taxable. This includes interest paid on dividends bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to
ferent types of interest income. on converted United States Government Life make up the $10,000 minimum deposit required
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer- interest unless state law automatically changes • Gift loans,
tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2008, but you it to a payment on the principal. • Pay-related loans,received only $265, which represented the $575
Interest income on frozen deposits. Ex- • Corporation-shareholder loans,you earned minus $310 interest charged on your
clude from your gross income interest on frozen$5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form • Tax avoidance loans, anddeposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the1099-INT for 2008 showing the $575 interest
year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de- • Certain loans made to qualified continuingyou earned. The bank also gives you a state-
posit because: care facilities under a continuing care con-ment showing that you paid $310 interest for
tract.2008. You must include the $575 in your in- • The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched- solvent, or
A pay-related loan is any below-market loanule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject
• The state in which the institution is located between an employer and an employee or be-to the net investment income limit.
has placed limits on withdrawals because tween an independent contractor and a personGift for opening account. If you receive non- other financial institutions in the state are for whom the contractor provides services.cash gifts or services for making deposits or for bankrupt or insolvent. A tax avoidance loan is any below-marketopening an account in a savings institution, you loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one ofmay have to report the value as interest. The amount of interest you must exclude is the main purposes of the interest arrangement.For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or the interest that was credited on the frozen de-
services valued at more than $10 must be re- posits minus the sum of: Forgone interest. For any period, forgone in-ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or terest is:• The net amount you withdrew from thesemore, gifts or services valued at more than $20 deposits during the year, and • The amount of interest that would be pay-must be reported as interest. The value is deter-
able for that period if interest accrued onmined by the cost to the financial institution. • The amount you could have withdrawn as
the loan at the applicable federal rate andof the end of the year (not reduced by any
was payable annually on December 31,Example. You open a savings account at penalty for premature withdrawals of a
minusyour local bank and deposit $800. The account time deposit).
earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal- • Any interest actually payable on the loanIf you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in-culator. If no other interest is credited to your for the period.come on deposits that were frozen at the end ofaccount during the year, the Form 1099-INT you 2008, see Frozen deposits under How To Re-receive will show $35 interest for the year. You Applicable federal rate. Applicable federalport Interest Income  for information about re-must report $35 interest income on your tax rates are published by the IRS each month in theporting this interest income exclusion on yourreturn. Internal Revenue Bulletin. Some IRS officestax return.
have these bulletins available for research. SeeInterest on insurance dividends. Interest on The interest you exclude is treated as credited chapter 5 for other ways to get this information.insurance dividends left on deposit with an in- to your account in the following year. You mustsurance company that can be withdrawn annu- include it in income in the year you can withdraw Rules for below-market loans. The rules thatally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to it. apply to a below-market loan depend onyour account. However, if you can withdraw it
whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, oronly on the anniversary date of the policy (or Example. $100 of interest was credited on term loan.other specified date), the interest is taxable in your frozen deposit during the year. You with-the year that date occurs. Gift and demand loans. A gift loan is anydrew $80 but could not withdraw any more as of
below-market loan where the forgone interest isthe end of the year. You must include $80 inPrepaid insurance premiums. Any increase in the nature of a gift.your income and exclude $20 from your incomein the value of prepaid insurance premiums,
A demand loan is a loan payable in full at anyfor the year. You must include the $20 in youradvance premiums, or premium deposit funds is
time upon demand by the lender. A demand loanincome for the year you can withdraw it.interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-
is a below-market loan if no interest is chargedums due on insurance policies or made avail- Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at a or if interest is charged at a rate below theable for you to withdraw. discount when interest has been defaulted or applicable federal rate.
U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations, when the interest has accrued but has not been A demand loan or gift loan that is a be-
such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds, paid, the transaction is described as trading a low-market loan is generally treated as an
issued by any agency or instrumentality of the bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is not arm's-length transaction in which the lender is
United States is taxable for federal income tax income and is not taxable as interest if paid later. treated as having made:
purposes. When you receive a payment of that interest, it is
• A loan to the borrower in exchange for aa return of capital that reduces the remainingInterest on tax refunds. Interest you receive note that requires the payment of interestcost basis of your bond. Interest that accrueson tax refunds is taxable income. at the applicable federal rate, andafter the date of purchase, however, is taxable
interest income for the year received or accrued.Interest on condemnation award. If the con- • An additional payment to the borrower in
See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later indemning authority pays you interest to compen- an amount equal to the forgone interest.
this chapter.sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the The borrower is generally treated as transferringinterest is taxable. the additional payment back to the lender asBelow-Market LoansInstallment sale payments. If a contract for interest. The lender must report that amount as
the sale or exchange of property provides for interest income.If you make a below-market gift or demand loan,deferred payments, it also usually provides for you must report as interest income any forgone The lender's additional payment to the bor-interest payable with the deferred payments. interest (defined later) from that loan. The be- rower is treated as a gift, dividend, contributionThat interest is taxable when you receive it. If low-market loan rules and exceptions are de- to capital, pay for services, or other payment,little or no interest is provided for in a deferred scribed in this section. For more information, depending on the substance of the transaction.payment contract, part of each payment may be see section 7872 of the Internal Revenue Code The borrower may have to report this paymenttreated as interest. See Unstated Interest and and its regulations. as taxable income, depending on its classifica-Original Issue Discount in Publication 537. If you receive a below-market loan, you may tion.
be able to deduct the forgone interest as well asInterest on annuity contract. Accumulated These transfers are considered to occur an-
any interest that you actually paid, but not if it isinterest on an annuity contract you sell before its nually, generally on December 31.
personal interest.maturity date is taxable. Term loans. A term loan is any loan that is
Usurious interest. Usurious interest is inter- Loans subject to the rules. The rules for be- not a demand loan. A term loan is a be-
est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as low-market loans apply to: low-market loan if the amount of the loan is more
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
than the present value of all payments due the organization and lender is $250,000 or Bureau of the Public Debt
Division of Customer Assistanceunder the loan. less at all times during the tax year, and
P.O. Box 7012A lender who makes a below-market term 6. Other loans on which the interest arrange- Parkersburg, WV 26106-7012.loan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer- ment can be shown to have no significantring an additional lump-sum cash payment to effect on the federal tax liability of the Or, on the Internet, visit: www.the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi- lender or the borrower. treasurydirect.gov/indiv/products/tal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. The products.htm/.
amount of this payment is the amount of the loan For a loan described in (6) above, all the
minus the present value, at the applicable fed- facts and circumstances are used to determine if Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac-eral rate, of all payments due under the loan. An the interest arrangement has a significant effect crual method of accounting, you must reportequal amount is treated as original issue dis- on the federal tax liability of the lender or bor- interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itcount (OID). The lender must report the annual rower. Some factors to be considered are: accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interestpart of the OID as interest income. The borrower until you receive it or until the bonds mature.• Whether items of income and deductionmay be able to deduct the OID as interest ex-
generated by the loan offset each other,pense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later. Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash
method of accounting, as most individual tax-• The amount of these items,Exceptions to the below-market loan rules. payers do, you generally report the interest on• The cost to you of complying with the be-Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But seelow-market loan rules, if they were to ap-discussed here. Series EE and series I bonds, below.ply, andException for loans of $10,000 or less. Series HH bonds. These bonds were issued• Any reasons other than taxes for structur-The rules for below-market loans do not apply to at face value. Interest is paid twice a year byany day on which the total outstanding amount ing the transaction as a below-market direct deposit to your bank account. If you are aof loans between the borrower and lender is loan. cash method taxpayer, you must report interest$10,000 or less. This exception applies only to: on these bonds as income in the year you re-If you structure a transaction to meet this ceive it.1. Gift loans between individuals if the gift exception, and one of the principal purposes of Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980;loan is not directly used to buy or carry structuring the transaction in that way is the they were last offered in August 2004. Beforeincome-producing assets, and avoidance of federal tax, the loan will be consid- 1980, series H bonds were issued. Series H
2. Pay-related loans or corpora- ered a tax-avoidance loan and this exception will bonds are treated the same as series HH bonds.
tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of not apply. If you are a cash method taxpayer, you must
federal tax is not a principal purpose of the report the interest when you receive it.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans ofinterest arrangement. Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30$100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi- years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.This exception does not apply to a term loan viduals, if the outstanding loans between the
described in (2) above that previously has been lender and borrower total $100,000 or less, the Series EE and series I bonds. Interest on
subject to the below-market loan rules. Those forgone interest to be included in income by the these bonds is payable when you redeem the
rules will continue to apply even if the outstand- lender and deducted by the borrower is limited to bonds. The difference between the purchase
ing balance is reduced to $10,000 or less. the amount of the borrower's net investment price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
est.income for the year. If the borrower's net invest-Exception for loans to continuing care fa-
ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated ascilities. Loans to qualified continuing care fa- Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds were firstzero. This limit does not apply to a loan if thecilities under continuing care contracts are not offered in January 1980. They have a maturitysubject to the rules for below-market loans for avoidance of federal tax is one of the main period of 30 years. Before July 1980, series Ethe calendar year if the lender or the lender's purposes of the interest arrangement. bonds were issued. The original 10-year matur-spouse is age 62 or older at the end of the year. ity period of series E bonds has been extendedFor the definitions of qualified continuing care Effective dates.  These rules apply to term to 40 years for bonds issued before Decemberfacility and continuing care contract, see Internal loans made after June 6, 1984, and to demand 1965 and 30 years for bonds issued after No-Revenue Code section 7872(h). loans outstanding after that date. vember 1965. Paper series EE and series E
bonds are issued at a discount. The face value isException for loans without significant tax
payable to you at maturity. Electronic series EEeffect. Loans are excluded from the be- U.S. Savings Bonds
bonds are issued at their face value. The facelow-market loan rules if their interest arrange-
This section provides tax information on U.S. value plus accrued interest is payable to you atments do not have a significant effect on the
savings bonds. It explains how to report the maturity.federal tax liability of the borrower or the lender.
 Owners of paper series E and EE bonds caninterest income on these bonds and how to treatThese loans include:
convert them to electronic bonds. These con-transfers of these bonds.
1. Loans made available by the lender to the verted bonds do not retain the denominationU.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi-general public on the same terms and con- listed on the paper certificate but are posted atviduals are the following.ditions that are consistent with the lender's their purchase price (with accrued interest).
• Series EE bondscustomary business practice,
Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first of-• Series I bonds2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or fered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed bondsmunicipal government that are made avail- issued at their face amount with a maturity pe-able under a program of general applica- riod of 30 years. The face value plus all accruedFor other information on U.S. savingstion to the public, interest is payable to you at maturity.bonds, write to:
3. Certain employee-relocation loans,
 Reporting options for cash method tax-
For Series HH/H: payers. If you use the cash method of report-4. Certain loans from a foreign person, un- Bureau of the Public Debt ing income, you can report the interest on seriesless the interest income would be effec-
Division of Customer Assistance EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of thetively connected with the conduct of a U.S.
P.O. Box 2186 following ways.trade or business and would not be ex-
Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186.empt from U.S. tax under an income tax 1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interesttreaty, until the earlier of the year you cash or
5. Gift loans to a charitable organization, con- dispose of the bonds or the year in which
tributions to which are deductible, if the they mature. (However, see Savings
total outstanding amount of loans between For Series EE and I bonds traded, later.) 
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the other co-owner will receive a Form 1099-INTTable 1-2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
at the time of redemption, the other co-owner
must provide you with another Form 1099-INTIF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ... showing the amount of interest from the bond
that is taxable to you. The co-owner who re-you buy a bond in your name and the name of you.
deemed the bond is a ªnominee.º See Nomineeanother person as co-owners, using only your
distributions under How To Report Interest In-own funds
come, later, for more information about how ayou buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond. person who is a nominee reports interest in-who is the sole owner of the bond come belonging to another person.
you and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion Both co-owners' funds used. If you andco-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond. the other co-owner each contribute part of thepurchase price bond's purchase price, the interest is generally
taxable to each of you, in proportion to theyou and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate
amount each of you paid.property state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally
property report one-half of the interest. Community property. If you and your
spouse live in a community property state and
hold bonds as community property, one-half ofNote. Series E bonds issued in 1978 ma- upon disposition, redemption, or final the interest is considered received by each ofmaturity, whichever is earliest, andtured in 2008. If you have used method 1, you. If you file separate returns, each of you
you generally must report the interest on generally must report one-half of the bond inter-b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-these bonds on your 2008 return. est. For more information about communityquired before the year of change when
property, see Publication 555, Community Prop-the interest is realized upon disposition,2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase
erty.redemption, or final maturity, whicheverin redemption value as interest each year.
is earliest, with the exception of the in- Table 1-2. These rules are also shown interest reported in prior tax years. Table 1-2.You must use the same method for all series EE,
series E, and series I bonds you own. If you do Child as only owner. Interest on U.S. savingsYou must attach this statement to your tax
not choose method 2 by reporting the increase bonds bought for and registered only in thereturn for the year of change, which you must file
in redemption value as interest each year, you name of your child is income to your child, evenby the due date (including extensions).
must use method 1. if you paid for the bonds and are named asYou can have an automatic extension of 6
beneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E,months from the due date of your return for theIf you plan to cash your bonds in the or series I bonds, the interest on the bonds isyear of change (excluding extensions) to file thesame year that you will pay for higher income to your child in the earlier of the year thestatement with an amended return. On the state-educational expenses, you may want
TIP bonds are cashed or disposed of or the year thement, type or print ªFiled pursuant to sectionto use method 1 because you may be able to bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re-301.9100-2.º To get this extension, you mustexclude the interest from your income. To learn port the interest income each year.have filed your original return for the year of thehow, see Education Savings Bond Program , change by the due date (including extensions).later. Choice to report interest each year. The
choice to report the accrued interest each yearBy the date you file the original state-Change from method 1. If you want to can be made either by your child or by you forment with your return, you must also
change your method of reporting the interest your child. This choice is made by filing an in-send a signed copy to the address be-
from method 1 to method 2, you can do so come tax return that shows all the interestlow.
without permission from the IRS. In the year of earned to date, and by stating on the return thatInternal Revenue Service
change, you must report all interest accrued to your child chooses to report the interest eachAttention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulings
date and not previously reported for all your year. Either you or your child should keep a copyBranch)
bonds. of this return.P.O. Box 7604
Unless your child is otherwise required to fileBenjamin Franklin StationOnce you choose to report the interest each
a tax return for any year after making this choice,Washington, DC 20044year, you must continue to do so for all series
your child does not have to file a return only toEE, series E, and series I bonds you own and for If you use a private delivery service, send the
report the annual accrual of U.S. savings bondany you get later, unless you request permission signed copy to the address below.
interest under this choice. However, see Tax onto change, as explained next. Internal Revenue Service investment income of certain children , earlier,
Change from method 2. To change from Attention: CC:IT&A under General Information. Neither you nor your
method 2 to method 1, you must request permis- (Automatic Rulings Branch) Room 5336 child can change the way you report the interest
sion from the IRS. Permission for the change is 1111 Constitution Avenue, NW unless you request permission from the IRS, as
automatically granted if you send the IRS a Washington, DC 20224 discussed earlier under Change from method 2.
statement that meets all the following require-
Ownership transferred. If you bought seriesments. Instead of filing this statement, you can re- E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with yourquest permission to change from method 2 to own funds and had them reissued in your1. You have typed or printed the following method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case, co-owner's name or beneficiary's name alone,number at the top: ª131º. follow the form instructions for an automatic you must include in your gross income for the2. It includes your name and social security change. No user fee is required. year of reissue all interest that you earned onnumber under the label in (1). these bonds and have not previously reported.Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in But, if the bonds were reissued in your name3. It includes the year of change (both the the names of co-owners, such as you and your alone, you do not have to report the interestbeginning and ending dates). child or you and your spouse, interest on the accrued at that time.bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who4. It identifies the savings bonds for which This same rule applies when bonds (otherbought the bond.you are requesting this change. than bonds held as community property) are
One co-owner's funds used. If you used transferred between spouses or incident to di-5. It includes your agreement to:
your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the tax vorce.
a. Report all interest on any bonds ac- on the interest. This is true even if you let the
quired during or after the year of other co-owner redeem the bond and keep all Example. You bought series EE bonds en-
change when the interest is realized the proceeds. Under these circumstances, since tirely with your own funds. You did not choose to
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
report the accrued interest each year. Later, you Decedents. The manner of reporting interest 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) any federal
transfer the bonds to your former spouse under income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds, estate tax paid because the $200 interest was
a divorce agreement. You must include the de- after the death of the owner, depends on the included in your uncle's estate.
ferred accrued interest, from the date of the accounting and income-reporting methods pre-
Example 2. If, in Example 1, the executororiginal issue of the bonds to the date of transfer, viously used by the decedent.
had chosen to include the $200 accrued interestin your income in the year of transfer. Your Decedent who reported interest each year. in your uncle's final return, you would report onlyformer spouse includes in income the interest on If the bonds transferred because of death were $300 as interest when you cashed the bond atthe bonds from the date of transfer to the date of owned by a person who used an accrual maturity. $300 is the interest earned after yourredemption. method, or who used the cash method and had uncle's death.chosen to report the interest each year, thePurchased jointly. If you and a co-owner
interest earned in the year of death up to theeach contributed funds to buy series E, series Example 3. If, in Example 1, you make ordate of death must be reported on that person'sEE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the have made the choice to report the increase infinal return. The person who acquires the bondsbonds reissued in the co-owner's name alone, redemption value as interest each year, youincludes in income only interest earned after theyou must include in your gross income for the include in gross income for the year you acquiredate of death.year of reissue your share of all the interest the bond all of the unreported increase in valueearned on the bonds that you have not previ- Decedent who postponed reporting inter- of all series E, series EE, and series I bonds youously reported. The former co-owner does not est. If the transferred bonds were owned by a hold, including the $200 on the bond you inher-have to include in gross income at the time of decedent who had used the cash method and ited from your uncle.reissue his or her share of the interest earned had not chosen to report the interest each year,that was not reported before the transfer. This Example 4. When your aunt died, sheand who had bought the bonds entirely with hisinterest, however, as well as all interest earned owned series H bonds that she had acquired in aor her own funds, all interest earned beforeafter the reissue, is income to the former trade for series E bonds. You were the benefi-death must be reported in one of the followingco-owner. ciary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cashways.This income-reporting rule also applies when method and did not choose to report the interest
the bonds are reissued in the name of your 1. The surviving spouse or personal repre- on the series E bonds each year as it accrued.
former co-owner and a new co-owner. But the sentative (executor, administrator, etc.) Your aunt's executor chose not to include any
new co-owner will report only his or her share of who files the final income tax return of the interest earned before your aunt's death on her
the interest earned after the transfer. decedent can choose to include on that final return.
If bonds that you and a co-owner bought return all of the interest earned on the The income in respect of the decedent is the
jointly are reissued to each of you separately in bonds before the decedent's death. The sum of the unreported interest on the series E
the same proportion as your contribution to the person who acquires the bonds then in- bonds and the interest, if any, payable on the
purchase price, neither you nor your co-owner cludes in income only interest earned after series H bonds but not received as of the date of
has to report at that time the interest earned the date of death. your aunt's death. You must report any interest
before the bonds were reissued. received during the year as income on your2. If the choice in (1) is not made, the interest
return. The part of the interest that was payableearned up to the date of death is income inExample 1. You and your spouse each but not received before your aunt's death isrespect of the decedent. It should not bespent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series income in respect of the decedent and mayincluded in the decedent's final return. AllEE savings bond. The bond was issued to you qualify for the estate tax deduction. For informa-of the interest earned both before and afterand your spouse as co-owners. You both post- tion on when to report the interest on the seriesthe decedent's death (except any part re-pone reporting interest on the bond. You later E bonds traded, see Savings bonds traded ,ported by the estate on its income tax re-have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one later.turn) is income to the person who acquiresin your name and one in your spouse's name. At the bonds. If that person uses the cashthat time neither you nor your spouse has to Savings bonds distributed from a retirementmethod and does not choose to report thereport the interest earned to the date of reissue. or profit-sharing plan. If you acquire a U.S.interest each year, he or she can postpone
savings bond in a taxable distribution from areporting it until the year the bonds areExample 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE retirement or profit-sharing plan, your income forcashed or disposed of or the year theysavings bond entirely with your own funds. The the year of distribution includes the bond's re-mature, whichever is earlier. In the yearbond was issued to you and your spouse as demption value (its cost plus the interest ac-that person reports the interest, he or sheco-owners. You both postponed reporting inter- crued before the distribution). When you redeemcan claim a deduction for any federal es-est on the bond. You later have the bond reis- the bond (whether in the year of distribution ortate tax that was paid on the part of thesued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and later), your interest income includes only theinterest included in the decedent's estate.one in your spouse's name. You must report half interest accrued after the bond was distributed.the interest earned to the date of reissue. For more information on income in respect of a To figure the interest reported as a taxable distri-
decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec- bution and your interest income when you re-
utors, and Administrators. deem the bond, see Worksheet for savingsTransfer to a trust. If you own series E, series
bonds distributed from a retirement orEE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a Example 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax- profit-sharing plan under How To Report Interesttrust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must payer, died and left you a $1,000 series EE Income, later.include in your income for that year the interest bond. He had bought the bond for $500 and hadearned to the date of transfer if you have not not chosen to report the interest each year. Atalready reported it. However, if you are consid- Savings bonds traded. If you postponed re-the date of death, interest of $200 had accruedered the owner of the trust and if the increase in porting the interest on your series EE or series Eon the bond and its value of $700 was includedvalue both before and after the transfer contin- bonds, you did not recognize taxable incomein your uncle's estate. Your uncle's executorues to be taxable to you, you can continue to when you traded the bonds for series HH orchose not to include the $200 accrued interest indefer reporting the interest earned each year. series H bonds, unless you received cash in theyour uncle's final income tax return. The $200 isYou must include the total interest in your in- trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-income in respect of the decedent.come in the year you cash or dispose of the ries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can-
bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, You are a cash method taxpayer and do not not trade any other series of bonds for series HH
whichever is earlier. choose to report the interest each year as it is bonds.) Any cash you received is income up to
The same rules apply to previously unre- earned. If you cash the bond when it reaches the amount of the interest earned on the bonds
ported interest on series EE or series E bonds if maturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter- traded. When your series HH or series H bonds
the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or est income Ðthe difference between maturity mature, or if you dispose of them before matur-
series H bonds you acquired in a trade for the value of $1,000 and the original cost of $500. ity, you report as interest the difference between
series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds For that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane- their redemption value and your cost. Your cost
traded, later. ous itemized deduction not subject to the is the sum of the amount you paid for the traded
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
series EE or series E bonds plus any amount From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational
you had to pay at the time of the trade. Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance schools that are accredited and are eligible to
Contracts, etc., for the year of distribution.) participate in student aid programs run by the
Example.  In 2004, you traded series EE Department of Education. See chapter 10 of
bonds (on which you postponed reporting the For more information on including the correct Publication 970 for information on foreign
interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 amount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav- schools that are eligible.
in cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in- ings bond interest previously reported  or Nomi- Reduction for certain benefits. You mustcome in 2004, the year of the trade. At the time nee distributions under How To Report Interest reduce your qualified higher educational ex-of the trade, the series EE bonds had accrued Income, later. penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.interest of $523 and a redemption value of Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-$2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma- 1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-empt from state and local taxes. Theturity, when you receive $2,500. You must report ships.Form 1099-INT you receive will indi-
TIP$300 as interest income in the year of maturity. cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bonds 2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-This is the difference between their redemption interest in box 3. Do not include this income on tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the your state or local income tax return.amount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It is 3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-also the difference between the accrued interest tion of distributions from a qualified tuitionof $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223 program.Education Savings Bond Programcash received on the trade.)
4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts orChoice to report interest in year of trade. You may be able to exclude from income all or inheritances) received as educational as-You could have chosen to treat all of the previ- part of the interest you receive on the redemp- sistance, such as:ously unreported accrued interest on series EE tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the
or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds as year if you pay qualified higher educational ex- a. Veterans' educational assistance bene-
income in the year of the trade. If you made this penses during the same year. This exclusion is fits,
choice, it is treated as a change from method 1. known as the Education Savings Bond Program. b. Qualified tuition reductions, orSee Change from method 1  under Series EE You do not qualify for this exclusion if your
and series I bonds, earlier. filing status is married filing separately. c. Employer-provided educational assis-
tance.Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond inter- Form 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In-
est. When you cash a bond, the bank or other terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds 5. Any expense used in figuring the Hopepayer that redeems it must give you a Form Issued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At- and lifetime learning credits.1099-INT if the interest part of the payment you tach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form For information about these benefits, see Pub-Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified1099-INT should show the interest as the differ- lication 970.U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issuedence between the amount you received and the
after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must beamount paid for the bond. However, your Form Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in-issued either in your name (sole owner) or in1099-INT may show more interest than you terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav-your and your spouse's names (co-owners).have to include on your income tax return. For ings bonds you redeem during the year are notYou must be at least 24 years old before theexample, this may happen if any of the following more than your adjusted qualified higher educa-bond's issue date. For example, a bond boughtare true. tional expenses for the year, you may be able toby a parent and issued in the name of his or her exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds are• You chose to report the increase in the child under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu- more than the expenses, you may be able toredemption value of the bond each year. sion by the parent or child. exclude only part of the interest.The interest shown on your Form
The issue date of a bond may be earlier To determine the excludable amount, multi-1099-INT will not be reduced by amounts
than the date the bond is purchased ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.previously included in income.
because the issue date assigned to a The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the
CAUTION
!• You received the bond from a decedent. bond is the first day of the month in which it is qualified higher educational expenses you paidThe interest shown on your Form purchased. during the year. The denominator (bottom part)1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter- of the fraction is the total proceeds you receivedBeneficiary. You can designate any individ-est reported by the decedent before death, during the year.ual (including a child) as a beneficiary of theor on the decedent's final return, or by the
bond.estate on the estate's income tax return. Example. In February 2008, Mark and
Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu-• Ownership of the bond was transferred.
ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in Aprilsion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp-The interest shown on your Form
1996. They received proceeds of $7,816, repre-tion information from the Department of1099-INT will not be reduced by interest
senting principal of $5,000 and interest ofTreasury.that accrued before the transfer.
$2,816. In 2008, they paid $4,000 of their daugh-• You were named as a co-owner and the Qualified expenses. Qualified higher educa- ter's college tuition. They are not claiming another co-owner contributed funds to buy tional expenses are tuition and fees required for education credit for that amount, and theirthe bond. The interest shown on your you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom daughter does not have any tax-free educationalForm 1099-INT will not be reduced by the you claim an exemption) to attend an eligible assistance. They can exclude $1,441 ($2,816 ×amount you received as nominee for the educational institution. ($4,000 ÷  $7,816)) of interest in 2008. Theyother co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in Qualified expenses include any contribution must pay tax on the remaining $1,375 ($2,816 −this section, for more information about you make to a qualified tuition program or to a $1,441) interest.the reporting requirements.) Coverdell education savings account. For infor-
Figuring the interest part of the proceedsmation about these programs, see Publication• You received the bond in a taxable distri- (Form 8815, line 6). To figure the amount of970, Tax Benefits for Education.bution from a retirement or profit-sharing interest to report on Form 8815, line 6, use theQualified expenses do not include expensesplan. The interest shown on your Form for room and board or for courses involving Line 6 Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions.1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter- sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of aest portion of the amount taxable as a If you previously reported any interestdegree or certificate granting program.distribution from the plan and not taxable from savings bonds cashed during
as interest. (This amount is generally Eligible educational institutions. These 2008, use the Alternate Line 6 Work-
shown on Form 1099-R, Distributions institutions include most public, private, and sheet below instead.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alternate Line 6 Worksheet (Form 1040), you must make a special computa- bonds generally pay interest every 6 months.
tion of your deductible interest to figure the net Generally, you report this interest for the year1. Enter the amount from Form 8815, royalty income included in your modified AGI. paid. When the notes or bonds mature, you canline 5 ................... . You must figure deductible interest without re- redeem these securities for face value.2. Enter the face value of all post-1989
gard to this exclusion of bond interest. Treasury notes and bonds are sold by auc-paper series EE bonds cashed in
You can use a ªdummyº Form 4952, Invest- tion. Two types of bids are accepted: competi-2008 .................... .
ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make the tive bids and noncompetitive bids. If you make a3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50)
special computation. On this form, include in competitive bid and a determination is made that4. Enter the face value of all electronic
your net investment income your total interestseries EE bonds (including the purchase price is less than the face value,
post-1989 series EE bonds income for the year from series EE and I U.S. you will receive a refund for the difference be-
converted from paper to electronic savings bonds. Use the deductible interest tween the purchase price and the face value.
format) and all series I bonds amount from this form only to figure the net This amount is considered original issue dis-
cashed in 2008 ............. . royalty income included in your modified AGI. count. However, the original issue discount rules
5. Add lines 3 and 4 ........... . Do not attach this form to your tax return. (discussed later) do not apply if the discount is6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ...... . After you figure this interest exclusion, use a less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the face7. Enter the amount of interest separate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc- amount, multiplied by the number of full yearsreported as income in previous tion for investment interest expenses, and at- from the date of original issue to maturity. Seeyears ................... . tach that form to your return. De minimis OID  under Original Issue Discount8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter the (OID), later. If the purchase price is determinedRecordkeeping. If you claim the inter-result here and on Form 8815, line 6 to be more than the face amount, the differenceest exclusion, you must keep a written is a premium. (See Bond Premium Amortizationrecord of the qualified U.S. savingsModified adjusted gross income limit.
RECORDS in chapter 3.)bonds you redeem. Your record must includeThe interest exclusion is limited if your modified
the serial number, issue date, face value, and For other information on these notes oradjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:
total redemption proceeds (principal and inter- bonds, write to:• $67,100 to $82,100 for taxpayers filing sin- est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818,
gle or head of household, and Optional Form To Record Redemption of Series Bureau of The Public Debt
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989, P.O. Box 7015• $100,650 to $130,650 for married taxpay-
to record this information. You should also keep Parkersburg, WV 26106-7015ers filing jointly, or for a qualifying
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-widow(er) with dependent child. Or, on the Internet, visit: http://www.mentation that shows you paid qualified higher
You do not qualify for the interest exclusion if treasurydirect.gov/indiv/indiv.htm.educational expenses during the year.
your modified AGI is equal to or more than the
upper limit for your filing status. U.S. Treasury Bills,
Modified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposes Notes, and Bonds Treasury inflation-protected securitiesof this exclusion, is adjusted gross income
(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a(Form 1040A, line 21, or Form 1040, line 37) Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amountfigured before the interest exclusion, and modi- (obligations) of the U.S. Government. that is adjusted to take into account inflation andfied by adding back any: deflation. For the tax treatment of these securi-Taxation of interest. Interest income from
ties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt InstrumentsTreasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to1. Foreign earned income exclusion,
under Original Issue Discount (OID), later.federal income tax, but is exempt from all state2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction, and local income taxes. You should receive
Retirement, sale, or redemption. For infor-Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interest3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents
mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption of(in box 3) that was paid to you for the year.of American Samoa,
U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or-Payments of principal and interest generally4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico, dinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non-will be credited to your designated checking or
taxable Trades  in chapter 4 for informationsavings account by direct deposit through the5. Exclusion for adoption benefits received
about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer-TREASURY DIRECT system.under an employer's adoption assistance
tain other designated issues.program, Treasury bills. These bills generally have a
6. Deduction for tuition and fees, 4-week, 13-week, or 26-week maturity period. Bonds Sold Between InterestThey are issued at a discount in the amount of7. Deduction for student loan interest, and Dates$100 and multiples of $100. The difference be-
8. Deduction for domestic production activi- tween the discounted price you pay for the bills If you sell a bond between interest paymentand the face value you receive at maturity isties. dates, part of the sales price represents interestinterest income. Generally, you report this inter- accrued to the date of sale. You must report thatUse the worksheet in the instructions for line est income when the bill is paid at maturity. See part of the sales price as interest income for the9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you Discount on Short-Term Obligations under Dis- year of sale.claim any of the exclusion or deduction items count on Debt Instruments, later. If you buy a bond between interest paymentlisted above (except items 6, 7, and 8), add the If you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur- dates, part of the purchase price representsamount of the exclusion or deduction (except ity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you will interest accrued before the date of purchase.any deduction for tuition and fees, student loan receive payment for the difference between the When that interest is paid to you, treat it as ainterest or domestic production activities) to the proceeds of the maturing bill (par amount less return of your capital investment, rather thanamount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the any tax withheld) and the purchase price of the interest income, by reducing your basis in thetotal on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI. new Treasury security. However, you must re- bond. See Accrued interest on bonds  underport the full amount of the interest income onRoyalties included in modified AGI. Be- How To Report Interest Income , later in thiseach of your Treasury bills at the time it reachescause the deduction for interest expenses due chapter, for information on reporting the pay-maturity.to royalties and other investments is limited to ment.
your net investment income (see Investment Treasury notes and bonds. Treasury notes
Interest in chapter 3), you cannot figure the have maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang- Insurance
deduction for interest expenses until you have ing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for Treasury
figured this exclusion of savings bond interest. bonds are longer than 10 years. Both of these Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-
Therefore, if you had interest expenses that are Treasury issues generally are issued in denomi- ciary of the insured person are usually not tax-
due to royalties and deductible on Schedule E nations of $100 to $1 million. Both notes and able. But if you receive the proceeds in
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
installments, you must usually report part of Indian tribal government. Bonds issued after Arbitrage bonds. Interest on arbitrage bonds
1982 by an Indian tribal government are treated issued by state or local governments after Octo-each installment payment as interest income.
as issued by a state. Interest on these bonds is ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is aFor more information about insurance pro-
generally tax exempt if the bonds are part of an bond any portion of the proceeds of which isceeds received in installments, see Publication
issue of which substantially all of the proceeds expected to be used to buy (or to replace funds525.
are to be used in the exercise of any essential used to buy) higher yielding investments. A
government function. However, interest on pri- bond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuerInterest option on insurance. If you leave life
vate activity bonds (other than certain bonds for intentionally uses any part of the proceeds of theinsurance proceeds on deposit with an insur-
tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxable. issue in this manner.ance company under an agreement to pay inter-
est only, the interest paid to you is taxable. Private activity bonds. Interest on a privateOriginal issue discount. Original issue dis-
activity bond that is not a qualified bond (definedcount (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern-Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-
below) is taxable. Generally, a private activityment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest.ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re- bond is part of a state or local government bondFor information on the treatment of OIDceive are taxed as pension and annuity income issue that meets both of the following require-when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, seefrom a nonqualified plan, not as interest income. ments.Tax-exempt state and local government bondsSee Publication 939, General Rule for Pensions under Discounted Debt Instruments  in chapterand Annuities, for information on taxation of 1. More than 10% of the proceeds of the is-4.pension and annuity income from nonqualified sue is to be used for a private businessplans. Stripped bonds or coupons. For special use.
rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga-
2. More than 10% of the payment of the prin-tions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons  underState or Local cipal or interest is:Original Issue Discount (OID), later.Government Obligations
a. Secured by an interest in property to beInformation reporting requirement. If youInterest you receive on an obligation issued by a used for a private business use (or pay-must file a tax return, you are required to showstate or local government is generally not tax- ments for this property), orany tax-exempt interest you received on yourable. The issuer should be able to tell you return. This is an information-reporting require- b. Derived from payments for property (orwhether the interest is taxable. The issuer ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter- borrowed money) used for a privateshould also give you a periodic (or year-end) est to taxable interest. See Reporting business use.statement showing the tax treatment of the obli- tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter-gation. If you invested in the obligation through a est Income, later in this chapter. Also, a bond is generally considered a privatetrust, a fund, or other organization, that organi- activity bond if the amount of the proceeds tozation should give you this information. be used to make or finance loans to personsTaxable InterestEven if interest on the obligation is not other than government units is more than 5%
subject to income tax, you may have to of the proceeds or $5 million (whichever isInterest on some state or local obligations isreport capital gain or loss when you sell less).
CAUTION
!taxable.it. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax may Qualified bond. Interest on a private activ-apply to other dispositions of the obligation. Federally guaranteed bonds. Interest on ity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. Afederally guaranteed state or local obligations qualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ-issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This rule ing an enterprise zone facility bond, a New YorkTax-Exempt Interest does not apply to interest on obligations guaran- Liberty bond, a Midwestern disaster area bond,teed by the following U.S. Government agen- a Hurricane Ike disaster area bond, or a GulfInterest on a bond used to finance government cies. Opportunity Zone Bond treated as an exemptoperations generally is not taxable if the bond is
facility bond), qualified student loan bond, quali-• Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran-issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a
fied small issue bond (including a tribal manu-tee was under the Northwest Power Act asU.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi-
facturing facility bond), qualified redevelopmentin effect on July 18, 1984).sions. Political subdivisions include:
bond, qualified mortgage bond (including a Gulf• Department of Veterans Affairs.• Port authorities, Opportunity Zone Bond, a Midwestern disaster
area bond, or a Hurricane Ike disaster area• Federal home loan banks. (The guarantee• Toll road commissions,
bond, treated as a qualified mortgage bond),must be made after July 30, 2008, in con-
• Utility services authorities, qualified veterans' mortgage bond, or qualifiednection with the original bond issue during
501(c)(3) bond (a bond issued for the benefit ofthe period beginning on July 30, 2008, and• Community redevelopment agencies, and
certain tax-exempt organizations).ending on December 31, 2010, and the
• Qualified volunteer fire departments (for Interest that you receive on thesebank must meet safety and soundness re-
certain obligations issued after 1980). tax-exempt bonds if issued after August 7, 1986,quirements.)
generally is a ªtax preference itemº and may beThere are other requirements for tax-exempt • Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora- subject to the alternative minimum tax. Seebonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern- tion. Form 6251 and its instructions for more informa-ment agency or see sections 103 and 141
tion.• Federal Housing Administration.through 150 of the Internal Revenue Code and
The interest on the following bonds is not athe related regulations. • Federal National Mortgage Association. tax preference item and is not subject to the
alternative minimum tax.• Government National Mortgage Corpora-Obligations that are not bonds. Inter-
tion.est on a state or local government obli- • Qualified 501(c)(3) bonds.
gation may be tax exempt even if the
TIP • Resolution Funding Corporation. • New York Liberty bonds.obligation is not a bond. For example, interest on
• Student Loan Marketing Association.a debt evidenced only by an ordinary written • Gulf Opportunity Zone bonds.
agreement of purchase and sale may be tax
• Midwestern disaster area bonds.exempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer on Mortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds of
default by the state or political subdivision may these bonds are used to finance mortgage loans • Hurricane Ike disaster area bonds.
be tax exempt. for homebuyers. Generally, interest on state or • Exempt facility bonds issued after July 30,local government home mortgage bonds issued 2008.Registration requirement. A bond issued af- after April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bonds
ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis- are qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter- • Qualified mortgage bonds issued after
tered form for the interest to be tax exempt. ans' mortgage bonds. July 30, 2008.
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Qualified veterans' mortgage bonds is- information about applying the rules discussed 5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow-
sued after July 30, 2008. ing are true.in this section to the regular interest holder of a
real estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi-
a. The lender is not in the business ofEnterprise zone facility bonds. Interest on nancial asset securitization investment trust, or
lending money.certain private activity bonds issued by a state or other CDO.
local government to finance a facility used in an b. The amount of the loan, plus the
empowerment zone or enterprise community is amount of any outstanding prior loansOriginal Issue
tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see between the same individuals, isDiscount (OID)Publication 954. $10,000 or less.
OID is a form of interest. You generally includeNew York Liberty bonds. New York Liberty c. Avoiding any federal tax is not one ofOID in your income as it accrues over the term ofbonds are bonds issued after March 9, 2002, to the principal purposes of the loan.
the debt instrument, whether or not you receivefinance the construction and rehabilitation of
any payments from the issuer.real property in the designated ªLiberty Zoneº of
New York City. Interest on these bonds is tax A debt instrument generally has OID when
exempt. the instrument is issued for a price that is less Form 1099-OID
than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID
Market discount. Market discount on a The issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro-is the difference between the stated redemption
tax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If you ker, if you held the instrument through a broker)price at maturity and the issue price.
bought the bond after April 30, 1993, you can should give you Form 1099-OID, Original IssueAll debt instruments that pay no interestchoose to accrue the market discount over the Discount, or a similar statement, if the total OIDbefore maturity are presumed to be issued at aperiod you own the bond and include it in your for the calendar year is $10 or more. Formdiscount. Zero coupon bonds are one exampleincome currently, as taxable interest. See Mar- 1099-OID will show, in box 1, the amount of OIDof these instruments.ket Discount Bonds  under Discount on Debt for the part of the year that you held the bond. ItThe OID accrual rules generally do not applyInstruments, later. If you do not make that also will show, in box 2, the stated interest thatto short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-choice, or if you bought the bond before May 1, you must include in your income. A copy of Formturity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).1993, any gain from market discount is taxable 1099-OID will be sent to the IRS. Do not file yourSee Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later.when you dispose of the bond. copy with your return. Keep it for your records.
For information about the sale of a debt in-For more information on the treatment of In most cases, you must report the entire
strument with OID, see chapter 4.market discount when you dispose of a amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as
tax-exempt bond, see Discounted Debt Instru- interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown
De minimis OID. You can treat the discountments under Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss in on Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, and
as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)chapter 4. also Original issue discount (OID) adjustment
of the stated redemption price at maturity multi- under How To Report Interest Income , later in
plied by the number of full years from the date of this chapter, for more information.
original issue to maturity. This small discount is Form 1099-OID not received. If you had OIDknown as ªde minimisº OID.Discount on for the year but did not receive a Form
1099-OID, see the OID tables found at http://Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond withDebt Instruments www.irs.gov/formspubs/article/a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,
0,,id=109875,00.html, which list total OID onTerms you may need to know issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth of
certain debt instruments and has information1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10(see Glossary):
that will help you figure OID. If your debt instru-(the number of full years from the date of original
ment is not listed, consult the issuer for furtherissue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20Market discount information about the accrued OID for the year.discount is less than $25, the OID is treated as
zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willMarket discount bond Nominee. If someone else is the holder of
recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.) record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-Original issue discount (OID)
ment that belongs to you and receives a FormExample 2. The facts are the same as inPremium 1099-OID on your behalf, that person must giveExample 1, except that the bond was issued at you a Form 1099-OID.$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount If you receive a Form 1099-OID that includesIn general, a debt instrument, such as a bond, is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-note, debenture, or other evidence of indebted- must include the OID in income as it accrues inee distributions under How To Report Interestness, that bears no interest or bears interest at a over the term of the bond. Income, later.lower than current market rate will usually be Debt instrument bought after original is- Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID.issued at less than its face amount. This dis- sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or boxcount is, in effect, additional interest income. minimis OID at a premium, the discount is not 6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the followingThe following are some of the types of dis- includible in income. If you buy a debt instrument apply.counted debt instruments. with de minimis OID at a discount, the discount
• You bought the debt instrument after its• U.S. Treasury bonds. is reported under the market discount rules. See
original issue and paid a premium or anMarket Discount Bonds, later in this chapter.• Corporate bonds. acquisition premium.
• Municipal bonds. Exceptions to reporting OID. The OID rules • The debt instrument is a stripped bond or
discussed here do not apply to the following debt a stripped coupon (including certain zero• Certificates of deposit.
instruments. coupon instruments). See Figuring OID• Notes between individuals. under Stripped Bonds and Coupons, later1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see• Stripped bonds and coupons. in this chapter.Stripped tax-exempt obligations, later.)
• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). 2. U.S. savings bonds. See Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentThe discount on these instruments (except mu- 3. Short-term debt instruments (those with a under How To Report Interest Income , later innicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. The fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year this chapter, for information about reporting thediscount on municipal bonds generally is not from the date of issue). correct amount of OID.taxable (but see State or Local Government
4. Obligations issued by an individual beforeObligations, earlier, for exceptions). See also Premium. You bought a debt instrument at
March 2, 1984.REMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs , later, for a premium if its adjusted basis immediately after
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
purchase was greater than the total of all Debt instruments issued after 1984. For is OID. You must include a part of the OID in
these debt instruments, you report the total OID your income over the term of the certificate.amounts payable on the instrument after the
that applies each year regardless of whetherpurchase date, other than qualified stated inter- The issuer must give you a statement on
you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset.est. Form 1099-OID indicating the amount you must
include in your income each year.If you bought an OID debt instrument at a Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru-premium, you generally do not have to report ment is increased by the amount of OID that youany OID as ordinary income. include in your gross income. Inflation-IndexedQualified stated interest. In general, this is Debt Instrumentsstated interest that is unconditionally payable in
Certificates of Deposit (CDs)cash or property (other than debt instruments of If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument
the issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate. (other than a series I U.S. savings bond), youIf you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1 must report as OID any increase in the infla-Acquisition premium. You bought a debt year, you must include in income each year a tion-adjusted principal amount of the instrumentinstrument at an acquisition premium if both of part of the total interest due and report it in the that occurs while you held the instrument duringthe following are true. same manner as other OID. the year. In general, an inflation-indexed debtThis also applies to similar deposit arrange-• You did not pay a premium. instrument is a debt instrument on which thements with banks, building and loan associa- payments are adjusted for inflation and deflation• The instrument's adjusted basis immedi- tions, etc., including: (such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securi-ately after purchase (including purchase at • Time deposits, ties). You should receive Form 1099-OID fromoriginal issue) was greater than its ad- the payer showing the amount you must reportjusted issue price. This is the issue price • Bonus plans, as OID and any qualified stated interest paid toplus the OID previously accrued, minus • Savings certificates, you during the year. For more information, seeany payment previously made on the in- Publication 1212.• Deferred income certificates,strument other than qualified stated inter-
est. • Bonus savings certificates, and
Stripped Bonds and Coupons• Growth savings certificates.Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OID
If you strip one or more coupons from a bondincludible in your income. For information about
and sell the bond or the coupons, the bond andBearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generallyfiguring the correct amount of OID to include in
coupons are treated as separate debt instru-must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDsyour income, see Figuring OID on Long-Term
ments issued with OID.that are not in registered form. They are notDebt Instruments in Publication 1212.
The holder of a stripped bond has the right toissued in the depositor's name and are transfer-
receive the principal (redemption price) pay-able from one individual to another.Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form
ment. The holder of a stripped coupon has theBanks must provide the IRS and the person1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument
right to receive interest on the bond.redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.or acquired it from another holder during the
Stripped bonds and stripped coupons in-year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates ,
Time deposit open account arrangement. clude:earlier, for information about the treatment of
This is an arrangement with a fixed maturity dateperiodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of • Zero coupon instruments availablein which you make deposits on a schedule ar-Form 1099-OID for that instrument. through the Department of the Treasury'sranged between you and your bank. But there is Separate Trading of Registered Interestno actual or constructive receipt of interest until and Principal of Securities (STRIPS) pro-the fixed maturity date is reached. For instance,Applying the OID Rules gram and government-sponsored enter-you and your bank enter into an arrangement prises such as the Resolution FundingThe rules for reporting OID depend on the date under which you agree to deposit $100 each Corporation and the Financing Corpora-the long-term debt instrument was issued. month for a period of 5 years. Interest will be tion, andcompounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payable
Debt instruments issued after 1954 and only at the end of the 5-year period. You must • Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se-
before May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a include a part of the interest in your income as curities that represent ownership interests
government instrument). For these instru- OID each year. Each year the bank must give in those securities, such as obligations
ments, you do not report the OID until the year you a Form 1099-OID to show you the amount backed by U.S. Treasury bonds that are
you sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If you must include in your income for the year. offered primarily by brokerage firms.
a gain results and the instrument is a capital
asset, the amount of the gain equal to the OID is Redemption before maturity. If, before the Seller. If you strip coupons from a bond andordinary interest income. The rest of the gain is maturity date, you redeem a deferred interest sell the bond or coupons, include in income thecapital gain. If there is a loss on the sale of the account for less than its stated redemption price interest that accrued while you held the bondinstrument, the entire loss is a capital loss and at maturity, you can deduct the amount of OID before the date of sale to the extent you did notno reporting of OID is required. that you previously included in income but did previously include this interest in your income.In general, the amount of gain that is ordinary not receive. For an obligation acquired after October 22,interest income equals the following amount: 1986, you must also include the market discountRenewable certificates. If you renew a CD at that accrued before the date of sale of theNumber of full months Original maturity, it is treated as a redemption and a stripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you didyou held the instrument × Issue purchase of a new certificate. This is true re- not previously include this discount in your in-Number of full months from date of Discount gardless of the terms of renewal. come. original issue to date of maturity
Add the interest and market discount that
you include in income to the basis of the bondFace-Amount CertificatesDebt instruments issued after May 27, 1969 and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be-(after July 1, 1982, if a government instru- These certificates are subject to the OID rules. tween the items you keep and the items you sell,ment), and before 1985. If you hold these They are a form of endowment contracts issued based on the fair market value of the items. Thedebt instruments as capital assets, you must by insurance or investment companies for either difference between the sale price of the bond (orinclude a part of the discount in your gross a lump-sum payment or periodic payments, with coupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (orincome each year that you own the instruments. the face amount becoming payable on the ma- coupon) is your gain or loss from the sale.
Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru- turity date of the certificate. Treat any item you keep as an OID bond
ment is increased by the amount of OID that you In general, the difference between the face originally issued and bought by you on the sale
include in your gross income. amount and the amount you paid for the contract date of the other items. If you keep the bond,
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
treat the amount of the redemption price of the When you buy a market discount bond, you number of days you held the bond to figure your
bond that is more than the basis of the bond as accrued market discount.can choose to accrue the market discount over
the OID. If you keep the coupons, treat the the period you own the bond and include it in Constant yield method. Instead of usingamount payable on the coupons that is more your income currently as interest income. If you the ratable accrual method, you can choose tothan the basis of the coupons as the OID. do not make this choice, the following rules figure the accrued discount using a constantgenerally apply. interest rate (the constant yield method). MakeBuyer. If you buy a stripped bond or stripped this choice by attaching to your timely filed return• You must treat any gain when you disposecoupon, treat it as if it were originally issued on a statement identifying the bond and stating thatof the bond as ordinary interest income,the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond, you are making a constant interest rate election.up to the amount of the accrued markettreat as OID any excess of the stated redemp- The choice takes effect on the date you acquireddiscount. See Discounted Debt Instru-tion price at maturity over your purchase price. If the bond. If you choose to use this method forments under Capital Gains and Losses inyou buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID any any bond, you cannot change your choice forchapter 4.excess of the amount payable on the due date of that bond.the coupon over your purchase price. • You must treat any partial payment of prin- For information about using the constantcipal on the bond as ordinary interest in- yield method, see Constant yield method underFiguring OID. The rules for figuring OID on come, up to the amount of the accrued Debt Instruments Issued After 1984  in Publica-stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend on market discount. See Partial principal pay- tion 1212. To use this method to figure marketthe date the debt instruments were purchased, ments, later in this discussion. discount (instead of OID), treat the bond asnot the date issued.
having been issued on the date you acquired it.• If you borrow money to buy or carry theYou must refigure the OID shown on the
Treat the amount of your basis (immediatelybond, your deduction for interest paid onForm 1099-OID you receive for a stripped bond
after you acquired the bond) as the issue price.the debt is limited. See Limit on interestor coupon. For information about figuring the
Then apply the formula shown in Publicationdeduction for market discount bondscorrect amount of OID on these instruments to
1212.under When To Deduct Investment Inter-include in your income, see Figuring OID on
est in chapter 3.Stripped Bonds and Coupons  in Publication
Choosing to include market discount in in-1212. However, owners of stripped bonds and
come currently. You can make this choice ifcoupons should not rely on the OID shown in Market discount. Market discount is the you have not revoked a prior choice to includeSection II of The OID tables (available at http:// amount of the stated redemption price of a bond market discount in income currently within thewww.irs.gov/formspubs/article/ at maturity that is more than your basis in the last 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at-0,,id=109875,00.html ) because the amounts bond immediately after you acquire it. You treat taching to your timely filed return a statement inlisted in Section II for stripped bonds or coupons market discount as zero if it is less than which you:are figured without reference to the date or price one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp-at which you acquired them. • State that you have included market dis-tion price of the bond multiplied by the number of
count in your gross income for the yearStripped inflation-indexed debt instru- full years to maturity (after you acquire the
under section 1278(b) of the Internal Rev-ments. OID on stripped inflation-indexed debt bond).
enue Code, andinstruments is figured under the discount bond If a market discount bond also has OID, the
method. This method is described in Regula- market discount is the sum of the bond's issue • Describe the method you used to figure
tions section 1.1275-7(e). price and the total OID includible in the gross the accrued market discount for the year.
income of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, theStripped tax-exempt obligations. You do Once you make this choice, it will apply to alltotal OID that accrued) before you acquired thenot have to pay tax on OID on any stripped market discount bonds that you acquire duringbond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi-tax-exempt bond or coupon that you bought the tax year and in later tax years. You cannotately after you acquired it.before June 11, 1987. However, if you acquired revoke your choice without the consent of theit after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID IRS. For information on how to revoke yourBonds acquired at original issue. Generally,on it to determine its basis when you dispose of choice, see section 32 of the Appendix to Reve-a bond that you acquired at original issue is not ait. See Original issue discount (OID) on debt nue Procedure 2008-52 in Internal Revenuemarket discount bond. If your adjusted basis in ainstruments under Stocks and Bonds in chapter Bulletin 2008-36. You can find this revenue pro-bond is determined by reference to the adjusted4. cedure at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-36_IRB/ar09.basis of another person who acquired the bondYou may have to pay tax on part of the OID html.at original issue, you are also considered toon stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons that Also see Election To Report All Interest ashave acquired it at original issue.you bought after June 10, 1987. For information OID, later. If you make that election, you muston figuring the taxable part, see Tax-Exempt Exceptions. A bond you acquired at origi- use the constant yield method.Bonds and Coupons  under Figuring OID on nal issue can be a market discount bond if either
Effect on basis. You increase the basis ofStripped Bonds and Coupons  in Publication of the following is true.
your bonds by the amount of market discount1212. • Your cost basis in the bond is less than you include in your income.
the bond's issue price.Market Discount Bonds Partial principal payments. If you receive a• The bond is issued in exchange for a mar-
partial payment of principal on a market discountA market discount bond is any bond having ket discount bond under a plan of reorgan-
bond that you acquired after October 22, 1986,market discount except: ization. (This does not apply if the bond is
and you did not choose to include the discount inissued in exchange for a market discount• Short-term obligations (those with fixed income currently, you must treat the payment asbond issued before July 19, 1984, and thematurity dates of up to 1 year from the ordinary interest income up to the amount of theterms and interest rates of both bonds aredate of issue), bond's accrued market discount. Reduce thethe same.)
amount of accrued market discount reportable• Tax-exempt obligations that you bought
as interest at disposition by that amount.before May 1, 1993, Accrued market discount. The accrued mar- There are 3 methods you can use to figure
ket discount is figured in one of two ways.• U.S. savings bonds, and accrued market discount for this purpose. You
can choose to figure accrued market discount:Ratable accrual method. Treat the market• Certain installment obligations.
discount as accruing in equal daily installments 1. On the basis of the constant yield method,during the period you hold the bond. Figure theMarket discount arises when the value of a described earlier,daily installments by dividing the market dis-debt obligation decreases after its issue date,
count by the number of days after the date yougenerally because of an increase in interest 2. In proportion to the accrual of OID for any
acquired the bond, up to and including its matur-rates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar- accrual period, if the debt instrument has
ity date. Multiply the daily installments by theket, it may have market discount. OID, or
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. In proportion to the amount of stated inter- discussed previously in Accrued market dis- Election To Report
est paid in the accrual period, if the debt count under Market Discount Bonds, earlier. All Interest as OIDinstrument has no OID.
Government obligations. For an obligation Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on aUnder method (2) above, figure accrued described above that is a short-term govern- debt instrument acquired during the tax year asmarket discount for a period by multiplying the ment obligation, the amount you include in your OID and include it in income currently. For pur-total remaining market discount by a fraction.
income for the current year is the accrued acqui- poses of this election, interest includes statedThe numerator (top part) of the fraction is the
interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimissition discount, if any, plus any other accruedOID for the period, and the denominator (bottom OID, market discount, de minimis  market dis-interest payable on the obligation. The acquisi-part) is the total remaining OID at the beginning count, and unstated interest as adjusted by anytion discount is the stated redemption price atof the period. amortizable bond premium or acquisition pre-maturity minus your basis. Under method (3) above, figure accrued mium. See Regulations section 1.1272-3.If you choose to use the constant yieldmarket discount for a period by multiplying the
method to figure accrued acquisition discount,total remaining market discount by a fraction.
treat the cost of acquiring the obligation as theThe numerator is the stated interest paid in the
issue price. If you choose to use this method,accrual period, and the denominator is the total When To Reportyou cannot change your choice.stated interest remaining to be paid at the begin-
ning of the accrual period. Interest IncomeNongovernment obligations. For an obliga-
tion listed above that is not a government obliga-Discount on Terms you may need to knowtion, the amount you include in your income forShort-Term Obligations (see Glossary):the current year is the accrued OID, if any, plus
any other accrued interest payable. If youWhen you buy a short-term obligation (one with
choose the constant yield method to figure ac- Accrual methoda fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from the
crued OID, apply it by using the obligation'sdate of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga- Cash methodissue price.tion, you can generally choose to include any
discount and interest payable on the obligation Choosing to include accrued acquisition
in income currently. If you do not make this When to report your interest income depends ondiscount instead of OID. You can choose to
whether you use the cash method or an accrualchoice, the following rules generally apply. report accrued acquisition discount (defined
method to report income.earlier under Government obligations ) rather• You must treat any gain when you sell,
than accrued OID on these short-term obliga-exchange, or redeem the obligation as or- Cash method. Most individual taxpayers usetions. Your choice will apply to the year for whichdinary income, up to the amount of the the cash method. If you use this method, youit is made and to all later years and cannot beratable share of the discount. See Dis- generally report your interest income in the yearchanged without the consent of the IRS.counted Debt Instruments under Capital in which you actually or constructively receive it.
You must make your choice by the due dateGains and Losses in chapter 4. However, there are special rules for reporting
of your return, including extensions, for the first the discount on certain debt instruments. See• If you borrow money to buy or carry the year for which you are making the choice. Attach U.S. Savings Bonds  and Discount on Debt In-obligation, your deduction for interest paid a statement to your return or amended return struments, earlier.on the debt is limited. See Limit on interest indicating:deduction for short-term obligations under Example. On September 1, 2006, youWhen To Deduct Investment Interest in • Your name, address, and social security loaned another individual $2,000 at 12% com-chapter 3. number, pounded annually. You are not in the business
• The choice you are making and that it is of lending money. The note stated that principal
Short-term obligations for which no choice being made under section 1283(c)(2) of and interest would be due on August 31, 2008.
is available. You must include any discount or In 2008, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-the Internal Revenue Code,
interest in current income as it accrues for any pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash• The period for which the choice is beingshort-term obligation (other than a tax-exempt method, you must include in income on yourmade and the obligation to which it ap-obligation) that is: 2008 return the $508.80 interest you received inplies, and that year.• Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer,
• Any other information necessary to show Constructive receipt. You constructively• Held primarily for sale to customers in the you are entitled to make this choice. receive income when it is credited to your ac-ordinary course of your trade or business, count or made available to you. You do not need
• Held by a bank, regulated investment to have physical possession of it. For example,Choosing to include accrued discount and
company, or common trust fund, you are considered to receive interest, divi-other interest in current income. If you ac-
dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-quire short-term discount obligations that are not• Held by certain pass-through entities, count in a bank, savings and loan, or similarsubject to the rules for current inclusion in in-
• Identified as part of a hedging transaction, financial institution, or interest on life insurancecome of the accrued discount or other interest,or policy dividends left to accumulate, when theyyou can choose to have those rules apply. This
are credited to your account and subject to yourchoice applies to all short-term obligations you• A stripped bond or stripped coupon held withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yetacquire during the year and in all later years.by the person who stripped the bond or entered in your passbook.You cannot change this choice without the con-coupon (or by any other person whose
You constructively receive income on thesent of the IRS.basis in the obligation is determined by
deposit or account even if you must:reference to the basis in the hands of that The procedures to use in making this choice
person). are the same as those described for choosing to • Make withdrawals in multiples of even
amounts,include acquisition discount instead of OID on
nongovernment obligations in current income.Effect on basis. Increase the basis of your • Give a notice to withdraw before makingHowever, you should indicate that you are mak-obligation by the amount of discount you include the withdrawal,ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of thein income currently. • Withdraw all or part of the account to with-Internal Revenue Code.
draw the earnings, orAlso see the following discussion. If youFiguring the accrued discount. Figure the
make the election to report all interest currentlyaccrued discount by using either the ratable • Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless
as OID, you must use the constant yield method.accrual method or the constant yield method the interest you are to receive on an early
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
withdrawal or redemption is substantially Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead Box 9 shows the tax-exempt interest subject
less than the interest payable at maturity. to the alternative minimum tax on Form 6251,of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:
Alternative Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. It is al-
1. You forfeited interest income because of ready included in the amount in box 8. Do notAccrual method. If you use an accrual the early withdrawal of a time deposit, add the amount in box 9 to, or subtract it from,method, you report your interest income when the amount in box 8.2. You received or paid accrued interest onyou earn it, whether or not you have received it.
securities transferred between interestInterest is earned over the term of the debt Do not report interest from an individ-
payment dates,instrument. ual retirement arrangement (IRA) as
tax-exempt interest.
CAUTION
!3. You had a financial account in a foreignExample. If, in the previous example, you country, unless the combined value of alluse an accrual method, you must include the Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,foreign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-interest in your income as you earn it. You would except for interest from U.S. savings bonds anding all of 2008 or the accounts were withreport the interest as follows: 2006, $80; 2007, Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Formcertain U.S. military banking facilities,$249.60; and 2008, $179.20. 1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxable
4. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 interest income you received. You must report
and choose to reduce interest income fromCoupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is all of your taxable interest income even if you do
the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-taxable in the year the coupon becomes due and not receive a Form 1099-INT.
mium (discussed in chapter 3 under Bondpayable. It does not matter when you mail the If you forfeited interest income because of
Premium Amortization),coupon for payment. the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
ductible amount will be shown on Form5. You are reporting OID in an amount more 1099-INT, in box 2. See Penalty on early with-or less than the amount shown on Form drawal of savings, later.1099-OID, or Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amountHow To Report 6. You received tax-exempt interest from pri- of interest income you received from U.S. sav-
vate activity bonds issued after August 7, ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, andInterest Income
1986. Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3
to any other taxable interest income you re-Terms you may need to know
Schedule B. You must complete Schedule ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 was(see Glossary): B (Form 1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 and previously included in your interest income. If
any of the following apply. part of the amount shown in box 3 was previ-
Nominee ously included in your interest income, see U.S.
1. Your taxable interest income is more than savings bond interest previously reported, later.Original issue discount (OID) $1,500. If you redeemed U.S. savings bonds you bought
after 1989 and you paid qualified educational2. You are claiming the interest exclusion
expenses, see Interest excluded under the Edu-Generally, you report all of your taxable interest under the Education Savings Bond Pro-
cation Savings Bond Program, later.income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, line gram (discussed earlier).
Box 4 (federal income tax withheld) of Form8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2. 3. You had a foreign account or you received 1099-INT will contain an amount if you wereYou cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest a distribution from, or were a granter of, or subject to backup withholding. Report theincome is more than $1,500. Instead, you must transferor to, a foreign trust. amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7; onuse Form 1040A or Form 1040.
Form 1040A, line 38; or on Form 1040, line 62.4. You received interest from aIn addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ if Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investmentseller-financed mortgage, and the buyeryou must use Form 1040, as described later, or expenses you may be able to deduct as anused the property as a home.if any of the statements listed under Schedule B, itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-later, are true. 5. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. ment expenses.
savings bond interest that includes If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of FormForm 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1 amounts you reported before 2008. 1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be(Form 1040A), Part I, if you file Form 1040A and able to take a credit for the amount shown in box6. You received, as a nominee, interest thatany of the following are true. 6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct thisactually belongs to someone else.
amount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as ªOther1. Your taxable interest income is more than 7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest taxes.º To take the credit, you may have to file$1,500. on frozen deposits. Form 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor-
2. You are claiming the interest exclusion mation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interestunder the Education Savings Bond Pro- for Individuals.on a bond that you bought between inter-gram (discussed earlier). est payment dates. Form 1099-OID. The taxable OID on a dis-
3. You received interest from a counted obligation for the part of the year you9. Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list isseller-financed mortgage, and the buyer owned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099-OID.true.used the property as a home. Include this amount in your total taxable interest
On Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and the income. But see Refiguring OID shown on Form4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. amount received from each. If you received a 1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID) ,savings bond interest that includes Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro- earlier.amounts you reported before 2008. kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer. You must report all taxable OID even if you
5. You received, as a nominee, interest that do not receive a Form 1099-OID.
actually belongs to someone else. Reporting tax-exempt interest. Total your Box 2 of Form 1099-OID shows any taxable
tax-exempt interest (such as interest or accrued interest on the obligation other than OID. Add6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest OID on certain state and municipal bonds) and this amount to the OID shown in box 1 andon frozen deposits. exempt-interest dividends from a mutual fund as include the result in your total taxable income.
List each payer's name and the amount of inter- shown in box 8 of Form 1099-INT. Add this If you forfeited interest or principal on the
est income received from each payer on line 1. If amount to any other tax-exempt interest you obligation because of an early withdrawal, the
you received a Form 1099-INT or Form received. Report the total on line 8b of Form deductible amount will be shown in box 3. See
1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker- 1040A or Form 1040. If you file Form 1040EZ, Penalty on early withdrawal of savings, later.
age firm as the payer. enter ªTEIº and the amount in the space to the Box 4 of Form 1099-OID will contain an
left of line 2. Do not add tax-exempt interest inYou cannot use Form 1040A if you must use amount if you were subject to backup withhold-
Form 1040, as described next. the total on Form 1040EZ, line 2. ing. Report the amount from box 4 on Form
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-INT
Interest on U.S. Savings Bonds and Treas. obligations3
$
Federal income tax withheld Investment expenses54
$$
Foreign tax paid6
$
Specified private activity
bond interest
9Tax-exempt interest8
Foreign country or U.S.
possession
7
$
Early withdrawal penalty2
$
Interest income1
$ 2008
1040EZ, line 7; on Form 1040A, line 38; or on 1099-INT Ð $841.20. (If you had other taxable A. Enter the amount of cash receivedForm 1040, line 62. interest income, you would enter it next and then upon redemption of the bond ... .Box 7 of Form 1099-OID shows investment enter a subtotal, as described earlier, before
expenses you may be able to deduct as an going to the next step.) Several lines above line B. Enter the value of the bond at the
itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest- 2, enter ªU.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously time of distribution by the plan ... .
ment expenses. Reportedº and enter $815.20 ($841.20 −
$26.00). Subtract $815.20 from $841.20 and C. Subtract the amount on line B fromU.S. savings bond interest previously re- enter $26.00 on line 2. Enter $26.00 on Sched- the amount on line A. This is theported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for amount of interest accrued on theule 1, line 4, and on Form 1040A, line 8a.U.S. savings bond interest, the form may show bond since it was distributed by theinterest you do not have to report. See Form plan .................... .Example 2. Your uncle died and left you a1099-INT for U.S. savings bond interest  under $1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bondU.S. Savings Bonds, earlier. D. Enter the amount of interest shownwhen it reaches maturity.On Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, or on your Form 1099-INT ....... .Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1, of the amount you receive upon redemption isreport all the interest shown on your Form E. Subtract the amount on line C frominterest income. Your uncle's executor included1099-INT. Then follow these steps. the amount on line D. This is thein your uncle's final return $200 of the interest amount you include in ªU.S. Savingsthat had accrued at the time of your uncle's1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal Bond Interest Previously Reportedºdeath. You have to include only $300 in yourof all interest listed on line 1.
income. Your employer should tell you the value of2. Below the subtotal enter ªU.S. Savings The bank where you redeem the bond gives each bond on the date it was distributed.Bond Interest Previously Reportedº and you a Form 1099-INT showing interest incomeenter amounts previously reported or inter- of $500. You also receive a Form 1099-INT Example. You received a distribution of se-est accrued before you received the bond. showing taxable interest income of $300 from ries EE U.S. savings bonds in December 2005
3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal your savings account. from your company's profit-sharing plan.
and enter the result on line 2. You file Form 1040 and you complete In March 2008, you redeemed a $100 series
Schedule B. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list the EE bond that was part of the distribution you
$500 and $300 interest amounts shown on your received in 2005. You received $116.76 for theExample 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav-
Forms 1099. Several lines above line 2, you put bond the company bought in May 1992. Theings bonds for you when you were a child. The
a subtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, enter value of the bond at the time of distribution inbonds were issued in your name, and the inter-
ªU.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Re- 2005 was $107.88. (This is the amount youest on the bonds was reported each year as it
portedº and enter the $200 interest included in included on your 2005 return.) The bank gaveaccrued. (See Choice to report interest each
your uncle's final return. Subtract the $200 from you a Form 1099-INT that shows $66.76 interestyear under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.)
the subtotal and enter $600 on line 2. You then (the total interest from the date the bond wasIn March 2008, you redeemed one of the
complete the rest of the form. purchased to the date of redemption). Since abonds Ð a $1,000 series EE bond. The bond
part of the interest was included in your incomewas originally issued in March 1989. When you Worksheet for savings bonds distributed in 2005, you need to include in your 2008 in-redeemed the bond, you received $1,341.20 for from a retirement or profit-sharing plan. If come only the interest that accrued after theit. you cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxable bond was distributed to you.The Form 1099-INT you received shows in- distribution from a retirement or profit-sharing
terest income of $841.20. However, since the On Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1, includeplan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds ,
interest on your savings bonds was reported all the interest shown on your Form 1099-INT asearlier), your interest income does not include
yearly, you need only include the $26.00 interest well as any other taxable interest income youthe interest accrued before the distribution and
that accrued from January 2008 to March 2008. received. Several lines above line 2, put a sub-taxed as a distribution from the plan.
You received no other taxable interest for total of all interest listed on line 1. Below this
Use the worksheet below to figure the2008. You file Form 1040A. subtotal enter ªU.S. Savings Bond Interest Pre-
amount you subtract from the interestOn Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1, viously Reportedº and enter the amount figured
shown on Form 1099-INT.
enter your interest income as shown on Form on the worksheet below.
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the seller, not you. Subtract that amount from Distribution.º (Your sister will report the $450 ofA. Enter the amount of cash received the interest income subtotal. Enter the result on interest income on her own tax return, if she hasupon redemption of the bond .. . $116.76 line 2 and also on Form 1040, line 8a. to file a return, and identify you as the payer ofB. Enter the value of the bond at the For more information, see Bonds Sold Be- that amount.)time of distribution by the plan .. . 107.88
tween Interest Dates, earlier.C. Subtract the amount on line B from Original issue discount (OID) adjustment. Ifthe amount on line A. This is the Nominee distributions. If you received a you are reporting OID in an amount greater oramount of interest accrued on the Form 1099-INT that includes an amount you less than the amount shown on Form 1099-OIDbond since it was distributed by received as a nominee for the real owner, report or other written statement (such as for a REMICthe plan ................. . $8.88 the full amount shown as interest on the Form regular interest), include the full amount of OIDD. Enter the amount of interest shown 1099-INT on Part I, line 1 of Schedule 1 (Form shown on your Form 1099-OID or other state-on your Form 1099-INT ...... . $66.76 1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, be- ment on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1.E. Subtract the amount on line C from
low a subtotal of all interest income listed, enterthe amount on line D. This is the If the OID to be reported is less than the amount
ªNominee Distributionº and the amount that ac-amount you include in ªU.S. shown on Form 1099-OID, show the OID you do
tually belongs to someone else. Subtract thatSavings Bond Interest Previously not have to report below a subtotal of the interest
amount from the interest income subtotal. EnterReportedº ............... . $57.88 and OID listed. Identify the amount as ªOID
the result on line 2 and also on line 8a of Form Adjustmentº and subtract it from the subtotal. IfSubtract $57.88 from the subtotal and enter the 1040A or 1040. the OID to be reported is greater than theresult on Schedule B, line 2. You then complete
amount shown on Form 1099-OID, show theFile Form 1099-INT with the IRS. If youthe rest of the form.
additional OID below the subtotal. Identify thereceived interest as a nominee in 2008, youInterest excluded under the Education Sav- amount as ªOID Adjustmentº and add it to themust file a Form 1099-INT for that interest withings Bond Program. Use Form 8815 to figure subtotal.the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099-INT with ayour interest exclusion when you redeem quali- Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal offied savings bonds and pay qualified higher edu- Penalty on early withdrawal of savings. IfU.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-cational expenses during the same year. you withdraw funds from a certificate of depositnue Service Center by March 2, 2009 (March 31,For more information on the exclusion and or other deferred interest account before matur-2009 if you file Form 1099-INT electronically).qualified higher educational expenses, see the ity, you may be charged a penalty. The FormGive the actual owner of the interest Copy B ofearlier discussion under Education Savings 1099-INT or similar statement given to you bythe Form 1099-INT by February 2, 2009. OnBond Program. the financial institution will show the totalForm 1099-INT, you should be listed as theYou must show your total interest from quali- amount of interest in box 1 and will show theªPayer.º Prepare one Form 1099-INT for eachfied savings bonds that you cashed during 2008 penalty separately in box 2. You must include inother owner and show that person as the ªRecip-on Form 8815, line 6, and on line 1 of either income all the interest shown in box 1. You canient.º However, you do not have to file FormSchedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B (Form deduct the penalty on Form 1040, line 30. De-1099-INT to show payments for your spouse.1040). After completing Form 8815, enter the duct the entire penalty even if it is more thanFor more information about the reporting re-result from line 14 (Form 8815) on Schedule 1 your interest income. quirements and the penalties for failure to file (or(Form 1040A), line 3, or Schedule B (Form furnish) certain information returns, see the1040), line 3. General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
Interest on seller-financed mortgage. If an 5498, and W2-G.
Dividends andindividual buys his or her home from you in a Similar rules apply to OID reported to you as
sale that you finance, you must report the a nominee on Form 1099-OID. You must file a
Other Corporatebuyer's name, address, and social security num- Form 1099-OID with Form 1096 to show the
ber on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), line 1, or proper distributions of the OID. DistributionsSchedule B (Form 1040), line 1. If you do not,
Example. You and your sister have a jointyou may have to pay a $50 penalty. The buyer Dividends are distributions of money, stock, orsavings account that paid $1,500 interest formay have to pay a $50 penalty if he or she does other property paid to you by a corporation. You2008. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds innot give you this information. also may receive dividends through a partner-this account, and you and she have agreed toYou must also give your name, address, and ship, an estate, a trust, or an association that isshare the yearly interest income in proportion tosocial security number (or employer identifica- taxed as a corporation. However, somethe amount that each of you has invested. Be-tion number) to the buyer. If you do not, you may amounts you receive that are called dividendscause your social security number was given tohave to pay a $50 penalty. are actually interest income. (See Dividends thatthe bank, you received a Form 1099-INT forFrozen deposits. Even if you receive a Form are actually interest  under Taxable Interest Ð2008 that includes the interest income earned1099-INT for interest on deposits that you could General, earlier.)belonging to your sister. This amount is $450, ornot withdraw at the end of 2008, you must ex- The most common kinds of distributions are:30% of the total interest of $1,500.clude these amounts from your gross income. You must give your sister a Form 1099-INT • Ordinary dividends,(See Interest income on frozen deposits  under by February 2, 2009, showing $450 of interestInterest Income , earlier.) Do not include this • Capital gain distributions, andincome that she earned for 2008. You must alsoincome on line 8a of Form 1040A or Form 1040. send a copy of the nominee Form 1099-INT, • Nondividend distributions.In Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, or Schedule along with Form 1096, to the Internal RevenueB (Form 1040), Part I, include the full amount of Most distributions are paid in cash (check).Service Center by March 2, 2009 (March 31,interest shown on your Form 1099-INT on line 1. However, distributions can consist of more2009, if you file Form 1099-INT electronically).Several lines above line 2, put a subtotal of all stock, stock rights, other property, or services.Show your own name, address, and social se-interest income. Below this subtotal, enter ªFro- curity number as that of the ªPayerº on the Formzen Depositsº and show the amount of interest Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Form1099-INT. Show your sister's name, address,that you are excluding. Subtract this amount 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to showand social security number in the blocks pro-from the subtotal and enter the result on line 2. you the distributions you received from themvided for identification of the ªRecipient.º during the year. Keep this form with your rec-Accrued interest on bonds. If you received a When you prepare your own federal income ords. You do not have to attach it to your taxForm 1099-INT that reflects accrued interest tax return, report the total amount of interest return.paid on a bond you bought between interest income, $1,500, on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),
payment dates, include the full amount shown Part I, line 1, or Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.
as interest on the Form 1099-INT on Schedule B line 1, and identify the name of the bank that Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, you
(Form 1040), Part I, line 1. Then, below a sub- paid this interest. Show the amount belonging to must still report all of your taxable dividend in-
total of all interest income listed, enter ªAccrued your sister, $450, as a subtraction from a sub- come. For example, you may receive distributive
Interestº and the amount of accrued interest that total of all interest on Schedule 1 (or Schedule shares of dividends from partnerships or S cor-
you paid to the seller. That amount is taxable to B) and identify this subtraction as a ªNominee porations. These dividends are reported to you
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-1 • The dividends must have been paid by a Fund because you held the ABC Mutual Fund
(Form 1120S). U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor- stock for less than 61 days.
poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora-Nominees. If someone receives distribu- Holding period reduced where risk of loss
tion later.)tions as a nominee for you, that person will give is diminished. When determining whether
you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu- you met the minimum holding period discussed• The dividends are not of the type listed
tions received on your behalf. earlier, you cannot count any day during whichlater under Dividends that are not qualified
If you receive a Form 1099-DIV that includes you meet any of the following conditions.dividends.
amounts belonging to another person, see Nom- • You meet the holding period (discussed 1. You had an option to sell, were under ainees under How To Report Dividend Income , next). contractual obligation to sell, or had madelater, for more information.
(and not closed) a short sale of substan-
tially identical stock or securities.Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay- Holding period. You must have held the stock
ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interest for more than 60 days during the 121-day period 2. You were grantor (writer) of an option tothat are received by a broker on your behalf that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date. buy substantially identical stock or securi-must be reported to you on Form 1099-MISC, The ex-dividend date is the first date following ties.Miscellaneous Income, or a similar statement. the declaration of a dividend on which the buyer
See also Reporting Substitute Payments under 3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holdingof a stock will not receive the next dividendShort Sales in chapter 4. one or more other positions in substantiallypayment. When counting the number of days
similar or related property.you held the stock, include the day you disposedIncorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. If of the stock, but not the day you acquired it. See For information about how to apply conditionyou receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect the examples, later. (3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.amount (or other incorrect information), you
should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The Exception for preferred stock. In the case
new Form 1099 you receive will be marked ªCor- of preferred stock, you must have held the stock Qualified foreign corporation. A foreign cor-
rected.º more than 90 days during the 181-day period poration is a qualified foreign corporation if it
that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend date meets any of the following conditions. Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold, if the dividends are due to periods totaling moreexchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a 1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are duedividend is declared, but before it is paid, the possession.to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold-owner of record (usually the payee shown on the ing period in the preceding paragraph applies. 2. The corporation is eligible for the benefitsdividend check) must include the dividend in
of a comprehensive income tax treaty withincome. Example 1. You bought 5,000 shares of the United States that the Treasury De-
XYZ Corp. common stock on July 1, 2008. XYZ partment determines is satisfactory for thisDividends received in January. If a mutual Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per purpose and that includes an exchange offund (or other regulated investment company) or share. The ex-dividend date was July 9, 2008. information program. For a list of thosereal estate investment trust (REIT) declares a
Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. showsdividend (including any exempt-interest divi- treaties, see Table 1-3.
$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in boxdend or capital gain distribution) in October, 3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold theNovember, or December payable to sharehold- above, but the stock for which the dividend5,000 shares on August 4, 2008. You held yourers of record on a date in one of those months is paid is readily tradable on an estab-shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of thebut actually pays the dividend during January of
lished securities market in the United121-day period (from July 2, 2008, through Au-the next calendar year, you are considered to
States. See Readily tradable stock, later.have received the dividend on December 31. gust 4, 2008). The 121-day period began on
You report the dividend in the year it was de- May 10, 2008 (60 days before the ex-dividend
Exception. A corporation is not a qualifiedclared. date), and ended on September 7, 2008. You
foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be-
vestment company during its tax year in whichcause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61Ordinary Dividends
the dividends are paid or during its previous taxdays.
year.Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-
mon type of distribution from a corporation. They Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Controlled foreign corporation (CFC).are paid out of the earnings and profits of a Example 1 except that you bought the stock on Dividends paid out of a CFC's earnings andcorporation and are ordinary income to you. This July 8, 2008 (the day before the ex-dividend profits that were not previously taxed are quali-means they are not capital gains. You can as- date), and you sold the stock on September 9, fied dividends if the CFC is otherwise a qualifiedsume that any dividend you receive on common 2008. You held the stock for 63 days (from July foreign corporation and the other requirementsor preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless 9, 2008, through September 9, 2008). The $500 in this discussion are met. Certain dividendsthe paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi- of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of your paid by a CFC that would be treated as a pas-nary dividends will be shown in box 1a of the Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends be- sive foreign investment company but for sectionForm 1099-DIV you receive. cause you held the stock for 61 days of the 1297(d) of the Internal Revenue Code may be
121-day period (from July 9, 2008, through Sep- treated as qualified dividends. For more infor-
tember 7, 2008).Qualified Dividends mation, see Notice 2004-70, which can be found
at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-44_IRB/ar09.html.Example 3. You bought 10,000 shares ofQualified dividends are the ordinary dividends
Readily tradable stock. Any stock (such asABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 1,that are subject to the same 0% or 15% maxi-
common, ordinary, or preferred stock), or anmum tax rate that applies to net capital gain. 2008. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend of
They should be shown in box 1b of the Form American depositary receipt in respect of that10 cents per share. The ex-dividend date was
1099-DIV you receive. stock, is considered to satisfy requirement (3) ifJuly 9, 2008. The ABC Mutual Fund advises you
it is listed on one of the following securitiesthat the portion of the dividend eligible to beQualified dividends are subject to the 15%
markets: the New York Stock Exchange, thetreated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents perrate if the regular tax rate that would apply is
25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that would NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Ex-share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual
apply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends are change, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cincin-Fund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000
subject to the 0% rate. nati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stockand qualified dividends of $200. However, you
Exchange, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, orsold the 10,000 shares on August 4, 2008. YouTo qualify for the 0% or 15% maximum rate,
the Pacific Exchange, Inc.all of the following requirements must be met. have no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a ofTable 1-3. Income Tax Treaties Dividends Used To
Form 2439) as long-term capital gains onBuy More Stock
Income tax treaties that the United States Schedule D (Form 1040), line 11, column (f).
The corporation in which you own stock mayhas with the following countries satisfy Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section
requirement (2) under Qualified foreign have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan 1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-
corporation. lets you choose to use your dividends to buy tions the part reported to you as unrecaptured
(through an agent) more shares of stock in the section 1250 gain. For any gain on qualifiedAustralia Indonesia Romania corporation instead of receiving the dividends in small business stock, follow the reporting in-Austria Ireland Russian cash. If you are a member of this type of plan structions under Section 1202 Exclusion  inBangladesh1 Israel Federation and you use your dividends to buy more stock at chapter 4. Enter the collectibles gain on line 4 ofBarbados2 Italy Slovak a price equal to its fair market value, you still the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the ScheduleBelgium Jamaica Republic must report the dividends as income. D instructions.Canada Japan Slovenia If you are a member of a dividend reinvest- The tax paid on these gains by the mutualChina Kazakhstan South Africa ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a price fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.Cyprus Korea Spain less than its fair market value, you must report You take credit for this tax by including it onCzech Latvia Sri Lanka3
as dividend income the fair market value of the Form 1040, line 68, and checking box a on thatRepublic Lithuania Sweden additional stock on the dividend payment date. line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return,Denmark Luxembourg Switzerland You also must report as dividend income any and keep Copy C for your records.Egypt Mexico Thailand service charge subtracted from your cash divi-
Estonia Morocco Trinidad and Basis adjustment. Increase your basis indends before the dividends are used to buy the
your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, byFinland Netherlands Tobago additional stock. But you may be able to deduct
the difference between the gain you report andFrance New Zealand Tunisia the service charge. See Expenses of Producing
the credit you claim for the tax paid.Germany Norway Turkey Income in chapter 3.
In some dividend reinvestment plans, youGreece Pakistan Ukraine
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at aHungary Philippines United Nondividend Distributions
price less than fair market value. If you chooseIceland Poland Kingdom
to do this, you must report as dividend income A nondividend distribution is a distribution that isIndia Portugal Venezuela
the difference between the cash you invest and not paid out of the earnings and profits of a1Effective for dividends paid after August 6, 2006.
2Effective for dividends paid after December 19, the fair market value of the stock you buy. When corporation. You should receive a Form
2004. figuring this amount, use the fair market value of 1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora-3Effective for dividends paid after July 11, 2004. the stock on the dividend payment date. tion showing you the nondividend distribution.  On Form 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution
will be shown in box 3. If you do not receive suchDividends that are not qualified dividends.
Money Market Funds a statement, you report the distribution as anThe following dividends are not qualified divi-
dends. They are not qualified dividends even if ordinary dividend.Report amounts you receive from money marketthey are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV. funds as dividend income. Money market funds Basis adjustment. A nondividend distribution• Capital gain distributions. are a type of mutual fund and should not be reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxed
confused with bank money market accounts that until your basis in the stock is fully recovered.• Dividends paid on deposits with mutual pay interest. This nontaxable portion is also called a return ofsavings banks, cooperative banks, credit
capital; it is a return of your investment in theunions, U.S. building and loan associa-
Capital Gain Distributions stock of the company. If you buy stock in ations, U.S. savings and loan associations,
corporation in different lots at different times,federal savings and loan associations, and
Capital gain distributions (also called capital and you cannot definitely identify the sharessimilar financial institutions. (Report these
gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to subject to the nondividend distribution, reduceamounts as interest income.)
your account by mutual funds (or other regu- the basis of your earliest purchases first.• Dividends from a corporation that is a lated investment companies) and real estate When the basis of your stock has been re-tax-exempt organization or farmer's coop- investment trusts (REITs). They will be shown in duced to zero, report any additional nondividenderative during the corporation's tax year in box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive from distribution that you receive as a capital gain.which the dividends were paid or during the mutual fund or REIT. Whether you report it as a long-term orthe corporation's previous tax year. Report capital gain distributions as long-term short-term capital gain depends on how longcapital gains, regardless of how long you owned• Dividends paid by a corporation on em- you have held the stock. See Holding Period inyour shares in the mutual fund or REIT. Seeployer securities which are held on the chapter 4.Capital gain distributions under How To Reportdate of record by an employee stock own-
Dividend Income, later in this chapter.ership plan (ESOP) maintained by that Example. You bought stock in 1996 for
corporation. $100. In 1999, you received a nondividend dis-Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds
tribution of $80. You did not include this amountand REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs• Dividends on any share of stock to the in your income, but you reduced the basis ofkeep their long-term capital gains and pay tax onextent that you are obligated (whether your stock to $20. You received a nondividendthem. You must treat your share of these gainsunder a short sale or otherwise) to make distribution of $30 in 2008. The first $20 of thisas distributions, even though you did not actu-related payments for positions in substan- amount reduced your basis to zero. You reportally receive them. However, they are not in-tially similar or related property. the other $10 as a long-term capital gain forcluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are
• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if 2008. You must report as a long-term capitalreported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share-
you know or have reason to know that the gain any nondividend distribution you receive onholder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital
payments are not qualified dividends. this stock in later years.Gains.
Form 2439 will also show how much, if any,• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box of the undistributed capital gains is: Liquidating Distributions1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent
you know or have reason to know the pay- • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1b), Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liqui-ments are not qualified dividends. dating dividends, are distributions you receive• Gain from qualified small business stock
during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-(section 1202 gain, box 1c), or
poration. These distributions are, at least in part,• Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1d). one form of a return of capital. They may be paid
in one or more installments. You will receiveFor information about these terms, see Capital
Form 1099-DIV from the corporation showingGain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you the amount of the liquidating distribution in The term ªstockº includes rights to acquire 4. The stock was issued after December 19,
box 8 or 9. 1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-stock, and the term ªshareholderº includes a
tion of the issuer, but the redemption pre-holder of rights or convertible securities.Any liquidating distribution you receive is not
mium is in the nature of a penalty fortaxable to you until you have recovered the If you receive taxable stock dividends or
premature redemption or redemption is notbasis of your stock. After the basis of your stock stock rights, include their fair market value at the
more likely than not to occur. The redemp-has been reduced to zero, you must report the time of the distribution in your income. tion will be treated under a ªsafe harborº asliquidating distribution as a capital gain. Whether
not more likely than not to occur if all of theyou report the gain as a long-term or short-term Constructive distributions. You must treat following are true.capital gain depends on how long you have held certain transactions that increase your propor-
the stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4. tionate interest in the earnings and profits or a. You and the issuer are not related
assets of a corporation as if they were distribu-Stock acquired at different times. If you under the rules discussed in chapter 4
tions of stock or stock rights. These constructiveacquired stock in the same corporation in more under Losses on Sales or Trades of
distributions are taxable if they have the samethan one transaction, you own more than one Property, substituting ª20%º for ª50%.º
block of stock in the corporation. If you receive result as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4), b. There are no plans, arrangements, ordistributions from the corporation in complete or (5) of the above discussion. agreements that effectively require orliquidation, you must divide the distribution This treatment applies to a change in your are intended to compel the issuer toamong the blocks of stock you own in the follow- stock's conversion ratio or redemption price, a redeem the stock.ing proportion: the number of shares in that difference between your stock's redemption
block over the total number of shares you own. c. The redemption would not reduce theprice and issue price, a redemption that is notDivide distributions in partial liquidation among stock's yield.treated as a sale or exchange of your stock, andthat part of the stock that is redeemed in the any other transaction having a similar effect onpartial liquidation. After the basis of a block of your interest in the corporation. Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-stock is reduced to zero, you must report the ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair marketPreferred stock redeemable at a premium.part of any later distribution for that block as a value when distributed. If you receive stock orIf you hold preferred stock having a redemptioncapital gain. stock rights that are not taxable to you, seeprice higher than its issue price, the differenceDistributions less than basis. If the total Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Investment(the redemption premium) generally is taxableliquidating distributions you receive are less Property in chapter 4 for information on how toas a constructive distribution of additional stockthan the basis of your stock, you may have a figure their basis.on the preferred stock.capital loss. You can report a capital loss only
Fractional shares. You may not own enoughFor stock issued before October 10, 1990,after you have received the final distribution in
stock in a corporation to receive a full share ofyou include the redemption premium in yourliquidation that results in the redemption or can-
stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-income ratably over the period during which thecellation of the stock. Whether you report the
dend. However, with the approval of the share-stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issuedloss as a long-term or short-term capital loss
holders, the corporation may set up a plan inafter October 9, 1990, you include the redemp-depends on how long you held the stock. See
which fractional shares are not issued, but in-tion premium on the basis of its economic ac-Holding Period in chapter 4.
stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are givencrual over the period during which the stock
to the shareholders. Any cash you receive forcannot be redeemed, as if it were original issueDistributions of Stock fractional shares under such a plan is treated asdiscount on a debt instrument. See Original Is-and Stock Rights an amount realized on the sale of the fractionalsue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter. shares. You must determine your gain or lossThe redemption premium is not a construc-Distributions by a corporation of its own stock and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-tive distribution, and therefore is not taxable, inare commonly known as stock dividends. Stock ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is thethe following situations.rights (also known as ªstock optionsº) are distri- difference between the cash you receive and thebutions by a corporation of rights to acquire the basis of the fractional shares sold.1. The stock was issued before October 10,corporation's stock. Generally, stock dividends
1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re-and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you Example. You own one share of commondeemable solely at the option of the is-do not report them on your return. stock that you bought on January 3, 2000, forsuer), and the redemption premium is $100. The corporation declared a common stockTaxable stock dividends and stock rights. ªreasonable.º (For stock issued before Oc- dividend of 5% on June 30, 2008. The fair mar-Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights tober 10, 1990, only the part of the re- ket value of the stock at the time the stockare taxable to you if any of the following apply. demption premium that is not ªreasonableº dividend was declared was $200. You were paidis a constructive distribution.) The redemp- $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under1. You or any other shareholder has the tion premium is reasonable if it is not more a plan described in the above paragraph. Youchoice to receive cash or other property than 10% of the issue price on stock not figure your gain or loss as follows:instead of stock or stock rights. redeemable for 5 years from the issue date
or is in the nature of a penalty for making a2. The distribution gives cash or other prop- Fair market value of old stock ... . $200.00
erty to some shareholders and an increase premature redemption. Fair market value of stock dividend
in the percentage interest in the corpora- (cash received) ............. . + 10.002. The stock was issued after October 9,tion's assets or earnings and profits to Fair market value of old stock and1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem- stock dividend .............. . $210.00other shareholders. able solely at the option of the issuer), and Basis (cost) of old stock3. The distribution is in convertible preferred the redemption premium is ªde minimis.º after the stock dividendstock and has the same result as in (2). The redemption premium is de minimis if it (($200 ÷  $210) ×  $100) ........ . $95.24
is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the Basis (cost) of stock dividend4. The distribution gives preferred stock to
redemption price multiplied by the number (($10 ÷  $210) ×  $100) ......... . + 4.76some common stock shareholders and
Total .................... . $100.00of full years from the date of issue to thecommon stock to other common stock
date redeemable.shareholders. Cash received .............. .  $10.00
Basis (cost) of stock dividend .... . − 4.763. The stock was issued after October 9,5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The
1990, and must be redeemed at a speci-distribution, however, is not taxable if it is Gain  $5.24fied time or is redeemable at your option,an increase in the conversion ratio of con-
but the redemption is unlikely because it isvertible preferred stock made solely to take Because you had held the share of stock for
subject to a contingency outside your con-into account a stock dividend, stock split, more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend
trol (not including the possibility of default,or similar event that would otherwise result was declared, your gain on the stock dividend is
insolvency, etc.).in reducing the conversion right.) a long-term capital gain.
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Scrip dividends. A corporation that de- • Property bought for your personal use, or • You received, as a nominee, dividends
clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip that actually belong to someone else.• Capital assets or depreciable propertycertificate that entitles you to a fractional share. bought for use in your business. But you If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,The certificate is generally nontaxable when you must reduce the basis (cost) of the items you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.receive it. If you choose to have the corporation bought. If the dividend is more than the List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, eachsell the certificate for you and give you the pro- adjusted basis of the assets, you must re- payer's name and the amount of ordinary divi-ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be- port the excess as income. dends you received. If your securities are heldtween the proceeds and the part of your basis in
by a brokerage firm (in ªstreet nameº), list thethe corporation's stock that is allocated to the These rules are the same whether the cooper- name of the brokerage firm that is shown oncertificate. ative paying the dividend is a taxable or Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock isHowever, if you receive a scrip certificate tax-exempt cooperative. held by a nominee who is the owner of record,that you can choose to redeem for cash instead
and the nominee credited or paid you dividendsof stock, the certificate is taxable when you re- Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do not on the stock, show the name of the nominee andceive it. You must include its fair market value in report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re- the dividends you received or for which you wereincome on the date you receive it. port these amounts on Form 1040, line 21; Form credited.1040A, line 13; or Form 1040EZ, line 3. 
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedOther Distributions
on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a
You may receive any of the following distribu- nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this
tions during the year. total on Form 1040, line 9a.How To Report
Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest Dividends received on restricted stock. Re-Dividend Incomedividends you receive from a mutual fund or stricted stock is stock that you get from yourother regulated investment company are not in- employer for services you perform and that isTerms you may need to knowcluded in your taxable income. Exempt-interest nontransferable and subject to a substantial risk(see Glossary):dividends should be shown in box 8 of Form of forfeiture. You do not have to include the1099-INT. value of the stock in your income when you
Nominee receive it. However, if you get dividends on re-Information reporting requirement. Al-
stricted stock, you must include them in yourthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax- Restricted stock
income as wages, not dividends. See Restrictedable, you must show them on your tax return if
Property in Publication 525 for information onyou have to file a return. This is an information
restricted stock dividends.reporting requirement and does not change the Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or
exempt-interest dividends to taxable income. Form 1040A to report your dividend income. Your employer should include these divi-
See Reporting tax-exempt interest  under How Report the total of your ordinary dividends on dends in the wages shown on your Form W-2. If
To Report Interest Income, earlier. line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Report you also get a Form 1099-DIV for these divi-
qualified dividends on line 9b. dends, list them on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),Alternative minimum tax treatment. Ex- If you receive capital gain distributions, you line 5, or Schedule B (Form 1040), line 5, withempt-interest dividends paid from specified pri- may be able to use Form 1040A or you may the other dividends you received. Enter a sub-vate activity bonds may be subject to the have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri- total of all your dividend income several linesalternative minimum tax. The exempt-interest butions, later. If you receive nondividend distri- above line 6. Below the subtotal, enter ªDivi-dividends subject to the alternative minimum tax butions required to be reported as capital gains, dends on restricted stock reported as wages onshould be shown in box 9 of Form 1099-INT. you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Form Form 1040 (or Form 1040A), line 7,º and enterSee Form 6251 and its instructions for more 1040EZ if you receive any dividend income. the amount of the dividends included in yourinformation. wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichDividends on insurance policies. Insurance Subtract this amount from the subtotal and enter
you received $10 or more in dividends and otherpolicy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses the result on line 6.
distributions, you should receive a Formto pay your premiums are not taxable. However, Election. You can choose to include the1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive a Formyou must report as taxable interest income the value of restricted stock in gross income as pay1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxableinterest that is paid or credited on dividends left for services. If you make this choice, report thedividend income.with the insurance company. dividends on the stock like any other dividends.See Form 1099-DIV for more information on If dividends on an insurance contract (other List them on Part II, line 5, of Schedule 1 orhow to report dividend income.than a modified endowment contract) are distrib- Schedule B, along with your other dividends (ifuted to you, they are a partial return of the the amount of ordinary dividends received fromForm 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1premiums you paid. Do not include them in your all sources is more than $1,500). If you receive(Form 1040A), Part II, and attach it to your Formgross income until they are more than the total of both a Form 1099-DIV and a Form W-2 showing1040A, if:all net premiums you paid for the contract. (For these dividends, do not include the dividends ininformation on the treatment of a distribution • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV, your wages reported on line 7 of Form 1040 orfrom a modified endowment contract, see Distri- box 1a) are more than $1,500, or Form 1040A. Attach a statement to your Formbution Before Annuity Starting Date From a 1040 or Form 1040A explaining why the amount• You received, as a nominee, dividendsNonqualified Plan  under Taxation of Nonperi- shown on line 7 of your Form 1040 or Formthat actually belong to someone else.odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension and 1040A is different from the amount shown onAnnuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu- List on line 5 each payer's name and the amount your Form W-2.tions on insurance policies on Form 1040, line of ordinary dividends you received. If you re-
21. Independent contractor. If you receivedceived a Form 1099-DIV from a brokerage firm,
restricted stock for services as an independentlist the brokerage firm as the payer.Dividends on veterans' insurance. Divi- contractor, the rules in the previous discussiondends you receive on veterans' insurance poli- Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed apply. Generally, you must treat dividends youcies are not taxable. In addition, interest on on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a receive on the stock as income fromdividends left with the Department of Veterans nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this self-employment.Affairs is not taxable. total on Form 1040A, line 9a.
Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage Qualified dividends. Report qualified divi-Form 1040. You must fill in Schedule B, Partdividends you receive in money from a coopera- dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b ofII, and attach it to your Form 1040, if:tive organization are included in your income. Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in box
Do not include in your income patronage • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV, 1b is already included in box 1a. Do not add the
dividends you receive on: box 1a) are more than $1,500, or amount in box 1b to, or subtract it from, the
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no.
RECIPIENT’S identification
number
PAYER’S federal identification
number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Dividends and
Distributions
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-DIV (keep for your records)
Copy B
This is important
tax information
and is being
furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you
are required to
file a return, a
negligence
penalty or other
sanction may be
imposed on you
if this income is
taxable and the
IRS determines
that it has not
been reported.
For Recipient
Unrecap. Sec. 1250 gain
OMB No. 1545-0110Total ordinary dividends1a
$
1b Qualified dividends
$
Total capital gain distr.2a
Collectibles (28%) gainSection 1202 gain 2d2c
$
3
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation
distributions
9Cash liquidation
distributions
8
$
$
2b
$$
Nondividend distributions
Form 1099-DIV
$
76
$
Foreign tax paid Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
$
4 Federal income tax withheld
$
2008
amount in box 1a. Do not include any of the interest deduction. This is done on the Qualified only after your basis in the stock has been re-
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or duced to zero. After the basis of your stock hasfollowing on line 9b.
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor- been reduced to zero, you must show this• Qualified dividends you received as a mation about the limit on investment interest, amount on Schedule D, Part I, line 1, if you heldnominee. See Nominees, later. see Interest Expenses in chapter 3. the stock 1 year or less. Show it on Schedule D,
Part II, line 8, if you held the stock for more than• Dividends on stock for which you did not
Capital gain distributions. How to report 1 year. Enter ªNondividend Distribution Exceed-meet the holding period. See Holding pe-
capital gain distributions depends on whether ing Basisº in column (a) of Schedule D and theriod, earlier under Qualified Dividends.
you have any other capital gains or losses. If you name of the company. Report your gain in col-• Dividends on any share of stock to the do, report total capital gain distributions (box 2a umn (f). Your gain is the amount of the distribu-
extent that you are obligated (whether of Form 1099-DIV) on Schedule D (Form 1040), tion that is more than your basis in the stock.
under a short sale or otherwise) to make Part II, line 13. If you do not have any other
related payments for positions in substan- capital gains or losses, you may be able to Nominees. If you received ordinary dividendstially similar or related property. report your capital gain distributions directly on as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in yourForm 1040, line 13, or Form 1040A, line 10. In• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if name but actually belong to someone else),either case, see Reporting Capital Gains andyou know or have reason to know that the include them on line 5 of Schedule 1 (FormLosses in chapter 4 for more information.payments are not qualified dividends. 1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). SeveralThe mutual fund (or other regulated invest- lines above line 6, put a subtotal of all dividend• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box ment company) or real estate investment trust income listed on line 5. Below this subtotal, enter1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent (REIT) making the distribution should tell you ªNominee Distributionº and show the amounthow much of it is:you know or have reason to know the pay- received as a nominee. Subtract the total of yourments are not qualified dividends. nominee distributions from the subtotal. Enter• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 2b),
the result on line 6.orIf you have qualified dividends, you must fig-
File Form 1099-DIV with the IRS. If you• Section 1202 gain (box 2c).ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-
received dividends as a nominee in 2008, youdends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the For information about these terms, see Capital must file a Form 1099-DIV for those dividendsForm 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched- Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. with the IRS. Send the Form 1099-DIV with aule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-
Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal ofEnter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Sectiontions, whichever applies. Enter qualified
U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-dividends on line 2 of the worksheet.
nue Service Center by March 2, 2009 (March 31,tions the part reported to you as unrecaptured
Investment interest deducted. If you claim 2009, if you file form 1099-DIV electronically).section 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualified
a deduction for investment interest, you may Give the actual owner of the dividends Copy B ofsmall business stock (section 1202 gain), follow
have to reduce the amount of your qualified the Form 1099-DIV by February 2, 2009. Onthe reporting instructions under Section 1202
dividends that are eligible for the 0% or 15% tax Form 1099-DIV, you should be listed as theExclusion in chapter 4.
rate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi- ªPayer.º The other owner should be listed as the
dends you choose to include in investment in- Nondividend distributions. Report nondivi- ªRecipient.º You do not, however, have to file a
come when figuring the limit on your investment dend distributions (box 3 of Form 1099-DIV) Form 1099-DIV to show payments for your
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
spouse. For more information about the report- Form 1099-OID shows the amount of OID
ing requirements and the penalties for failure to and interest, if any, that accrued to you for theREMICs, FASITs,file (or furnish) certain information returns, see period you held the regular interest. You will not
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, need to make any adjustments to the amountsand Other CDOs
5498, and W-2G. reported even if you held the regular interest for
only a part of the calendar year. However, if youHolders of interests in real estate mortgage in-
Liquidating distributions. If you receive a bought the regular interest at a premium or ac-vestment conduits (REMICs), financial asset
liquidating distribution on stock, the corporation quisition premium, see Refiguring OID shown onsecuritization investment trusts (FASITs), and
will give you a Form 1099-DIV showing the Form 1099-OID under Original Issue Discountother collateralized debt obligations (CDOs)
amount of the liquidating distribution in boxes 8 must follow special rules for reporting income (OID), earlier.
and 9. and any expenses from these investment prod-
You may not get a Form 1099. Corpora-ucts.
tions and other persons specified in Regulations
section 1.6049-7(c) will not receive Forms 1099.REMICsStripped These persons and fiscal year taxpayers may
obtain tax information by contacting the REMICA real estate mortgage investment conduit
Preferred Stock or the issuer of the CDO, if they hold their inter-(REMIC) is an entity that is formed for the pur-
pose of holding a fixed pool of mortgages se- est directly from the REMIC or issuer of the
 If the dividend rights are stripped from certain cured by interests in real property. A REMIC CDO. Publication 938, Real Estate Mortgagepreferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre- issues regular and residual interests to inves- Investment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Infor-ferred stock may have to include amounts in tors. For tax purposes, a REMIC is generally mation, explains how to request this information.income equal to the amounts that would have treated as a partnership with the residual inter- Publication 938 is available only on thebeen included if the stock were a bond with est holders treated as the partners. The regular Internet at www.irs.gov.original issue discount (OID). interests are treated as debt instruments.
REMIC income or loss is not income or lossStripped preferred stock defined. Stripped from a passive activity.preferred stock is any stock that meets both of If you hold a regular interest or CDO throughFor more information about the qualificationsthe following tests. a nominee (rather than directly), you can re-and the tax treatment that apply to a REMIC and
quest the information from the nominee.the interests of investors in a REMIC, see sec-1. There has been a separation in ownership
tions 860A through 860G of the Internal Reve-between the stock and any dividend on the
nue Code, and the regulations under those Allocated investment expenses. Regular in-stock that has not become payable.
sections. terest holders in a REMIC may be allowed to2. The stock: deduct the REMIC's investment expenses, but
only if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. Aa. Is limited and preferred as to dividends, Regular Interest single-class REMIC is one that generally would
b. Does not participate in corporate growth be classified as a trust for tax purposes if it hadA REMIC can have several classes (also knownto any significant extent, and not elected REMIC status.as ªtranchesº) of regular interests. A regular The single-class REMIC will report yourc. Has a fixed redemption price. interest unconditionally entitles the holder to re- share of its investment expenses in box 5 ofceive a specified principal amount (or other simi-
Form 1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. Itlar amount).Treatment of buyer. If you buy stripped pre- will also include this amount in box 1 of FormA REMIC regular interest is treated as a debtferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in- 1099-INT or box 2 of Form 1099-OID, and on theinstrument for income tax purposes. Accord-clude certain amounts in your gross income additional written statement.ingly, the OID, market discount, and incomewhile you hold the stock. These amounts are You may be able to take a deduction forreporting rules that apply to bonds and otherordinary income. They are equal to the amounts these expenses subject to a 2% limit that alsodebt instruments as described earlier in thisyou would have included in gross income if the applies to certain other miscellaneous itemizedpublication under Discount on Debt Instrumentsstock were a bond that: deductions. See chapter 3 for more information.apply, with certain modifications discussed be-
low.1. Was issued on the purchase date of the
Redemption of regular interests at maturity.Generally, you report your income from astock, and
Redemption of debt instruments at their maturityregular interest on Form 1040, line 8a. For more
2. Has OID equal to: is treated as a sale or exchange. You mustinformation on how to report interest and OID,
report redemptions on your tax return whether orsee How To Report Interest Income, earlier.a. The redemption price for the stock, mi- not you realize gain or loss on the transaction.nus Holders must use accrual method. Holders Your basis is your adjusted issue price, which
of regular interests must use an accrual methodb. The price at which you bought the includes any OID you previously reported in
of accounting to report OID and interest income.stock. income.
Because income under an accrual method is not Any amount that you receive on the retire-determined by the receipt of cash, you may haveReport these amounts as other income on ment of a debt instrument is treated in the sameto include OID or interest income in your taxableForm 1040, line 21. For information about OID, way as if you had sold or exchanged that instru-income even if you have not received any cashsee Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier. ment. A debt instrument is retired when it ispayments.This treatment also applies to you if you reacquired or redeemed by the issuer and can-acquire the stock in such a way (for example, by celed.Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You shouldgift) that your basis in the stock is determined by
Sale or exchange of a regular interest.receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Formusing a buyer's basis.
Some of your gain on the sale or exchange of a1099-OID from the REMIC. You will also receive
REMIC regular interest may be ordinary income.a written statement by March 16, 2009 (if youTreatment of person stripping stock. If you
The ordinary income part, if any, is:are a calendar year taxpayer), that providesstrip the rights to one or more dividends from
additional information. The statement shouldstripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav- • The amount that would have been in-contain enough information to enable you toing purchased the stock. You are treated as cluded in your income if the yield to matur-figure your accrual of market discount or amor-making the purchase on the date you disposed ity on the regular interest had been 110%tizable bond premium.of the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in the of the applicable federal rate at the begin-stripped preferred stock is treated as your Form 1099-INT shows the amount of interest ning of your holding period, minuspurchase price. The rules described in Treat- income that accrued to you for the period you
• The amount you included in your income.ment of buyer, earlier, apply to you. held the regular interest.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CDOs can be secured by a pool of mort-Residual Interest
gages, automobile loans, equipment leases, or S CorporationsA residual interest is an interest in a REMIC that credit card receivables.
is not a regular interest. It is designated as a For more information about the qualifications In general, an S corporation does not pay a taxresidual interest by the REMIC. and the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of a on its income. Instead, its income and expensesIf you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC, CDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the Internal are passed through to the shareholders, whoyou must take into account, on a quarterly basis, Revenue Code and the regulations under that then report these items on their own income taxyour daily portion of the taxable income or net section. returns.loss of the REMIC for each day during the tax
The OID, market discount, and in- If you are an S corporation shareholder, youryear that you hold the residual interest. You
share of the corporation's current year incomecome-reporting rules that apply to bonds andmust report these amounts as ordinary income
or loss and other tax items are taxed to youother debt instruments, as described earlier inor loss.
whether or not you receive any amount. Gener-this chapter under Discount on Debt Instru-
Basis in the residual interest. Your basis in ally, those items increase or decrease the basisments, also apply to a CDO.
the residual interest is increased by the amount of your S corporation stock as appropriate. ForYou must include interest income from yourof taxable income you take into account. Your more information on basis adjustments for SCDO in your gross income under your regularbasis is decreased (but not below zero) by the corporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds undermethod of accounting. Also include any OIDamount of cash or the fair market value of any Basis of Investment Property in chapter 4.accrued on your CDO during the tax year.property distributed to you, and by the amount of Generally, S corporation distributions, ex-Generally, you report your income from aany net loss you have taken into account. If you cept dividend distributions, are considered a re-CDO on Form 1040, line 8a. For more informa-sell your residual interest, you must adjust your turn of capital and reduce your basis in the stocktion about reporting these amounts on your re-basis to reflect your share of the REMIC's tax- of the corporation. The part of any distributionturn, see How To Report Interest Income ,able income or net loss immediately before the that is more than your basis is treated as a gainearlier.sale. See Wash Sales , in chapter 4, for more from the sale or exchange of property. The cor-
information about selling a residual interest. poration's distributions may be in the form ofForms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You should cash or property.Treatment of distributions. You must in- receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form S corporation distributions are not treated asclude in your gross income the part of any distri- 1099-OID. You will also receive a written state- dividends except in certain cases in which thebution that is more than your adjusted basis. ment by March 16, 2009, that provides addi- corporation has accumulated earnings and prof-Treat the distribution as a gain from the sale or tional information. The statement should contain its from years before it became an S corporation.exchange of your residual interest. enough information about the CDO to enable
you to figure your accrual of market discount orSchedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residual Reporting S corporation income, deduc-amortizable bond premium.interest, you should receive Schedule Q (Form tions, and credits. The S corporation should
Form 1099-INT shows the amount of interest1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interest send you a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S)
income paid to you for the period you held theHolder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net Loss showing your share of the S corporation's in-
CDO.Allocation, and instructions from the REMIC come, credits, and deductions for the tax year.
each quarter. Schedule Q will indicate your You must report your distributive share of the SForm 1099-OID shows the amount of OID
share of the REMIC's quarterly taxable income corporation's income, gain, loss, deductions, oraccrued to you and the interest, if any, paid to
(or loss). Do not attach the Schedule Q to your credits on the appropriate lines and schedules ofyou for the period you held the CDO. You should
tax return. Keep it for your records. your Form 1040.not need to make any adjustments to the
Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part IV, to For more information about your treatment ofamounts reported even if you held the CDO for
report your total share of the REMIC's taxable S corporation tax items, see Shareholder's In-only a part of the calendar year. However, if you
income (or loss) for each quarter included in structions for Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).bought the CDO at a premium or acquisitionyour tax year. premium, see Refiguring OID shown on Form Limit on losses and deductions. The de-For more information about reporting your 1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID) , duction for your share of losses and deductionsincome (or loss) from a residual interest in a earlier. shown on Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) is limitedREMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) and If you did not receive a Form 1099, see You to the adjusted basis of your stock and any debtSchedule E (Form 1040) instructions. may not get a Form 1099 under REMICs, earlier. the corporation owes you. Any loss or deduction
Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- not allowed because of this limit is carried over
gross-income limit, you may be able to claim a and treated as a loss or deduction in the next taxFASITs
miscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or- year.
A financial asset securitization investment trustdinary and necessary expenses that you paid or Passive activity losses. Rules apply thatincurred in connection with your investment in a (FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt obliga- limit losses from passive activities. Your copy ofREMIC. These expenses may include certain tions such as credit card receivables, home eq- Schedule K-1 and its instructions will explain theexpense items incurred by the REMIC and uity loans, and automobile loans. limits and tell you where on your return to reportpassed through to you. The REMIC will report A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as a your share of S corporation items from passivethese expenses to you on Schedule Q, line 3b. debt instrument. The rules described under Col- activities.See chapter 3 for information on how to report lateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap-
these expenses. Form 8582. If you have a passive activityply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that a loss from an S corporation, you must completeholder of a regular interest in a FASIT must use Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, toCollateralized Debt an accrual method of accounting to report OID figure the amount of the allowable loss to enterand interest income.Obligations (CDOs) on your return. See Publication 925 for moreFor more information about FASITs, see information.A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a debt sections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev-
instrument, other than a REMIC regular interest, enue Code.that is secured by a pool of mortgages or other
Beginning January 1, 2005, the specialevidence of debt and that has principal pay-
rules for FASITs are repealed. How- Investment Clubsments that are subject to acceleration. (Note:
ever, the special rules still apply to anyWhile REMIC regular interests are collateralized
CAUTION
!
FASIT in existence on October 22, 2004, to the An investment club is formed when a group ofdebt obligations, they have unique rules that do
extent that regular interests issued by the FASIT friends, neighbors, business associates, ornot apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) CDOs,
before that date continue to remain outstanding others pool their money to invest in stock oralso known as ªpay-through bonds,º are com-
in accordance with the original terms of issu- other securities. The club may or may not have amonly divided into different classes (also called
ance. written agreement, a charter, or bylaws.ªtranchesº).
Page 26 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 27 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Usually the group operates informally with However, as a partner in the club, you must • It is formed under a state law that refers to
members pledging to pay a regular amount into report on your individual return your share of the it as a joint-stock company or joint-stock
the club monthly. Some clubs have a committee club's income, gains, losses, deductions, and association, or
that gathers information on securities, selects credits for the club's tax year. (Its tax year gener- • It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.the most promising securities, and recommends ally must be the same tax year as that of the
that the club invest in them. Other clubs rotate partners owning a majority interest.) You must
Choosing to be taxed as a corporation. Tothese responsibilities among all their members. report these items whether or not you actually
Most clubs require all members to vote for or choose to be taxed as a corporation, the clubreceive any distribution from the partnership.
against all investments, sales, trades, and other cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) or
Schedule K-1. You should receive a copy oftransactions. otherwise subject to special treatment under the
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), Partner's Share of tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to makeIdentifying number. Each club must have an Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the part- the choice.employer identification number (EIN) to use nership. The amounts shown on Schedule K-1when filing its return. The club's EIN also may are your share of the partnership's income, de- Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as ahave to be given to the payer of dividends or ductions, and credits. Report each amount on corporation, it must file Form 1120. In that case,other income from investments recorded in the the appropriate lines and schedules of your in- you do not report any of its income or expensesclub's name. To obtain an EIN, first get Form come tax return. on your individual return. All ordinary incomeSS-4, Application for Employer Identification The club's expenses for producing or collect- and expenses and capital gains and losses mustNumber, from the Internal Revenue Service or ing income, for managing investment property, be reported on the Form 1120. Any distributionyour nearest Social Security Administration of- or for determining any tax are listed separately the club makes that qualifies as a dividend mustfice. See chapter 5 of this publication for more on Schedule K-1. Each individual partner who be reported on Form 1099-DIV if total distribu-information about how to get this form. itemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) tions to the shareholder are $10 or more for theInvestments in name of member. When can deduct his or her share of those expenses. year.an investment is recorded in the name of one The expenses are listed on Schedule A, line 23, You must report any distributions that youclub member, this member must give his or her along with other miscellaneous deductions sub- receive from the club on your individual return.social security number (SSN) to the payer of ject to the 2% limit. See chapter 3  for more You should receive a copy of Form 1099-DIVinvestment income. (When an investment is information on the 2% limit. from the club showing the distributions you re-held in the names of two or more club members, For more information about reporting your ceived.the SSN of only one member must be given to income from a partnership, see the Schedule Some corporations can choose not to bethe payer.) This member is considered as the K-1 instructions. Also see Publication 541, Part- taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-record owner for the actual owner, the invest- nerships.
ers. See S Corporations, earlier.ment club. This member is a ªnomineeº and Passive activity losses. Rules apply thatmust file an information return with the IRS. For For more information about corporations,limit losses from passive activities. Your copy ofexample, the nominee member must file Form see Publication 542, Corporations.Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and its instructions1099-DIV for dividend income, showing the club will tell you where on your return to report youras the owner of the dividend, his or her SSN, share of partnership items from passive activi- Club as a Trustand the EIN of the club. ties. If you have a passive activity loss from a
partnership, you must complete Form 8582 to In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as aTax Treatment of the Club figure the amount of the allowable loss to enter trust. In general, a trust is an arrangement
on your tax return. through which trustees take title to property forGenerally, an investment club is treated as a
the purpose of protecting or conserving it for thepartnership for federal tax purposes unless it No social security coverage for investment beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied inchooses otherwise. In some situations, how- club earnings. If an investment club partner- chancery or probate courts. An arrangement isever, it is taxed as a corporation or a trust. ship's activities are limited to investing in sav- treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purposeings certificates, stock, or securities, andClubs formed before 1997. Before 1997, the is to vest in trustees responsibility for protectingcollecting interest or dividends for its members'rules for determining how an investment club is and conserving property for beneficiaries whoaccounts, a member's share of income is nottreated were different from those explained in cannot share in that responsibility and so are notearnings from self-employment. You cannot vol-the following discussions. An investment club associates in a joint enterprise for the conduct ofuntarily pay the self-employment tax to increasethat existed before 1997 is treated for later years business for profit. If you need more informationyour social security coverage and ultimate bene-the same way it was treated before 1997, unless about trusts, see Regulations sectionfits.it chooses to be treated a different way under the 301.7701-4.new rules. To make that choice, the club must
file Form 8832, Entity Classification Election. Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as aClub as a Corporation trust, it must file Form 1041. You should receive
a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) from theAn investment club formed after 1996 is taxedClub as a Partnership trust. Report the amounts shown on Scheduleas a corporation if:
K-1 on the appropriate lines and schedules ofIf your club is not taxed as a corporation or a • It is formed under a federal or state law your income tax return.trust, it will be treated as a partnership. that refers to it as incorporated or as a
corporation, body corporate, or body poli-Filing requirement. If your investment club is
tic,treated as a partnership, it must file Form 1065.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 27

Page 28 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rules To Curb 
Abusive Tax SheltersAbusive Tax Shelters2. Congress has enacted a series of income taxAbusive tax shelters are marketing schemes
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive taxthat involve artificial transactions with little or no
shelters. These provisions include the following.economic reality. They often make use of un-Tax Shelters and realistic allocations, inflated appraisals, losses 1. Disclosure of reportable transactions.
in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis- You must disclose information for each re-
Other matching of income and deductions, financing portable transaction in which you partici-
pate. See Reportable Transactiontechniques that do not conform to standard com-
Disclosure Statement, later.mercial business practices, or the mischaracter-Reportable Material advisors with respect to any re-ization of the substance of the transaction.
portable transaction must disclose informa-Despite appearances to the contrary, the tax- tion about the transaction on Form 8918.Transactions payer generally risks little. This requirement applies to material advi-
Abusive tax shelters commonly involve sors who provide material aid, assistance,
package deals that are designed from the start or advice on any reportable transaction after
Introduction to generate losses, deductions, or credits that October 22, 2004.
Material advisors will receive a reportablewill be far more than present or future invest-Investments that yield tax benefits are some-
transaction number for the disclosed report-ment. Or, they may promise investors from thetimes called ªtax shelters.º In some cases, Con-
able transaction. They must provide thisgress has concluded that the loss of revenue is start that future inflated appraisals will enable
number to all persons to whom they actedan acceptable side effect of special tax provi- them, for example, to reap charitable contribu-
as a material advisor. They must providesions designed to encourage taxpayers to make tion deductions based on those appraisals. (But the number at the time the transaction iscertain types of investments. In many cases, see the appraisal requirements discussed under entered into. If they do not have the numberhowever, losses from tax shelters produce little Rules To Curb Abusive Tax Shelters , later.) at that time, they must provide it within 60or no benefit to society, or the tax benefits are They are commonly marketed in terms of the days from the date the number is mailed toexaggerated beyond those intended. Those ratio of tax deductions allegedly available to them. For information on penalties for fail-cases are called ªabusive tax shelters.º An in- each dollar invested. This ratio (or ªwrite-offº) is ure to disclose and failure to maintain lists,vestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub-
frequently said to be several times greater than see Internal Revenue Code sections 6707,ject to restrictions, including the requirement
one-to-one. 6707A, and 6708. that it be disclosed, as discussed later.
Because there are many abusive tax shel- 2. Requirement to maintain list. Material
Topics ters, it is not possible to list all the factors you advisors must maintain a list of persons to
This chapter discusses: should consider in determining whether an offer- whom they provide material aid, assis-
tance, or advice on any reportable transac-ing is an abusive tax shelter. However, you
• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter, tion after October 22, 2004. Beforeshould ask the following questions, which might
October 23, 2004, organizers and sellersprovide a clue to the abusive nature of the plan.• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax
who acted as material advisors with re-shelters, • Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco- spect to any potentially abusive tax shelter
• Investor's reporting requirements, and nomic benefits? (including a reportable transaction, dis-
cussed later) were required to maintain a• Penalties that may apply. • Is this a transaction you would seriously
list of persons involved in the tax shelter.consider, apart from the tax benefits, if you The list must be available for inspection byhoped to make a profit?Useful Items the IRS, and the information required to be
You may want to see: • Do shelter assets really exist and, if so, included on the list generally must be kept
for 7 years. See Regulations sectionare they insured for less than their
Publication 301.6112-1 for more information (includingpurchase price?
what information is required to be included❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods • Is there a nontax justification for the way on the list).
profits and losses are allocated to part-❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal 3. Confidentiality privilege. The confidenti-ners?Rights, and Claims for Refund ality privilege between you and a federally
• Do the facts and supporting documents authorized tax practitioner does not apply❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated
make economic sense? In that connec- to written communications made after Oc-Property
tion, are there sales and resales of the tax tober 21, 2004, regarding the promotion of❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules your direct or indirect participation in anyshelter property at ever increasing prices?
tax shelter.• Does the investment plan involve a gim-Form (and Instructions)
4. Appraisal requirement for donatedmick, device, or sham to hide the eco-
❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement property. If you claim a deduction of morenomic reality of the transaction?
than $5,000 for an item or group of similar❏ 8275-R Regulation Disclosure Statement • Does the promoter offer to backdate docu- items of donated property, you generally
ments after the close of the year? Are you❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions must get a qualified appraisal from a quali-
instructed to backdate checks covering fied appraiser and you must complete and❏ 8886 Reportable Transaction Disclosure your investment? attach section B of Form 8283 to your taxStatement return. If you claim a deduction of more• Is your debt a real debt or are you assured than $500,000 for the donated property,See chapter 5  for information about getting by the promoter that you will never have to you generally must attach the qualified ap-these publications and forms. pay it? praisal to your tax return. For more infor-
mation about appraisals, including• Does this transaction involve laundering
exceptions, see Publication 561.United States source income through for-
eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha- 5. Passive activity loss and credit limits.
ven and owned by United States The passive activity loss and credit rules
shareholders? limit the amount of losses and credits that
Page 28 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 29 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can be claimed from passive activities and Bulletin 2007-7, available at www.irs.gov/irb/Reportable Transaction Disclosure
2007-07_IRB/ar15.html.limit the amount that can offset nonpassive Statement
income, such as certain portfolio income Loss transactions. For individuals, a lossUse Form 8886 to disclose information for eachfrom investments. For more detailed infor- transaction is any transaction that results in areportable transaction in which you participated.mation about determining and reporting in- deductible loss if the gross amount of the loss isGenerally, you must attach Form 8886 to yourcome, losses, and credits from passive at least $2 million in a single tax year or $4return for each tax year in which you participatedactivities, see Publication 925. million in any combination of tax years. A lossin the transaction. In certain circumstances, a
from a foreign currency transaction under Inter-transaction must be disclosed within 90 days of6. Interest on penalties. If you are assessed
nal Revenue Code section 988 is a loss transac-the transaction being identified as a listed trans-an accuracy-related or civil fraud penalty
action or a transaction of interest. In addition, for tion if the gross amount of the loss is at least(as discussed under Penalties, later), inter-
the first year Form 8886 is attached to your $50,000 in a single tax year, whether or not theest will be imposed on the amount of the return, you must send a copy of the form to: loss flows through from an S corporation orpenalty from the due date of the return partnership.Internal Revenue Service(including any extensions) to the date you
Certain losses (such as losses from casual-OTSA Mail Stop 4915pay the penalty.
ties, thefts, and condemnations) are excepted1973 North Rulon White Blvd.7. Accounting method restriction. Tax from this category and do not have to be re-Ogden, Utah 84404
shelters generally cannot use the cash ported on Form 8886. For information on other
method of accounting. exceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2004-66 inIf you fail to file Form 8886 as required or fail
Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-50 (or futureto include any required information on the form,8. Uniform capitalization rules. The uniform
published guidance) available at www.irs.gov/you may have to pay a penalty. See Penalty forcapitalization rules generally apply to pro-
irb/2004-50_IRB/ar11.html.failure to disclose a reportable transaction, laterducing property or acquiring it for resale.
under Penalties.Under those rules, the direct cost and part Transactions of interest. A transaction ofThe following discussion briefly describes re-of the indirect cost of the property must be interest is a transaction entered into after No-portable transactions. For more details, see the vember 1, 2006, that is the same as or substan-capitalized or included in inventory. For instructions for Form 8886. tially similar to one of the types of transactionsmore information, see Publication 538.
that the IRS has identified by notice, regulation,Reportable transaction. A reportable trans-9. Denial of deduction for interest on an or other form of published guidance as a trans-action is any of the following.underpayment due to a reportable action of interest. As of the date this publication• A listed transaction.transaction. You cannot deduct any inter- was prepared for print, the IRS has identified theest you paid or accrued on any part of an • A confidential transaction. following transactions of interest.
underpayment of tax due to an understate-
• A transaction with contractual protection. • ªTogglingº grantor trusts as described inment arising from a reportable transaction
Notice 2007-73, 2007-36 I.R.B. 545, avail-(discussed later) if the relevant facts affect- • Loss transactions. able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-36_IRB/ar20.ing the tax treatment of the item are not • Transactions of interest entered into after html.adequately disclosed. This rule applies to November 1, 2006.
reportable transactions entered into in tax • Certain transactions involving contribu-
tions of a successor member interest in ayears beginning after October 22, 2004.
limited liability company as described inNote. Transactions with a brief asset hold-
Notice 2007-72, 2007-36 I.R.B. 544, avail-ing period were removed from the definition of
able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-36_IRB/ar19.reportable transaction for transactions enteredAuthority for Disallowance of Tax into after August 2, 2007. html.Benefits
Listed transaction. A listed transaction is a • Certain transactions involving the sale or
The IRS has published guidance concluding that transaction that is the same as or substantially other disposition of all interests in a chari-
the claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax similar to one of the types of transactions that table remainder trust and claiming little or
shelters should be disallowed. The guidance is the IRS has determined to be a tax-avoidance no taxable gain as described in Notice
the conclusion of the IRS on how the law is transaction. These transactions have been iden- 2008-99, 2008-47 I.R.B. 1194, available at
tified in notices, regulations, and other publishedapplied to a particular set of facts. Guidance is www.irs.gov/irb/2008-47_IRB/ar11.html.
guidance issued by the IRS. For a list of existingpublished in the Internal Revenue Bulletin for
guidance, see the instructions for Form 8886.taxpayers' information and also for use by IRS
Penaltiesofficials. So, if your return is examined and an Confidential transaction. A confidential
abusive tax shelter is identified and challenged, transaction is one that is offered to you under Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be anpublished guidance dealing with that type of conditions of confidentiality and for which you expensive proposition when you consider all ofshelter, which disallows certain claimed tax have paid an advisor a minimum fee. A transac- the consequences. First, the promoter generallytion is offered under conditions of confidentialityshelter benefits, could serve as the basis for the charges a substantial fee. If your return is ex-if the advisor who is paid the fee places a limit onexamining official's challenge of the tax benefits amined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter-your disclosure of the tax treatment or tax struc-that you claimed. In such a case, the examiner mined, you will be faced with payment of moreture of the transaction and the limit protects thewill not compromise even if you or your repre- tax, interest on the underpayment, possibly aconfidentiality of the advisor's tax strategies.sentative believes that you have authority for the 20% or 30% accuracy-related penalty, or a 75%The transaction is treated as confidential even ifpositions taken on your tax return. civil fraud penalty. You may also be subject tothe conditions of confidentiality are not legally the penalty for failure to pay tax. These penaltiesThe courts have generally been un- binding on you.
are explained in the following paragraphs.sympathetic to taxpayers involved in Transaction with contractual protection.abusive tax shelter schemes and have
CAUTION
! Generally, a transaction with contractual protec- Accuracy-related penalties. An accuracy-ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of the tion is a transaction in which you or a related related penalty of 20% can be imposed for un-cases in which these shelters have been chal- party has the right to a full or partial refund of derpayments of tax due to:lenged. fees if all or part of the intended tax conse-
• Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-quences of the transaction are not sustained, or
a transaction for which the fees are contingent tions,Investor Reporting
on your realizing the tax benefits from the trans- • Substantial understatement of tax, orYou may be required to file a reportable transac- action. For information on exceptions, see Rev-
• Substantial valuation misstatement.tion disclosure statement. enue Procedure 2007-20 in Internal Revenue
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions Page 29

Page 30 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalty for failure to disclose a reportableThis penalty will not be imposed if you can show that could cause a substantial understatement
transaction. If you fail to include any requiredthat you had reasonable cause for any under- of income tax. In that way, you can avoid the
information regarding a reportable transactionstatement of tax and that you acted in good faith. substantial understatement penalty if you have a
(discussed earlier) on a return or statement, youYour failure to disclose a reportable transaction reasonable basis for your position on the tax
may have to pay a penalty. The amount of theis a strong indication that you failed to act in issue. Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a tax
penalty is $10,000 if you are an individual, orgood faith. return does not reduce the amount of the under-
$50,000 if you are not. In the case of a listedstatement.If you are charged an accuracy-related pen- transaction, the amount of the penalty isAlso, the understatement penalty will not bealty, interest will be imposed on the amount of $100,000 if you are an individual, or $200,000 ifimposed if you can show that there was reason-the penalty from the due date of the return (in- you are not. This penalty applies whether or notable cause for the underpayment caused by thecluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen- there is an understatement of tax and is in addi-understatement and that you acted in good faith.alty. tion to any other penalty that may be imposed.An important factor in establishing reasonableNegligence or disregard of rules or regula- The IRS may rescind or abate the penalty forcause and good faith will be the extent of yourtions. The penalty for negligence or disregard failing to disclose a reportable transaction undereffort to determine your proper tax liability underof rules or regulations is imposed only on the certain limited circumstances, but cannot re-the law.part of the underpayment that is due to negli- scind the penalty for failing to disclose a listed
Valuation misstatement. In general, yougence or disregard of rules or regulations. The transaction.
are liable for a 20% penalty for a substantialpenalty will not be charged if you can show that
valuation misstatement if all of the following are Accuracy-related penalty for a reportableyou had reasonable cause for understating your
true. transaction understatement. If you have atax and that you acted in good faith.
reportable transaction understatement, you may Negligence includes any failure to make a • The value or adjusted basis of any prop- have to pay a penalty equal to 20% of thereasonable attempt to comply with the provi- erty claimed on the return is 150% or more amount of that understatement. This applies tosions of the Internal Revenue Code. It also in- of the correct amount. any item due to a listed transaction or othercludes any failure to keep adequate books and
• You underpaid your tax by more than reportable transaction with a significant purposerecords. A return position that has a reasonable
$5,000 because of the misstatement. of avoiding or evading federal income tax. Thebasis is not negligence.
penalty is 30% rather than 20% for the part ofDisregard includes any careless, reckless, or • You cannot establish that you had reason- any reportable transaction understatement if theintentional disregard of rules or regulations. able cause for the underpayment and that transaction was not properly disclosed. You mayThe penalty for disregard of rules and regula- you acted in good faith. not have to pay the 20% penalty if you meet thetions can be avoided if all of the following are
strengthened reasonable cause and good faithtrue. The 20% penalty does not apply to any under- exception.statement that is subject to the accuracy-related• You keep adequate books and records. This penalty does not apply to the part of anpenalty for a reportable transaction understate-• You have a reasonable basis for your po- understatement on which the fraud penalty orment (discussed later).sition on the tax issue. gross valuation misstatement penalty is im-You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for a posed.• You make an adequate disclosure of your gross valuation misstatement. If you misstate
position. the value or the adjusted basis of property by Civil fraud penalty. If there is any underpay-
200% or more of the amount determined to beUse Form 8275 to make your disclosure, and ment of tax on your return due to fraud, a penalty
correct, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%,attach it to your tax return. To disclose a position of 75% of the underpayment will be added to
instead of 20%, of the amount you underpaidcontrary to a regulation, use Form 8275-R. Also your tax.
because of the gross valuation misstatement.use Form 8886 to disclose a reportable transac- Joint return. The fraud penalty on a jointThe penalty rate is also 40% if the property'stion (discussed earlier). return applies to a spouse only if some part ofcorrect value or adjusted basis is zero.
Substantial understatement of tax. An the underpayment is due to the fraud of that
understatement is considered to be substantial if spouse.Penalty for incorrect appraisals. The personit is more than the greater of: who prepares an appraisal of the value of prop- Failure to pay tax. If a deficiency is assessederty may have to pay a penalty if:• 10% of the tax required to be shown on and is not paid within 10 days of the demand forthe return, or • He or she knows, or reasonably should payment, an investor can be penalized with up
have known, that the appraisal would be to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to pay• $5,000.
continues.used in connection with a return or claimAn ªunderstatementº is the amount of tax re- for refund, andquired to be shown on your return for a tax year
Whether To Invest• The claimed value of the property on aminus the amount of tax shown on the return,
return or claim for refund which is basedreduced by any rebates. The term ªrebateº gen- In light of the adverse tax consequences and theon that appraisal results in a substantialerally means a decrease in the tax shown on substantial amount of penalties and interest thatvaluation misstatement or a gross valua-your original return as the result of your filing an will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal-tion misstatement as discussed above.amended return or claim for refund. lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-
For details on the amount of the penalty andFor items other than tax shelters, you can file ments carefully and seek competent legal and
exceptions, see Publication 561.Form 8275 or Form 8275-R to disclose items financial advice.
Page 30 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 31 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
explained later in this chapter under Expenses Expenses. Do not include in the computa-
of Producing Income. tion of your passive activity income or loss:
• Expenses (other than interest) that areAt-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to3. clearly and directly allocable to your port-most income-producing activities. These rules
folio income, orlimit the amount of loss you can deduct to the
amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally, • Interest expense properly allocable tothis is the amount of cash and the adjusted basisInvestment portfolio income.of property you contribute to the activity. It also
However, this interest and other expenses mayincludes money you borrow for use in the activity
be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-Expenses if you are personally liable for repayment or if
plained in the rest of this chapter.you use property not used in the activity as
security for the loan. For more information, see Additional information. For more informa-Terms you may need to know Publication 925. tion about determining and reporting income(see Glossary): and losses from passive activities, see Publica-Passive activity losses and credits. The
tion 925.amount of losses and tax credits you can claim
At-risk rules from passive activities is limited. Generally, you
are allowed to deduct passive activity lossesPassive activity only up to the amount of your passive activity
Portfolio income income. Also, you can use credits from passive Interest Expenses
activities only against tax on the income from
passive activities. There are exceptions for cer- This section discusses interest expenses you
tain activities, such as rental real estate activi- may be able to deduct as an investor.Topics ties. For information on business interest, seeThis chapter discusses:
chapter 4 of Publication 535.Passive activity. A passive activity gener-
ally is any activity involving the conduct of any• Limits on Deductions, You cannot deduct personal interest ex-
trade or business in which you do not materially penses other than qualified home mortgage in-• Interest Expenses, participate and any rental activity. However, if terest, as explained in Publication 936, Home
you are involved in renting real estate, the activ-• Bond Premium Amortization, Mortgage Interest Deduction, and interest on
ity is not a passive activity if both of the following certain student loans, as explained in Publica-• Expenses of Producing Income, are true. tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education.
• Nondeductible Expenses, and • More than one-half of the personal serv-
Investment Interest• How To Report Investment Expenses. ices you perform during the year in all
trades or businesses are performed in real
If you borrow money to buy property you hold forproperty trades or businesses in whichUseful Items investment, the interest you pay is investmentyou materially participate.
interest. You can deduct investment interestYou may want to see:
• You perform more than 750 hours of serv- subject to the limit discussed later. However,
ices during the year in real property trades you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-Publication
or businesses in which you materially par- duce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in-
ticipate.❏ 535 Business Expenses come under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Nor
can you deduct interest expenses on straddles,❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
also discussed under Nondeductible Expenses.The term ªtrade or businessº generally means❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and Investment interest does not include anyany activity that involves the conduct of a tradeDependents qualified home mortgage interest or any interestor business, is conducted in anticipation of start-
taken into account in computing income or lossing a trade or business, or involves certain re-Form (and Instructions) from a passive activity.search or experimental expenditures. However,
it does not include rental activities or certain❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Investment property. Property held for in-activities treated as incidental to holding prop-Deductions vestment includes property that produces inter-erty for investment.
❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense est, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derivedYou are considered to materially participate inDeduction in the ordinary course of a trade or business. Itan activity if you are involved on a regular, con- also includes property that produces gain or losstinuous, and substantial basis in the operationsSee chapter 5  for information about getting (not derived in the ordinary course of a trade orof the activity.these publications and forms. business) from the sale or trade of property
producing these types of income or held forOther income (nonpassive income). Gen-
investment (other than an interest in a passiveerally, you can use losses from passive activities
activity). Investment property also includes anonly to offset income from passive activities.
interest in a trade or business activity in whichYou generally cannot use passive activity lossesLimits on Deductions
you did not materially participate (other than ato offset your other income, such as your wages
passive activity).or your portfolio income. Portfolio income in-Your deductions for investment expenses may
cludes gross income from interest, dividends,be limited by: Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.
annuities, or royalties that is not derived in the To determine your investment interest, combine• The at-risk rules, ordinary course of a trade or business. It also your share of investment interest from a partner-
includes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi-• The passive activity loss limits, ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your
nary course of a trade or business) from the sale other investment interest.• The limit on investment interest, or or trade of property (other than an interest in a
passive activity) producing portfolio income or• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous
held for investment. This includes capital gainitemized deductions. Allocation of Interest Expense
distributions from mutual funds (and other regu-
The at-risk rules and passive activity rules are lated investment companies) and real estate If you borrow money for business or personal
explained briefly in this section. The limit on investment trusts. purposes as well as for investment, you must
investment interest  is explained later in this You cannot use passive activity losses to allocate the debt among those purposes. Only
chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is offset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. the interest expense on the part of the debt used
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for investment purposes is treated as invest- Pass-through entities. If you use borrowed Figure the amount in (2) above using the rules
ment interest. The allocation is not affected by funds to buy an interest in a partnership or S for figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1
the use of property that secures the debt. corporation, then the interest on those funds under Market Discount Bonds.
must be allocated based on the assets of the Interest not deducted due to limit. In theExample 1. You borrow $10,000 and use entity. If you contribute to the capital of the year you dispose of the bond, you can deduct$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 to entity, you can make the allocation using any the amount of any interest expense you were notbuy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt reasonable method.
allowed to deduct in earlier years because of theis used for, and allocated to, investment pur-
limit.poses, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest- Additional allocation rules. For more infor-
ment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible mation about allocating interest expense, see Choosing to deduct disallowed interest
personal interest. chapter 4 of Publication 535. expense before the year of disposition. You
can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex-
Debt proceeds received in cash. If you re- pense in any year before the year you dispose ofWhen To Deductceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds are the bond, up to your net interest income from the
Investment Interestgenerally not treated as investment property. bond during the year. The rest of the disallowed
interest expense remains deductible in the yearIf you use the cash method of accounting, youDebt proceeds deposited in account. If you you dispose of the bond.must pay the interest before you can deduct it. deposit debt proceeds in an account, that de- If you use an accrual method of accounting, Net interest income. This is the interestposit is treated as investment property, regard- you can deduct interest over the period it ac- income (including OID) from the bond that youless of whether the account bears interest. But, if crues, regardless of when you pay it. For an include in income for the year, minus the interestyou withdraw the funds and use them for an- exception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re- expense paid or accrued during the year toother purpose, you must reallocate the debt to lated party under When To Report Investment purchase or carry the bond.determine the amount considered to be for in- Expenses, later in this chapter.vestment purposes.
Limit on interest deduction for short-termExample. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-Example 2. Assume in Example 1 that you obligations. If the current income inclusiontember 3, 2008, payable in 90 days at 12%borrowed the money on March 1 and immedi- rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount oninterest. On December 2, 2008, you paid thisately bought the stock for $8,000. You did not with a new note for $1,030, due on March 2, Short-Term Obligations do not apply to you, thebuy the household items until June 1. You had 2009. If you use the cash method of accounting, amount you can deduct for interest expense youdeposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no you cannot deduct any part of the $30 interest paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry aother transactions on the bank account until on your return for 2008 because you did not short-term obligation is limited.June. You did not sell the stock and you made actually pay it. If you use an accrual method, you The interest is deductible only to the extent itno principal payments on the debt. You paid may be able to deduct a portion of the interest on is more than:interest from another account. The $8,000 is the loans through December 31, 2008, on yourtreated as being used for an investment pur- • The amount of acquisition discount or OIDreturn for 2008.pose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for an on the obligation for the tax year, plusinvestment purpose for the 3-month period. Interest paid in advance. Generally, if you • The amount of any interest payable on theYour total interest expense for 3 months on this pay interest in advance for a period that goes obligation for the year that is not includeddebt is investment interest. In June, when you beyond the end of the tax year, you must spread in income because of your accountingspend the $2,000 for household items, you must the interest over the tax years to which it belongs method (other than interest taken into ac-begin to allocate 80% of the debt and the inter- under the OID rules discussed in chapter 1. Youest expense to investment purposes and 20% to count in determining the amount of acqui-can deduct in each year only the interest for thatpersonal purposes. sition discount or OID).year.
Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re- The method of determining acquisition discount
Interest on margin accounts. If you are aceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro- and OID for short-term obligations is discussed
cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interestceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat in chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli-
on margin accounts to buy taxable securities asany payment (up to the amount of the proceeds) gations.
investment interest in the year you paid it. Youmade from any account you own, or from cash,
Interest not deducted due to limit. In theare considered to have paid interest on theseas made from those proceeds. This applies to
year you dispose of the obligation, or if youaccounts only when you actually pay the brokerany payment made within 30 days before or
choose, in another year in which you have netor when payment becomes available to the bro-after the proceeds are received in cash or de-
interest income from the obligation, you canker through your account. Payment may be-posited in your account.
deduct the amount of any interest expense youcome available to the broker through yourIf you received the loan proceeds in cash,
were not allowed to deduct for an earlier yearaccount when the broker collects dividends oryou can treat the payment as made on the date
interest for your account, or sells securities held because of the limit. Follow the same rules pro-you received the cash instead of the date you
for you or received from you. vided in the earlier discussion under Limit onactually made the payment.
You cannot deduct any interest on money interest deduction for market discount bonds ,
borrowed for personal reasons. earlier.Payments on debt may require new alloca-
tion. As you repay a debt used for more than
Limit on interest deduction for market dis-one purpose, you must reallocate the balance. Limit on Deductioncount bonds. The amount you can deduct forYou must first reduce the amount allocated to
interest expense you paid or accrued during the Generally, your deduction for investment inter-personal purposes by the repayment. You then
year to buy or carry a market discount bond may est expense is limited to the amount of your netreallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is
be limited. This limit does not apply if you accruefor investment purposes. investment income.
the market discount and include it in your in- You can carry over the amount of investmentcome currently.Example 3. If, in Example 2 , you repay interest that you could not deduct because ofUnder this limit, the interest is deductible$500 on November 1, the entire repayment is this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedonly to the extent it is more than:applied against the amount allocated to per- over is treated as investment interest paid orsonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo- 1. The total interest and OID includible in accrued in that next year.cated as $8,000 for investment purposes, and gross income for the bond for the year, You can carry over disallowed investment$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next plus interest to the next tax year even if it is more thanreallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷
your taxable income in the year the interest was$9,500) of the debt and the interest expense is 2. The market discount for the number of
allocated to investment. days you held the bond during the year. paid or accrued.
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the reduced amount figured next under Child's $10,000. His investment expenses (other thanNet Investment Income
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends). interest) are $3,200 after taking into account the
Determine the amount of your net investment 2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions.Child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.income by subtracting your investment ex- His investment interest expense is $8,000. TedIf part of the amount you report is your child'spenses (other than interest expense) from your also has income from the partnership of $2,000.Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that partinvestment income. Ted figures his net investment income anddoes not count as investment income. To figure the limit on his investment interest expense de-Investment income. This generally includes the amount of your child's income that you can duction in the following way:your gross income from property held for invest- consider your investment income, start with the
ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that Total investment income ....... . $10,000royalties). Investment income does not include amount by a percentage that is equal to the Minus: Investment expenses (otherAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by than interest) ............... . 3,200not include qualified dividends or net capital gain the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. Subtract Net investment income ........ . $6,800unless you choose to include them. the result from the amount on Form 8814, line
12. Deductible investment interestChoosing to include qualified dividends.
expense for the year .......... . $6,800Investment income generally does not include Example. Your 10-year-old child has tax-qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 1. able interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per- The $2,000 of income from the passive activ-However, you can choose to include all or part of manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You choose ity is not used in determining Ted's net invest-your qualified dividends in investment income. to report this on your return. You enter $4,000 on ment income. His investment interest deductionYou make this choice by completing Form Form 8814, line 1a, $2,000 on line 2a, and for the year is limited to $6,800, the amount of4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. $6,000 on line 4. You then enter $4,200 on Form his net investment income.If you choose to include any amount of your 8814, lines 6 and 12, and Form 1040, line 21.qualified dividends in investment income, you You figure the amount of your child's incomemust reduce your qualified dividends that are Form 4952that you can consider your investment incomeeligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by as follows:the same amount. Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expense
Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-$4,200 − ($4,200 ×  ($2,000 ÷  $6,000))Choosing to include net capital gain. In-
ment interest.vestment income generally does not include net
You include the result, $2,800, on Form 4952,capital gain from disposing of investment prop-
line 4a. Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 2008erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-
income includes $3,000 in dividends (other thantual funds). However, you can choose to include Child's capital gain distributions. If part qualified dividends) and a net capital gain ofall or part of your net capital gain in investment of the amount you report is your child's capital $9,000 from the sale of investment property.income. gain distributions, that part (which is reported on She also has a gain of $1,000 from the sale of aYou make this choice by completing Form Schedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13) painting given to her by an artist friend. The4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. generally does not count as investment income. painting is not a capital asset because Jane'sIf you choose to include any amount of your However, you can choose to include all or part of basis in the painting is determined by referencenet capital gain in investment income, you must it in investment income, as explained in Choos- to her friend's basis in the painting. She incurredreduce your net capital gain that is eligible for ing to include net capital gain, earlier. $12,500 of investment interest expense. Herthe lower capital gains tax rates by the same Your investment income also includes the other investment expenses directly connectedamount. amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, with the production of investment income totalFor more information about the capital gains the reduced amount figured under Child's $980 after applying the 2% limit on miscellane-rates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier). ous itemized deductions on Schedule A (Form
Before making either choice, consider 1040).Investment expenses. Investment expensesthe overall effect on your tax liability. For 2008, Jane chooses to include all of herare your allowed deductions (other than interestCompare your tax if you make one or
TIP net capital gain in investment income. Her totalexpense) directly connected with the productionboth of these choices with your tax if you do not. investment income is $13,000 ($3,000 divi-of investment income. Investment expenses dends + $9,000 net capital gain + $1,000 fromthat are included as a miscellaneous itemizedInvestment income of child reported on par- the sale of the painting). Her net investmentdeduction on schedule A (Form 1040) are allow-ent's return. Investment income includes the income is $12,020 ($13,000 total investmentable deductions after applying the 2% limit thatpart of your child's interest and dividend income income − $980 other investment expenses).applies to miscellaneous itemized deductions.that you choose to report on your return. If the Jane's Form 4952 is illustrated, later. HerUse the smaller of:child does not have qualified dividends, Alaska investment interest expense deduction is limitedPermanent Fund dividends, or capital gain distri- • The investment expenses included on to $12,020, the amount of her net investmentbutions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, or income. The $480 disallowed investment inter-8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter- est expense is carried forward to 2009.• The amount on Schedule A, line 27.est and Dividends. Include it on line 4a of Form
4952. See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for a Exception to use of Form 4952. You do not
discussion of the 2% limit. have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to yourExample. Your 8-year-old son has interest return if you meet all of the following tests.income of $2,000, which you choose to report on Losses from passive activities. Income oryour own return. You enter $2,000 on Form • Your investment interest expense is notexpenses that you used in computing income or8814, lines 1a and 4, and $300 on lines 6 and more than your investment income fromloss from a passive activity are not included in12. Also enter $300 on Form 1040, line 21. Your interest and ordinary dividends minus anydetermining your investment income or invest-investment income includes this $300. qualified dividends.ment expenses (including investment interest
expense). See Publication 925 for informationChild's qualified dividends. If part of the • You do not have any other deductible in-
about passive activities.amount you report is your child's qualified divi- vestment expenses.
dends, that part (which is reported on Form • You have no carryover of investment inter-Example. Ted is a partner in a partnership1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in- est expense from 2007.that operates a business. However, he does notvestment income. However, you can choose to
materially participate in the partnership's busi-include all or part of it in investment income, as If you meet all of these tests, you can deductness. Ted's interest in the partnership is consid-explained under Choosing to include qualified all of your investment interest. ered a passive activity.dividends, earlier.
Your investment income also includes the Ted's investment income from interest and
amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, dividends (other than qualified dividends) is
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
10,000
9,000
1,000
9,000
13,000
980
12,020
480
12,020
3,000
OMB No. 1545-0191
Investment Interest Expense Deduction4952Form
/H17075Attach to your tax return.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 51
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number
1Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2008 (see instructions)1
2Disallowed investment interest expense from 2007 Form 4952, line 72
3Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 23
4a
Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net
gain from the disposition of property held for investment)
4a
Investment expenses (see instructions)5 5
Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4h. If zero or less, enter -0-6 6
Total Investment Interest Expense
Net Investment Income
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
b Qualified dividends included on line 4a
c Subtract line 4b from line 4a
d Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment
e Enter the smaller of line 4d or your net capital gain from the disposition
of property held for investment (see instructions)
f Subtract line 4e from line 4d
Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2009. Subtract line 6 from 
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-
7
Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions8
4f
4b
4c
7
8
Part III
Part I
Part II
g Enter the amount from lines 4b and 4e that you elect to include in investment income (see
instructions)
h Investment income. Add lines 4c, 4f, and 4g 4h
4g
4d
4e
(99)
2008
• Bonds whose basis has to be determined at least two decimal places when expressed asBond Premium a percentage.using the basis of the person who trans-
ferred the bond to you. If you do not know the yield, consult yourAmortization
broker or tax advisor. Databases available toSee Regulations section 1.171-1(e).
them are likely to show the yield at the date ofIf you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-
purchase.mium is part of your basis in the bond. If the Dealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyone
bond yields taxable interest, you can choose to who holds them mainly for sale to customers in Step 2: determine the accrual periods.
amortize the premium. This generally means the ordinary course of a trade or business or You can choose the accrual periods to use.
that each year, over the life of the bond, you use who would properly include bonds in inventory They may be of any length and may vary in
a part of the premium to reduce the amount of at the close of the tax year) cannot claim a length over the term of the bond, but each ac-
interest includible in your income. If you make deduction for amortizable bond premium. crual period can be no longer than 1 year and
this choice, you must reduce your basis in the each scheduled payment of principal or interestSee section 75 of the Internal Revenue Codebond by the amortization for the year. must occur either on the first or the final day offor the treatment of bond premium by a dealer in
If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, you an accrual period. The computation is simplest iftax-exempt bonds.
must amortize the premium. This amortized accrual periods are the same as the intervals
amount is not deductible in determining taxable between interest payment dates.How To Figureincome. However, each year you must reduce Step 3: determine the bond premium forAmortizationyour basis in the bond (and tax-exempt interest the accrual period. To do this, multiply yourotherwise reportable on Form 1040, line 8b) by adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of theFor bonds issued after September 27, 1985, youthe amortization for the year. accrual period by your yield. Then subtract themust amortize bond premium using a constant
result from the qualified stated interest for theyield method on the basis of the bond's yield toBond premium. Bond premium is the amount period.maturity, determined by using the bond's basisby which your basis in the bond right after you Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-and compounding at the close of each accrualget it is more than the total of all amounts pay- ning of the first accrual period is the same asperiod.able on the bond after you get it (other than your basis. After that, it is your basis decreasedpayments of qualified stated interest). For exam- by the amount of bond premium amortized forConstant yield method. Figure the bond pre-ple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000 earlier periods and the amount of any paymentmium amortization for each accrual period asgenerally would have a $50 premium if you buy it previously made on the bond other than a pay-follows.for $1,050. ment of qualified stated interest.
Step 1: determine your yield. Your yield isBasis. In general, your basis for figuring
the discount rate that, when used in figuring thebond premium amortization is the same as your Example. On February 2, 2007, you bought
present value of all remaining payments to bebasis for figuring any loss on the sale of the a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has a
made on the bond (including payments of quali-bond. However, you may need to use a different stated principal amount of $100,000, payable at
fied stated interest), produces an amount equalbasis for: maturity on February 2, 2014, making your pre-
to your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as of mium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). The• Convertible bonds, the date you got the bond. It must be constant bond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000
• Bonds you got in a trade, and over the term of the bond and must be figured to on February 2 of each year. Your yield is
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8.07439% compounded annually. You choose However, in some cases, attorney or accountingHow To Report
fees are part of the basis of property. See Basisto use annual accrual periods ending on Febru- Amortization of Investment Property in chapter 4.ary 2 of each year. To find your bond premium
amortization for the accrual period ending on Subtract the bond premium amortization from Automatic investment service and dividend
February 2, 2008, you multiply the adjusted ac- your interest income from these bonds. reinvestment plans. A bank may offer its
Report the bond's interest on Schedule Bquisition price at the beginning of the period checking account customers an automatic in-
(Form 1040), line 1. Several lines above line 2, vestment service so that, for a charge, each($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract the
put a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1. customer can choose to invest a part of theresult ($8,881.83) from the qualified stated inter-
Below this subtotal, print ªABP Adjustment,º and checking account each month in common stock.est for the period ($10,000), you find that your the amortization amount. Subtract this amount Or, a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent forbond premium amortization for the period is from the subtotal, and enter the result on line 2. a number of publicly-owned corporations may$1,118.17. set up an automatic dividend reinvestment serv-Bond premium amortization more than inter-Special rules. For special rules that apply ice. Through that service, cash dividends areest. If the amount of your bond premium amor-to variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds, reinvested in more shares of stock, after thetization for an accrual period is more than the bank deducts a service charge.and bonds that provide for alternative payment qualified stated interest for the period, you can A corporation in which you own stock alsoschedules or remote or incidental contingen- deduct the difference as a miscellaneous item- may have a dividend reinvestment plan. Thiscies, see Regulations section 1.171-3. ized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line plan lets you choose to use your dividends to28. buy more shares of stock in the corporation But your deduction is limited to the amount instead of receiving the dividends in cash.Bonds Issued Before by which your total interest inclusions on the You can deduct the monthly service chargeSeptember 28, 1985 bond in prior accrual periods is more than your you pay to a bank to participate in an automatictotal bond premium deductions on the bond in investment service. If you participate in a divi-For these bonds, you can amortize bond pre- prior periods. Any amount you cannot deduct dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct anymium using any reasonable method. Reasona- because of this limit can be carried forward to service charge subtracted from your cash divi-ble methods include: the next accrual period. dends before the dividends are used to buy
• The straight-line method, and more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in thePre-1998 election to amortize bond premium.
year you pay them.Generally, if you first elected to amortize bond• The Revenue Ruling 82-10 method.
premium before 1998, the above treatment of Clerical help and office rent. You can deductthe premium does not apply to bonds you ac- office expenses, such as rent and clerical help,Straight-line method. Under this method, the quired before 1988. that you pay in connection with your investmentsamount of your bond premium amortization is
Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986. and collecting the taxable income on them.the same each month. Divide the number of
The amortization of the premium on these bondsmonths you held the bond during the year by the Cost of replacing missing securities. To re-is a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub-number of months from the beginning of the tax place your taxable securities that are mislaid,ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to postyear (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to the
Bonds acquired after October 22, 1986, but an indemnity bond. You can deduct the premiumdate of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiply
before 1988. The amortization of the premium you pay to buy the indemnity bond and thethe result by the bond premium (reduced by any
on these bonds is investment interest expense related incidental expenses.bond premium amortization claimed in earlier subject to the investment interest limit, unless You may, however, get a refund of part of theyears). This gives you your bond premium amor- you choose to treat it as an offset to interest bond premium if the missing securities are re-tization for the year. income on the bond. covered within a specified time. Under certain
types of insurance policies, you can recover
Revenue Ruling 82-10 method. Under this some of the expenses.
If you receive the refund in the tax year youmethod, the amount of your bond premium
pay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ-Expenses ofamortization increases each month over the life
ence between the expenses paid and theof the bond. This method is explained in Reve-
Producing Income amount refunded. If the refund is made in a laternue Ruling 82-10, 1982-1 C.B. 46.
tax year, you must include the refund in income
You deduct investment expenses (other than in the year you received it, but only to the extentChoosing To Amortize interest expenses) as miscellaneous itemized that the expenses decreased your tax in the year
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To be you deducted them.You choose to amortize the premium on taxable deductible, these expenses must be ordinarybonds by reporting the amortization for the year Fees to collect income. You can deduct feesand necessary expenses paid or incurred: you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similaron your income tax return for the first tax year for
• To produce or collect income, or agent to collect investment income, such aswhich you want the choice to apply. You should
your taxable bond or mortgage interest, or yourattach a statement to your return that you are • To manage property held for producing in- dividends on shares of stock.making this choice under section 171. See How come.
To Report Amortization, next. Fees to buy or sell. You cannot deduct aThe expenses must be directly related to the fee you pay to a broker to acquire investmentThis choice is binding for the year you make income or income-producing property, and the property, such as stocks or bonds. You mustit and for later tax years. It applies to all taxable income must be taxable to you. add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basisbonds you own in the year you make the choice The deduction for most income-producing ex- of Investment Property in chapter 4.and also to those you acquire in later years. penses is subject to a 2% limit that also applies You cannot deduct any broker's fees, com-
You can change your decision to amortize to certain other miscellaneous itemized deduc- missions, or option premiums you pay (or that
bond premium only with the written approval of tions. The amount deductible is limited to the were netted out) in connection with the sale of
total of these miscellaneous deductions that isthe IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115, investment property. They can be used only to
more than 2% of your adjusted gross income. figure gain or loss from the sale. See ReportingApplication for Change in Accounting Method.
For information on how to report expenses of Capital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for moreFor more information on requesting approval,
producing income, see How To Report Invest- information about the treatment of these salesee section 5 of the Appendix to Revenue Pro-
ment Expenses, later. expenses.cedure 2008-52 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
2008-36. You can find Revenue Procedure Attorney or accounting fees. You can de- Investment counsel and advice. You can
2008-52 at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-36_IRB/ar09. duct attorney or accounting fees that are neces- deduct fees you pay for counsel and advice
html. sary to produce or collect taxable income. about investments that produce taxable income.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This includes amounts you pay for investment REMIC, you must report as ordinary income on collateral in connection with the short sale. How-
advisory services. Schedule E (Form 1040) the total amounts ever, it does not apply to the expenses you incur
shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), lines 1b and if you deposit cash as collateral for the propertySafe deposit box rent. You can deduct rent 3b. If you are a REMIC regular interest holder, used in the short sale and the cash does notyou pay for a safe deposit box if you use the box you must include the amount of any expense earn a material return during the period of theto store taxable income-producing stocks, allocation you received on Form 1040, line 8a. sale. Short sales are discussed in chapter 4.bonds, or other investment-related papers and
Publicly-offered mutual funds. Pub- Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxabledocuments. If you also use the box to store
licly-offered mutual funds, generally, are funds income. You may have expenses that are fortax-exempt securities or personal items, you can
that are traded on an established securities ex- both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can-deduct only part of the rent. See Tax-exempt
change. These funds do not pass investment not specifically identify what part of the ex-income under Nondeductible Expenses, later, to
expenses through to you. Instead, the dividend penses is for each type of income, you canfigure what part you can deduct.
income they report to you in box 1a of Form divide the expenses, using reasonable propor-
State and local transfer taxes. You cannot 1099-DIV is already reduced by your share of tions based on facts and circumstances. You
deduct the state and local transfer taxes you pay investment expenses. Therefore, you cannot must attach a statement to your return showingwhen you buy or sell securities. If you pay these deduct the expenses on your return. how you divided the expenses and stating thattransfer taxes when you buy securities, you Include the amount from box 1a of Form each deduction claimed is not based onmust treat them as part of the cost of the prop- 1099-DIV in your income. tax-exempt income.erty. If you pay these transfer taxes when you One accepted method for dividing expensessell securities, you must treat them as a reduc- is to do it in the same proportion that each typetion in the amount realized. of income is to the total income. If the expenses
Nondeductible relate in part to capital gains and losses, includeTrustee's commissions for revocable trust.
the gains, but not the losses, in figuring thisIf you set up a revocable trust and have its Expensesincome distributed to you, you can deduct the proportion. To find the part of the expenses that
commission you pay the trustee for managing is for the tax-exempt income, divide yourSome expenses that you incur as an investorthe trust to the extent it is to produce or collect tax-exempt income by the total income and mul-are not deductible.taxable income or to manage property. How- tiply your expenses by the result.
ever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis- Stockholders' meetings. You cannot deduct
Example. You received $6,000 interest;sion that is for producing or collecting transportation and other expenses that you pay
$4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable.tax-exempt income or for managing property to attend stockholders' meetings of companies
that produces tax-exempt income. In earning this income, you had $500 of ex-in which you have no interest other than owning
If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay the penses. You cannot specifically identify thestock. This is true even if your purpose in attend-
commissions for several years in advance, you amount of each expense item that is for eaching is to get information that would be useful in
must deduct a part of the commission each year. income item, so you must divide your expenses.making further investments.
You cannot deduct the entire amount in the year 80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided byInvestment-related seminar. You cannot de-you pay it. $6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for theduct expenses for attending a convention, semi- tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400nar, or similar meeting for investment purposes.Investment expenses from pass-through en- (80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deducttities. If you hold an interest in a partnership, S Single-premium life insurance, endowment, $100 (the rest of the expenses) because theycorporation, real estate mortgage investment and annuity contracts. You cannot deduct are for the taxable interest.conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offered regu- interest on money you borrow to buy or carry a State income taxes. If you itemize your de-lated investment company (mutual fund), you single-premium life insurance, endowment, or ductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in-can deduct your share of that entity's investment annuity contract. come taxes on interest income that is exemptexpenses. A partnership or S corporation will
Used as collateral. If you use a single pre-show your share of these expenses on your from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct,
mium annuity contract as collateral to obtain orSchedule K-1. A nonpublicly offered mutual fund as either taxes or investment expenses, state
continue a mortgage loan, you cannot deductwill indicate your share of these expenses in box income taxes on other exempt income.
any interest on the loan that is collateralized by5 of Form 1099-DIV, or on an equivalent state-
the annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-ment. Publicly-offered mutual funds are dis- Interest expense and carrying charges on
est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur-cussed later. straddles. You cannot deduct interest and
rent interest rate on the mortgage loan by theIf you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex- carrying charges that are allocable to personal
lesser of the amount of the annuity contract usedpenses relating to your residual interest invest- property that is part of a straddle. The nonde-
as collateral or the amount of the loan.ment will be shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), ductible interest and carrying charges are added
line 3b. Any expenses relating to your regular to the basis of the straddle property. However,Borrowing on insurance. Generally, youinterest investment will appear in box 5 of Form this treatment does not apply if:cannot deduct interest on money you borrow to1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. buy or carry a life insurance, endowment, or • All the offsetting positions making up theReport your share of these investment ex- annuity contract if you plan to systematically straddle either consist of one or morepenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to borrow part or all of the increases in the cash qualified covered call options and the op-the 2% limit, in the same manner as your other value of the contract. This rule applies to the tioned stock or consist of section 1256investment expenses. interest on the total amount borrowed to buy or contracts (and the straddle is not part of a
carry the contract, not just the interest on theIncluding mutual fund or REMIC expenses larger straddle), or
borrowed increases in the cash value.in income. Your share of the investment ex-
• The straddle is a hedging transaction.penses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered Tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex-mutual fund, as described above, are consid- penses you incur to produce tax-exempt in-ered to be indirect deductions through that For information about straddles, including defini-come. Nor can you deduct interest on moneypass-through entity. You must include in your tions of the terms used in this discussion, seeyou borrow to buy tax-exempt securities orgross income an amount equal to the amount of chapter 4.shares in a mutual fund or other regulated in-the expenses allocated to you, whether or not vestment company that distributes only ex- Interest includes any amount you pay or incuryou are able to claim a deduction for those empt-interest dividends. in connection with personal property used in aexpenses. If you are a shareholder in a nonpub-
short sale. However, you must first apply thelicly offered mutual fund, you must include on Short-sale expenses. The rule disallowing
rules discussed in Payments in lieu of dividendsyour return the full amount of ordinary dividends a deduction for interest expenses on tax-exempt
under Short Sales in chapter 4.or other distributions of stock, as shown in box securities applies to amounts you pay in con-
To determine the interest on market discount1a of Form 1099-DIV or an equivalent state- nection with personal property used in a short
bonds and short-term obligations that are part ofment. If you are a residual interest holder in a sale or amounts paid by others for the use of any
Page 36 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 37 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a straddle, you must first apply the rules dis- Basis adjustment. Add the nondeductible If you use an accrual method, you generally
cussed under Limit on interest deduction for amount to the basis of your straddle property. deduct your expenses when you incur a liability
market discount bonds  and Limit on interest for them, rather than when you pay them.
deduction for short-term obligations (both under Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter-Interest Expenses, earlier). est, earlier in this chapter.
How To ReportNondeductible amount. Figure the nonde-
ductible amount of interest and carrying charges Unpaid expenses owed to related party. IfInvestment Expenseson straddle property as follows. you use an accrual method, you cannot deduct
To deduct your investment expenses, you must1. Add: interest and other expenses owed to a related
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). cash-basis person until payment is made anda. Interest on indebtedness incurred or Enter your deductible investment interest ex- the amount is includible in the gross income ofcontinued to buy or carry the personal pense on Schedule A, line 14. Include any de- that person. The relationship, for purposes ofproperty, and ductible short sale expenses. (See Short Sales this rule, is determined as of the end of the taxin chapter 4 for information on these expenses.)b. All other amounts (including charges to year for which the interest or expense wouldAlso attach a completed Form 4952 if you usedinsure, store, or transport the personal otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is deniedthat form to figure your investment interest ex-property) paid or incurred to carry the under this rule, this rule will continue to applypense.personal property. even if your relationship with the person ceasesEnter the total amount of your other invest- to exist before the amount is includible in thement expenses (other than interest expenses)2. Subtract from the amount in (1): gross income of that person.on Schedule A, line 23. List the type and amount
a. Interest (including OID) includible in This rule generally applies to those relation-of each expense on the dotted lines next to line
gross income for the year on the per- 23. (If necessary, you can show the required ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Party
sonal property, information on an attached statement.) Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-
For information on how to report amortizable nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,b. Any income from the personal property
bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza- shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-treated as ordinary income on the dis-
tion, earlier in this chapter. tions to shareholders.position of short-term government obli-
gations or as ordinary income under the The postponement of deductions for unpaid
market discount and short-term bond expenses and interest under the related partyprovisions Ð see Discount on Debt In- rule does not apply to original issue discountstruments in chapter 1, When To Report (OID), regardless of when payment is made.
c. The dividends includible in gross in- This rule also does not apply to loans with be-Investment Expensescome for the year from the personal low-market interest rates or to certain payments
property, and for the use of property and services when theIf you use the cash method to report income and
lender or recipient has to include payments peri-expenses, you generally deduct your expenses,d. Any payment on a loan of the personal
odically in income, even if a payment has notexcept for certain prepaid interest, in the yearproperty for use in a short sale that is
you pay them. been made.includible in gross income.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Redemption of stock. A redemption of stockTopics
is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to theThis chapter discusses:
capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-
4. demption is a dividend or other distribution on• What a sale or trade is,
stock.• Basis,
Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a• Adjusted basis, redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,Sales and
or other distribution depends on the circum-• Figuring gain or loss,
stances in each case. Both direct and indirect• Nontaxable trades,Trades of ownership of stock will be considered. The re-
• Capital gains and losses, and demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if:
• How to report your gain or loss. • The redemption is not essentiallyInvestment
equivalent to a dividend Ð see Dividends
and Other Corporate Distributions in chap-Useful ItemsProperty ter 1,You may want to see:
• There is a substantially disproportionate
redemption of stock,Publication
Introduction • There is a complete redemption of all the❏ 551 Basis of Assets stock of the corporation owned by theThis chapter explains the tax treatment of sales
❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions shareholder, orand trades of investment property.
• The redemption is a distribution in partialForm (and Instructions)Investment property. This is property that liquidation of a corporation.
produces investment income. Examples include ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. and Losses Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re-Property used in a trade or business is not in- demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From Sectionvestment property. maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.1256 Contracts and Straddles
See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds  and Dis-Form 1099-B. If you sold property such as ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations counted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-stocks, bonds, or certain commodities through a nary Gain or Loss, later.❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchangesbroker during the year, you should receive, for In addition, a significant modification of aeach sale, a Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Bro- See chapter 5  for information about getting bond is treated as a trade of the original bond forker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or an these publications and forms. a new bond. For details, see Regulations sec-equivalent statement from the broker. You tion 1.1001-3.should receive the statement by February 15 of
the next year. It will show the gross proceeds Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by a
from the sale. The IRS will also get a copy of dominant shareholder who retains control of theWhat Is aForm 1099-B from the broker. corporation is treated as a contribution to capital
Use Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state- rather than as an immediate loss deductibleSale or Trade?
ment received from your broker) to complete from taxable income. The surrendering share-
Schedule D of Form 1040. For more information, Terms you may need to know holder must reallocate his or her basis in the
see Form 1099-B transactions under Reporting surrendered shares to the shares he or she(see Glossary):
Capital Gains and Losses, later. retains.
Nominees. If someone receives gross pro- Equity option Trade of investment property for an annuity.ceeds as a nominee for you, that person will give The transfer of investment property to a corpora-Futures contractyou a Form 1099-B, which will show gross pro- tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-Marked to marketceeds received on your behalf. tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract that
If you receive Form 1099-B that includes will make guaranteed annual payments to youNonequity option
gross proceeds belonging to another person, for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value ofOptions dealersee Nominees later under Reporting Capital the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-
Gains and Losses for more information. erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the yearRegulated futures contract
of the trade. Figure the present value of theSection 1256 contractOther property transactions. Certain trans- annuity according to factors used by commercial
insurance companies issuing annuities.fers of property are discussed in other IRS publi- Short sale
cations. These include:
Transfer by inheritance. The transfer of• Sale of your main home, discussed in This section explains what is a sale or trade. It property of a decedent to the executor or admin-
Publication 523, Selling Your Home, also explains certain transactions and events istrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-
that are treated as sales or trades. ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable• Installment sales, covered in Publication
gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.A sale is generally a transfer of property for537, Installment Sales,
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to• Various types of transactions involving Termination of certain rights and obliga-pay money.
business property, discussed in Publica- tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, orA trade is a transfer of property for othertion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of other termination of a right or obligation (otherproperty or services, and may be taxed in the
Assets, than a securities futures contract) with respect tosame way as a sale.
property that is a capital asset (or that would be• Transfers of property at death, covered in a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as aSale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transactionPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gainis not a trade when you voluntarily sell propertyAdministrators, and or loss.for cash and immediately buy similar property to
• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac- This rule does not apply to the retirement of areplace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-
tivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas- debt instrument. See Redemption or retirementrate transactions. But see Like-Kind Exchanges
sive Activity and At-Risk Rules. of bonds, earlier.under Nontaxable Trades, later.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 39 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Enter into an offsetting notional principal a. The position unconditionally entitles theWorthless Securities
contract relating to the same or substan- holder to receive a specified principal
tially identical property, amount,Stocks, stock rights, and bonds (other than
those held for sale by a securities dealer) that • Enter into a futures or forward contract to b. The interest payments (or other similarbecame completely worthless during the tax deliver the same or substantially identical amounts) with respect to the positionyear are treated as though they were sold on the property (including a forward contract that are payable at a fixed rate or a variablelast day of the tax year. This affects whether provides for cash settlement), or rate described in Regulations sectionyour capital loss is long-term or short-term. See 1.860G-1(a)(3), and• Acquire the same or substantially identicalHolding Period, later.
property (if the appreciated financial posi- c. The position is not convertible, eitherWorthless securities also include securities
tion is a short sale, an offsetting notional directly or indirectly, into stock of thethat you abandon after March 12, 2008. To
principal contract, or a futures or forward issuer (or any related person).abandon a security, you must permanently sur-
contract).render and relinquish all rights in the security
3. Any hedge with respect to a position de-and receive no consideration in exchange for it.
You are also treated as having made a con- scribed in (2).All the facts and circumstances determine
structive sale of an appreciated financial posi-whether the transaction is properly character-
Certain trust instruments treated as stock.tion if a person related to you enters into aized as an abandonment or other type of trans-
For the constructive sale rules, an interest in antransaction described above with a view towardaction, such as an actual sale or exchange,
actively traded trust is treated as stock unlessavoiding the constructive sale treatment. Forcontribution to capital, dividend, or gift.
substantially all of the value of the property heldthis purpose, a related person is any relatedIf you are a cash basis taxpayer and make
by the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep-party described under Related Party Transac-payments on a negotiable promissory note that
tion to the definition of an appreciated financialtions, later in this chapter.you issued for stock that became worthless, you
position (explained in (2) above).can deduct these payments as losses in the Exception for nonmarketable securities.years you actually make the payments. Do not You are not treated as having made a construc- Sale of appreciated financial position. Adeduct them in the year the stock became worth- tive sale solely because you entered into a con- transaction treated as a constructive sale of anless. tract for sale of any stock, debt instrument, or appreciated financial position is not treated as a
partnership interest that is not a marketable se-How to report loss. Report worthless securi- constructive sale of any other appreciated finan-
curity if it settles within 1 year of the date youties on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8, cial position, as long as you continue to hold the
enter into it.whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d), enter original position. However, if you hold another
ªWorthless.º Enter the amount of your loss in appreciated financial position and dispose of theException for certain closed transactions.
parentheses in column (f). original position before closing the transactionDo not treat a transaction as a constructive sale
that resulted in the constructive sale, you areif all of the following are true.Filing a claim for refund. If you do not claim a treated as if, at the same time, you construc-loss for a worthless security on your original 1. You closed the transaction on or before tively sold the other appreciated financial posi-return for the year it becomes worthless, you can the 30th day after the end of your tax year. tion.file a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss.
You must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi- 2. You held the appreciated financial position
Section 1256 Contractsvidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return throughout the 60-day period beginning on
for the year the security became worthless. You the date you closed the transaction. Marked to Market
must file it within 7 years from the date your 3. Your risk of loss was not reduced at any If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end oforiginal return for that year had to be filed, or 2 time during that 60-day period by holding the tax year, you generally must treat it as soldyears from the date you paid the tax, whichever certain other positions. at its fair market value on the last business dayis later. (Claims not due to worthless securities
of the tax year.or bad debts generally must be filed within 3 If a closed transaction is reestablished in a
years from the date a return is filed, or 2 years substantially similar position during the 60-day
from the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) period beginning on the date the first transaction
Section 1256 ContractFor more information about filing a claim, see was closed, this exception still applies if the
Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Ap- reestablished position is closed before the 30th A section 1256 contract is any:peal Rights, and Claims for Refund. day after the end of your tax year in which the
first transaction was closed and, after that clos- • Regulated futures contract,
ing, (2) and (3) above are true.Constructive Sales • Foreign currency contract,This exception also applies to successiveof Appreciated short sales of an entire appreciated financial • Nonequity option,Financial Positions position. For more information, see Revenue • Dealer equity option, orRuling 2003-1 in Internal Revenue BulletinYou are treated as having made a constructive 2003-3. This bulletin is available at www.irs.gov/ • Dealer securities futures contract.sale when you enter into certain transactions pub/irs-irbs/irb03-03.pdf.involving an appreciated financial position (de-
Regulated futures contract. This is a con-fined later) in stock, a partnership interest, or Appreciated financial position. This is any
tract that:certain debt instruments. You must recognize interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debt
gain as if the position were disposed of at its fair instrument (including a futures or forward con- • Provides that amounts that must be de-market value on the date of the constructive tract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing of posited to, or can be withdrawn from, yoursale. This gives you a new holding period for the the interest would result in a gain. margin account depend on daily marketposition that begins on the date of the construc- conditions (a system of marking to mar-Exceptions. An appreciated financial posi-tive sale. Then, when you close the transaction, ket), andtion does not include the following.you reduce your gain (or increase your loss) by
• Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, athe gain recognized on the constructive sale. 1. Any position from which all of the apprecia- qualified board of exchange. A qualifiedConstructive sale. You are treated as having tion is accounted for under marked to mar- board of exchange is a domestic board ofmade a constructive sale of an appreciated fi- ket rules, including section 1256 contracts trade designated as a contract market bynancial position if you: (described later under Section 1256 Con- the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-tracts Marked to Market).• Enter into a short sale of the same or sion, any board of trade or exchange ap-
substantially identical property, 2. Any position in a debt instrument if: proved by the Secretary of the Treasury,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 39

Page 40 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or a national securities exchange regis- Equity option. This is any option: rights under section 1256 contracts are termi-
tered with the Securities and Exchange nated or transferred during the tax year. In this• To buy or sell stock, orCommission. case, use the fair market value of each section
• That is valued directly or indirectly by ref- 1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-
erence to any stock or narrow-based se- fer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations orForeign currency contract. This is a contract curity index. transfers may result from any offsetting, deliv-that: ery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli-
• Requires delivery of a foreign currency gation or rights under section 1256 contracts.Equity options include options on a group ofthat has positions traded through regu- stocks only if the group is a narrow-based stock Loss carryback election. An individual hav-lated futures contracts (or settlement of index. ing a net section 1256 contracts loss (definedwhich depends on the value of that type of
later) for 2008 can elect to carry this loss back 3foreign currency), Dealer securities futures contract. For
years, instead of carrying it over to the next year.any dealer in securities futures contracts or op-• Is traded in the interbank market, and See How To Report, later, for information abouttions on those contracts, this is a securities fu-
reporting this election on your return.• Is entered into at arm's length at a price tures contract (or option on such a contract) that:
determined by reference to the price in the The loss carried back to any year under this• Is entered into by the dealer (or, in theinterbank market. election cannot be more than the net sectioncase of an option, is purchased or granted 1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, theby the dealer) in the normal course of theBank forward contracts with maturity dates amount of loss carried back to an earlier tax yeardealer's activity of dealing in this type ofthat are longer than the maturities ordinarily cannot increase or produce a net operating losscontract (or option), andavailable for regulated futures contracts are con- for that year.
sidered to meet the definition of a foreign cur- • Is traded on a qualified board or exchange The loss is carried to the earliest carryback
rency contract if the above three conditions are (as defined under Regulated futures con- year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount can
satisfied. tract, earlier.) then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. In
Special rules apply to certain foreign cur- each carryback year, treat 60% of the carrybackA securities futures contract that is not a dealerrency transactions. These transactions may re- amount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as asecurities futures contract is treated as de-sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. For short-term capital loss from section 1256 con-scribed later under Securities Futures Con-details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988 tracts.tracts.and Regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) and If only a portion of the net section 1256 con-
1.988-3. tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back,Marked to Market Rules the unabsorbed portion can be carried forward,Nonequity option. This is any listed option under the capital loss carryover rules, to the yearA section 1256 contract that you hold at the end(defined later) that is not an equity option. None- following the loss. (See Capital Losses  underof the tax year will generally be treated as sold atquity options include debt options, commodity Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig-its fair market value on the last business day offutures options, currency options, and ure your capital loss carryover as if, for the lossthe tax year, and you must recognize any gain orbroad-based stock index options. A year, you had an additional short-term capitalloss that results. That gain or loss is taken intobroad-based stock index is based upon the gain of 40% of the amount of net section 1256account in figuring your gain or loss when youvalue of a group of diversified stocks or securi- contracts loss absorbed in the carryback yearslater dispose of the contract, as shown in theties (such as the Standard and Poor's 500 in- and an additional long-term capital gain of 60%example under 60/40 rule, below.dex). of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treatWarrants based on a stock index that are any capital loss carryover from losses on sectionHedging exception. The marked to marketeconomically, substantially identical in all mate- 1256 contracts as if it were a loss from sectionrules do not apply to hedging transactions. Seerial respects to options based on a stock index 1256 contracts for that year.Hedging Transactions, later.are treated as options based on a stock index.
Net section 1256 contracts loss. This lossCash-settled options. Cash-settled op- 60/40 rule. Under the marked to market sys- is the lesser of:tions based on a stock index and either traded tem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will be • The net capital loss for your tax year de-on or subject to the rules of a qualified board of treated as a long-term capital gain or loss, and termined by taking into account only theexchange are nonequity options if the Securities 40% will be treated as a short-term capital gain gains and losses from section 1256 con-and Exchange Commission (SEC) determines or loss. This is true regardless of how long you tracts, orthat the stock index is broad based. actually held the property.
This rule does not apply to options estab- • The capital loss carryover to the next taxlished before the SEC determines that the stock Example. On June 22, 2007, you bought a year determined without this election.index is broad based. regulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-
cember 31, 2007 (the last business day of your Net section 1256 contracts gain. This gainListed option. This is any option that is
tax year), the fair market value of the contract is the lesser of:traded on, or subject to the rules of, a qualified
was $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain onboard or exchange (as discussed earlier under • The capital gain net income for the car-your 2007 tax return, treated as 60% long-termRegulated futures contract ). A listed option, ryback year determined by taking into ac-and 40% short-term capital gain.however, does not include an option that is a count only gains and losses from sectionOn February 1, 2008, you sold the contractright to acquire stock from the issuer. 1256 contracts, orfor $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000
gain on your 2007 return, you recognize aDealer equity option. This is any listed option • The capital gain net income for that year.
$1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2008that, for an options dealer:
tax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%• Is an equity option, Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain forshort-term capital loss. any carryback year without regard to the net• Is bought or granted by that dealer in the Limited partners or entrepreneurs. The section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year ornormal course of the dealer's business ac- 60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op- any later tax year.tivity of dealing in options, and tions or dealer securities futures contracts that
result in capital gain or loss allocable to limited Traders in section 1256 contracts. Gain or• Is listed on the qualified board of ex-
partners or limited entrepreneurs (defined later loss from the trading of section 1256 contracts ischange where that dealer is registered.
under Hedging Transactions ). Instead, these capital gain or loss subject to the marked to
gains or losses are treated as short term.An ªoptions dealerº is any person registered market rules. However, this does not apply to
with an appropriate national securities ex- contracts held for purposes of hedging property
change as a market maker or specialist in listed Terminations and transfers. The marked to if any loss from the property would be an ordi-
options. market rules also apply if your obligation or nary loss.
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Treatment of underlying property. The limited partner) and who does not actively par- Fair market value
determination of whether an individual's gain or ticipate in its management. However, an inter- Original issue discount (OID)loss from any property is ordinary or capital gain est is not considered held by a limited partner
or loss is made without regard to the fact that the or entrepreneur if the interest holder actively
individual is actively engaged in dealing in or participates (or did so for at least 5 full years) Basis is a way of measuring your investment in
trading section 1256 contracts related to that in the management of the entity, or is the property for tax purposes. You must know the
property. spouse, child (including a legally adopted basis of your property to determine whether you
child), grandchild, or parent of an individual have a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-
who actively participates in the management of tion.How To Report the entity. Investment property you buy normally has an
original basis equal to its cost. If you get propertyIf you disposed of regulated futures or foreign Hedging loss limit. If you are a limited partner in some way other than buying it, such as by giftcurrency contracts in 2008 (or had unrealized or entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a or inheritance, its fair market value may be im-profit or loss on these contracts that were open hedging loss you can claim is limited. A ªhedging portant in figuring the basis.at the end of 2007 or 2008), you should receive lossº is the amount by which the allowable de-Form 1099-B, or an equivalent statement, from ductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg-your broker. Cost Basising transaction (determined without regard to
the limit) are more than the income received or The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781, Gains
accrued during the tax year from this transac- The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtand Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and
tion. obligations, or other property or services.Straddles, to report your gains and losses from
Any hedging loss that is allocated to you forall section 1256 contracts that are open at the
the tax year is limited to your taxable income forend of the year or that were closed out during Unstated interest. If you buy property on a
that year from the trade or business in which thethe year. This includes the amount shown in box time-payment plan that charges little or no inter-
hedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg-11 of Form 1099-B. Then enter the net amount est, the basis of your property is your stated
ing transaction items in determining this taxableof these gains and losses on Schedule D (Form purchase price, minus the amount considered to
income. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 with your be unstated interest. You generally have un-
lowed because of this limit, you can carry it overincome tax return. stated interest if your interest rate is less than
to the next tax year as a deduction resulting from the applicable federal rate. For more informa-If the Form 1099-B you receive includes a
a hedging transaction. tion, see Unstated Interest and  Original Issuestraddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it
If the hedging transaction relates to property Discount (OID) in Publication 537.may be necessary to show certain adjustments
other than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc-
ing losses applies if the limited partner or entre-tions for completing Part I. Basis Other Than Cost
preneur is an individual.
Loss carryback election. To carry back your There are times when you must use a basisThe limit on hedging losses does not apply to
loss under the election procedures described other than cost. In these cases, you may need toany hedging loss to the extent that it is more
earlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica- know the property's fair market value or thethan all your unrecognized gains from hedging
tion for Tentative Refund, for the year to which adjusted basis of the previous owner.transactions at the end of the tax year that are
you are carrying the loss with an amended Form from the trade or business in which the hedging
6781 and an amended Schedule D attached. Fair market value. This is the price at whichtransaction occurred. The term ªunrecognized
Follow the instructions for completing Form the property would change hands between againº has the same meaning as defined under
6781 for the loss year to make this election. buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy orStraddles, later.
sell and both having reasonable knowledge of
all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,Sale of property used in a hedge. Once youHedging Transactions around the same date, may be helpful in figuringidentify personal property as being part of a
fair market value.hedging transaction, you must treat gain from itsThe marked to market rules, described earlier, sale or exchange as ordinary income, not capitaldo not apply to hedging transactions. A transac- gain.tion is a hedging transaction if both of the follow- Property Received for Servicesing conditions are met.
If you receive investment property for services,Self-Employment Income1. You entered into the transaction in the nor- you must include the property's fair market valuemal course of your trade or business pri- in income. The amount you include in incomeGains and losses derived in the ordinary coursemarily to manage the risk of: then becomes your basis in the property. If theof a commodity or option dealer's trading in
services were performed for a price that wassection 1256 contracts and property related toa. Price changes or currency fluctuations
agreed to beforehand, this price will be acceptedthese contracts are included in net earningson ordinary property you hold (or will
as the fair market value of the property if there isfrom self-employment. In addition, the rules re-hold), or
no evidence to the contrary.lating to contributions to self-employment retire-b. Interest rate or price changes, or cur- ment plans apply. For information on retirementrency fluctuations, on your current or Restricted property. If you receive, as pay-plan contributions, see Publication 560, Retire-future borrowings or ordinary obliga- ment for services, property that is subject toment Plans for Small Business, and Publicationtions. certain restrictions, your basis in the property590, Individual Retirement Arrangements
generally is its fair market value when it be-(IRAs). 2. You clearly identified the transaction as comes substantially vested. Property becomesbeing a hedging transaction before the substantially vested when it is transferable or isclose of the day on which you entered no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture,into it. whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-Basis of erty in Publication 525 for more information.This hedging transaction exception does not
apply to transactions entered into by or for any Investment Property
Bargain purchases. If you buy investmentsyndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor-
property at less than fair market value, as pay-poration, or other entity (other than a regular Terms you may need to know ment for services, you must include the differ-corporation) that allocates more than 35% of its (see Glossary): ence in income. Your basis in the property is thelosses to limited partners or limited entrepre-
price you pay plus the amount you include inneurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person who
income.Basishas an interest in an enterprise (but not as a
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 41

Page 42 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value ............ . $101,000No gain or loss. If you use the basis forProperty Received
Minus: Adjusted basis ......... .  40,000figuring a gain and the result is a loss, and thenin Taxable Trades
Net increase in value of gift ..... . $ 61,000use the basis for figuring a loss and the result is
If you received investment property in trade for a gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss. Gift tax paid ............... . $ 21,000other property, the basis of the new property is
Multiplied by .685 ($61,000 ÷its fair market value at the time of the trade Example. You receive a gift of investment $89,000) ................. . .685unless you received the property in a nontaxable property having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at Gift tax due to net increase in value $ 14,385trade. the time of the gift. The fair market value at the Plus: Adjusted basis of property to time of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the your mother ............... . 40,000Example. You trade A Company stock for B property for $9,500. You have neither gain nor Your basis in the property $ 54,385Company stock having a fair market value of loss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, and$1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Company $9,500 minus $10,000 results in a $500 loss.stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxable Your basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and Part sale, part gift. If you get property in again on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the A $9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain. transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, yourCompany stock is more than $1,200, you have a basis is the larger of the amount you paid for thedeductible loss on the trade. The basis of your B Fair market value equal to or more than do- property or the transferor's adjusted basis in theCompany stock is $1,200. If you later sell the B property at the time of the transfer. Add to thatnor's adjusted basis. If the fair market valueCompany stock for $1,300, you will have a gain amount the amount of any gift tax paid on theof the property at the time of the gift was equal toof $100. gift, as described in the preceding discussion.or more than the donor's adjusted basis just
For figuring loss, your basis is limited to thebefore the gift, your basis for gain or loss on its
property's fair market value at the time of thesale or other disposition is the donor's adjustedProperty Received
transfer.basis plus or minus any required adjustments toin Nontaxable Trades
basis during the period you hold the property.
If you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec- Gift tax information. For information on giftAlso, you may be allowed to add to the donor's
ognize gain or loss until you dispose of the tax, see Publication 950, Introduction to Estateadjusted basis all or part of any gift tax paid,
property you received in the trade. See Nontax- and Gift Taxes.depending on the date of the gift.
able Trades, later.
Gift received before 1977. If you receivedThe basis of property you received in a non-
property as a gift before 1977, your basis in the Property Received as Inheritancetaxable or partly nontaxable trade is generally
property is the donor's adjusted basis increasedthe same as the adjusted basis of the property
If you inherited property, your basis in that prop-by the total gift tax paid on the gift. However,you gave up. Increase this amount by any cash
erty generally is its fair market value (its ap-your basis cannot be more than the fair marketyou paid, additional costs you had, and any gain
praised value on Form 706, United Statesvalue of the gift at the time it was given to you.recognized. Reduce this amount by any cash or
Estate (and Generation-Skipping Transfer) Taxunlike property you received, any loss recog-
Return) on:Example 1. You were given XYZ Companynized, and any liability of yours that was as-
stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stocksumed or treated as assumed. • The date of the decedent's death, orhad a fair market value of $21,000. The donor's
• The later alternate valuation date if theadjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a
estate qualifies for, and elects to use, al-gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain orProperty Received
ternate valuation.loss is $20,500, the donor's adjusted basis plusFrom Your Spouse
the amount of gift tax paid. If no Form 706 was filed, use the appraisedIf property is transferred to you from your spouse value on the date of death for state inheritance(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident to Example 2. The facts are the same as in or transmission taxes. For stocks and bonds, ifyour divorce), your basis is the same as your Example 1  except that the gift tax paid was no Form 706 was filed and there are no statespouse's or former spouse's adjusted basis just $1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor's ad- inheritance or transmission taxes, see the Formbefore the transfer. See Transfers Between justed basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited to 706 instructions for figuring the fair market valueSpouses, later. the fair market value of the stock at the time of of the stocks and bonds on the date of the
the gift. decedent's death.Recordkeeping. The transferor must
give you the records necessary to de- Gift received after 1976. If you received Appreciated property you gave the dece-termine the adjusted basis and holding
RECORDS property as a gift after 1976, your basis is the dent. Your basis in certain appreciated prop-period of the property as of the date of the donor's adjusted basis increased by the part of erty that you inherited is the decedent's adjustedtransfer. the gift tax paid that was for the net increase in basis in the property immediately before deathvalue of the gift. You figure this part by multiply- rather than its fair market value. This applies toing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The appreciated property that you or your spouseProperty Received as a Gift numerator (top part) is the net increase in value gave the decedent as a gift during the 1-year
of the gift and the denominator (bottom part) is period ending on the date of death. AppreciatedTo figure your basis in property that you re- the amount of the gift. property is any property whose fair market valueceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted
The net increase in value of the gift is the fair on the day you gave it to the decedent was morebasis to the donor just before it was given to you,
market value of the gift minus the donor's ad- than its adjusted basis.its fair market value at the time it was given to
justed basis. The amount of the gift is its valueyou, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and the
for gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-date it was given to you. More information. See Publication 551, Ba-
nual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc- sis of Assets, for more information on the basis
tion that applies to the gift. of inherited property, including community prop-Fair market value less than donor's adjusted
erty, property held by a surviving tenant in a jointbasis. If the fair market value of the property at
Example. In 2008, you received a gift of tenancy or tenancy by the entirety, a qualifiedthe time of the gift was less than the donor's
property from your mother. At the time of the gift, joint interest, and a farm or closely held busi-adjusted basis just before the gift, your basis for
the property had a fair market value of $101,000 ness.gain on its sale or other disposition is the same
and an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. Theas the donor's adjusted basis plus or minus any
amount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasrequired adjustments to basis during the period Adjusted Basis
$89,000 ($101,000 minus the $12,000 annualyou hold the property. Your basis for loss is its
exclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax offair market value at the time of the gift plus or Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale,
$21,000. You figure your basis in the followingminus any required adjustments to basis during exchange, or other disposition of property or
way:the period you hold the property. figure allowable depreciation, depletion, or
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amortization, you usually must make certain ad- • Receive a written confirmation of this from is the purchase price plus a share of the broker's
commission.your broker or other agent within a reason-justments (increases and decreases) to the ba-
able time.sis of the property. The result of these
Dividend reinvestment plans. If you partici-adjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis.
pate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receiveIf you sell part of the stock represented by aAdjustments to the basis of stocks and stock from the corporation at a discount, yoursingle certificate directly to the buyer instead ofbonds are explained in the following discussion. basis is the full fair market value of the stock onthrough a broker, you will make an adequateFor information about other adjustments to ba- the dividend payment date. You must includeidentification if you keep a written record of thesis, see Publication 551. the amount of the discount in your income.particular stock that you intend to sell.
Public utilities. If, before 1986, you ex-Bonds. These methods of identificationStocks and Bonds cluded from income the value of stock you hadalso apply to bonds sold or transferred.
received under a qualified public utility reinvest-The basis of stocks or bonds you own generally Identification not possible. If you buy and ment plan, your basis in that stock is zero.is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase, sell securities at various times in varying quanti-such as commissions and recording or transfer ties and you cannot adequately identify the Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distri-fees. If you acquired stock or bonds other than shares you sell, the basis of the securities you butions made by a corporation of its own stock.by purchase, your basis is usually determined sell is the basis of the securities you acquired Generally, stock dividends are not taxable toby fair market value or the previous owner's first. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis- you. However, see Distributions of Stock andadjusted basis as discussed earlier under Basis cussed later, you cannot use the average price Stock Rights under Dividends and Other Corpo-
Other Than Cost. per share to figure gain or loss on the sale of the rate Distributions in chapter 1 for some excep-
The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer- shares. tions. If the stock dividends are not taxable, you
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam- must divide your basis for the old stock between
Example. You bought 100 shares of stockple, if you receive more stock from nontaxable the old and new stock.
of XYZ Corporation in 1995 for $10 a share. Instock dividends or stock splits, you must reduce New and old stock identical. If the newJanuary 1996 you bought another 200 sharesthe basis of your original stock. You must also stock you received as a nontaxable dividend isfor $11 a share. In July 1996 you gave your sonreduce your basis when you receive nondivi- identical to the old stock on which the dividend50 shares. In December 1998 you bought 100dend distributions (discussed in chapter 1). was declared, divide the adjusted basis of theshares for $9 a share. In April 2008 you sold 130These distributions, up to the amount of your old stock by the number of shares of old andshares. You cannot identify the shares you dis-basis, are a nontaxable return of capital. new stock. The result is your basis for eachposed of, so you must use the stock you ac-
share of stock.The IRS partners with companies that quired first to figure the basis. The shares of
offer Schedule D software that can im- stock you gave your son had a basis of $500 (50 Example 1. You owned one share of com-port trades from many brokerage firms ×  $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares of
TIP mon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora-and accounting software to help you keep track stock you sold in 2008 as follows: tion distributed two new shares of commonof your adjusted basis in securities. To find out stock for each share held. You then had three50 shares (50 ×  $10) balance ofmore, go to http://www.irs.gov/efile. shares of common stock. Your basis in eachstock bought in 1995 ......... . $ 500
share is $15 ($45 ÷  3).80 shares (80 ×  $11) stock bought inIdentifying stock or bonds sold. If you can January 1996 .............. . 880
adequately identify the shares of stock or the Example 2. You owned two shares of com-Total basis of stock sold in 2008 $1,380
bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other mon stock. You had bought one for $30 and the
basis of the particular shares of stock or bonds. other for $45. The corporation distributed two
Shares in a mutual fund or REIT. The basis new shares of common stock for each shareAdequate identification. You will make an of shares in a mutual fund (or other regulated held. You had six shares after the distributionÐadequate identification if you show that certifi- investment company) or a real estate invest- three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷  3) andcates representing shares of stock from a lot that ment trust (REIT) is generally figured in the three with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷  3).you bought on a certain date or for a certain same way as the basis of other stock. New and old stock not identical. If theprice were delivered to your broker or other
Mutual fund load charges. Your cost basis new stock you received as a nontaxable divi-agent. in a mutual fund often includes a sales fee, also dend is not identical to the old stock on which it
Broker holds stock. If you have left the known as a load charge. But, in certain cases, was declared, the basis of the new stock is
stock certificates with your broker or other you cannot include the entire amount of a load calculated differently. Divide the adjusted basis
agent, you will make an adequate identification if charge in your basis if the charge gives you a of the old stock between the old and the new
you: reinvestment right. For more information, see stock in the ratio of the fair market value of each
Publication 564. lot of stock to the total fair market value of both• Tell your broker or other agent the particu- lots on the date of distribution of the new stock.Choosing average basis for mutual fundlar stock to be sold or transferred at the
shares. You can choose to use the averagetime of the sale or transfer, and Example. You bought a share of commonbasis of mutual fund shares if you acquired the• Receive a written confirmation of this from stock for $100. Later, the corporation distributedshares at various times and prices and left them a share of preferred stock for each share ofyour broker or other agent within a reason- on deposit in an account kept by a custodian or common stock held. At the date of distribution,able time. agent. The methods you can use to figure aver- your common stock had a fair market value ofage basis are explained in Publication 564. $150 and the preferred stock had a fair marketStock identified this way is the stock sold or Undistributed capital gains. If you had to value of $50. You figure the basis of the old andtransferred even if stock certificates from a dif- include in your income any undistributed capital new stock by dividing your $100 basis betweenferent lot are delivered to the broker or other gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase your them. The basis of your common stock is $75
agent. basis in the stock by the difference between the ($150/$200 ×  $100), and the basis of the new
amount you included and the amount of tax paid preferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 ×  $100).Single stock certificate. If you bought for you by the fund or REIT. See Undistributedstock in different lots at different times and you Stock bought at various times. Figure thecapital gains of mutual funds and REITs  underhold a single stock certificate for this stock, you basis of stock dividends received on stock youCapital Gain Distributions in chapter 1.will make an adequate identification if you: bought at various times and at different prices by
allocating to each lot of stock the share of the• Tell your broker or other agent the particu- Automatic investment service. If you partici- stock dividends due to it.lar stock to be sold or transferred when pate in an automatic investment service, your
you deliver the certificate to your broker or basis for each share of stock, including frac- Taxable stock dividends. If your stock divi-
other agent, and tional shares, bought by the bank or other agent dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis of
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 43

Page 44 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your new stock is its fair market value on the basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18 See Payments in lieu of dividends , later, for
date of distribution. The basis of your old stock information about deducting payments in lieu ofper share. The remaining basis of the old stock
does not change. dividends.is $21.78 per share.
Premiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at aStock splits. Figure the basis of stock splits in Investment property received in liquidation. premium, the premium is treated as part of yourthe same way as stock dividends if identical In general, if you receive investment property as basis in the bond. If you choose to amortize thestock is distributed on the stock held. a distribution in partial or complete liquidation of premium paid on a taxable bond, you must re-a corporation and if you recognize gain or loss duce the basis of the bond by the amortized partStock rights. A stock right is a right to acquire when you acquire the property, your basis in the of the premium each year over the life of thea corporation's stock. It may be exercised, it may property is its fair market value at the time of the bond.be sold if it has a market value, or it may expire. distribution. Although you cannot deduct the premium onStock rights are rarely taxable when you receive
a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de-them. See Distributions of Stock and Stock S corporation stock. You must increase your termine your adjusted basis in the bond. YouRights under Dividends and Other Corporate basis in stock of an S corporation by your pro must reduce the basis of the bond by the pre-Distributions in chapter 1. rata share of the following items. mium you amortized for the period you held theTaxable stock rights. If you receive stock bond.• All income items of the S corporation, in-rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights is See Bond Premium Amortization in chaptercluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa-their fair market value at the time of distribution. 3 for more information.rately stated and passed through to you asThe basis of the old stock does not change. a shareholder. Market discount on bonds. If you includeNontaxable stock rights. If you receive • The nonseparately stated income of the S market discount on a bond in income currently,nontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex- corporation. increase the basis of your bond by the amount ofpire, they have no basis. market discount you include in your income. SeeIf you exercise or sell the nontaxable stock • The amount of the deduction for depletion Market Discount Bonds  in chapter 1 for morerights and if, at the time of distribution, the stock (other than oil and gas depletion) that is information.rights had a fair market value of 15% or more of more than the basis of the property being
the fair market value of the old stock, you must depleted. Bonds purchased at par value. A bond pur-
divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be- chased at par value (face amount) has no pre-
tween the old stock and the stock rights. Use a You must decrease your basis in stock of an S mium or discount. When you sell or otherwise
ratio of the fair market value of each to the total corporation by your pro rata share of the follow- dispose of the bond, you figure the gain or loss
fair market value of both at the time of distribu- ing items. by comparing the bond proceeds to the
tion. purchase price of the bond.• Distributions by the S corporation thatIf the fair market value of the stock rights was were not included in your income.less than 15%, their basis is zero. However, you Example. You purchased a bond several
can choose to divide the basis of the old stock • All loss and deduction items of the S cor- years ago for its par value of $10,000. You sold
between the old stock and the stock rights. To poration that are separately stated and the bond this year for $10,100. You have a gain
make the choice, attach a statement to your passed through to you. of $100. However, if you had sold the bond for
return for the year in which you received the $9,900, you would have a loss of $100.• Any nonseparately stated loss of the Srights, stating that you choose to divide the basis corporation. Acquisition discount on short-term obliga-of the stock.
tions. If you include acquisition discount on a• Any expense of the S corporation that isBasis of new stock. If you exercise the short-term obligation in your income currently,not deductible in figuring its taxable in-stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its cost increase the basis of the obligation by thecome and not properly chargeable to aplus the basis of the stock rights exercised. amount of acquisition discount you include incapital account. your income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-
Example. You own 100 shares of ABC • The amount of your deduction for deple- gations in chapter 1 for more information.
Company stock, which cost you $22 per share. tion of oil and gas wells to the extent the Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-The ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxable deduction is not more than your share of ments. Increase the basis of a debt instrumentstock rights that would allow you to buy 10 more the adjusted basis of the wells. by the amount of OID that you include in yourshares at $26 per share. At the time the stock However, your basis in the stock cannot be income. See Original Issue Discount (OID)  inrights were distributed, the stock had a market reduced below zero. chapter 1.value of $30, not including the stock rights. Each
stock right had a market value of $3. The market Discounted tax-exempt obligations. OIDSpecialized small business investment com-value of the stock rights was less than 15% of on tax-exempt obligations is generally not tax-pany stock or partnership interest. If youthe market value of the stock, but you chose to able. However, when you dispose of abought this stock or interest as replacementdivide the basis of your stock between the stock tax-exempt obligation issued after September 3,property for publicly traded securities you sold atand the rights. You figure the basis of the rights 1982, that you acquired after March 1, 1984, youa gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock orand the basis of the old stock as follows: must accrue OID on the obligation to determineinterest by the amount of any postponed gain on
its adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added tothat sale. See Rollover of Gain From Publicly100 shares ×  $22 = $2,200, basis of old the basis of the obligation to determine your gainTraded Securities, later.stock or loss.
For information on determining OID on aQualified small business stock. If you100 shares ×  $30 = $3,000, market value of long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is-bought this stock as replacement property forold stock sued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985  orother qualified small business stock you sold at Debt Instruments Issued After 1984 , whichever10 rights ×  $3 = $30, market value of rights a gain, you must reduce the basis of this re- applies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OIDplacement stock by the amount of any post- on Long-Term Debt Instruments.($3,000 ÷  $3,030) ×  $2,200 = $2,178.22, poned gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity ofnew basis of old stock Qualified Small Business Stock, later. 1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules for
acquisition discount on short-term obligations.($30 ÷  $3,030) ×  $2,200 = $21.78, basis of Short sales. If you cannot deduct paymentsrights See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  inyou make to a lender in lieu of dividends on chapter 1.stock used in a short sale, the amount you pay toIf you sell the rights, the basis for figuring
the lender is a capital expense, and you mustgain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷  10) per right. If Stripped tax-exempt obligation. If you ac-
add it to the basis of the stock used to close theyou exercise the rights, the basis of the stock quired a stripped tax-exempt bond or coupon
short sale.you acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus the after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
it to determine its adjusted basis when you dis- even if neither you nor the buyer is personally 4. There must be a trade of like property. The
pose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds or trade of real estate for real estate, or per-liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or
coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part of sonal property for similar personal prop-trade property that is subject to a nonrecourse
this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID on erty, is a trade of like property. The tradeloan, the amount you realize generally includes
these obligations in the manner described in of an apartment house for a store building,the full amount of the note assumed by the buyer
chapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons. or a panel truck for a pickup truck, is aeven if the amount of the note is more than the
Increase your basis in the stripped trade of like property. The trade of a piecefair market value of the property.
tax-exempt bond or coupon by the taxable and of machinery for a store building is not a
nontaxable accrued OID. Also increase your ba- trade of like property. Real property lo-Example. You sell stock that you had
sis by the interest that accrued (but was not cated in the United States and real prop-pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.
paid, and was not previously reflected in your erty located outside the United States areYour basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer
basis) before the date you sold the bond or not like property. Also, personal propertypays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in
coupon. In addition, for bonds acquired after used predominantly within the Unitedcash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000
June 10, 1987, add to your basis any accrued States and personal property used+ $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 ±
market discount not previously reflected in ba- predominantly outside the United States$6,000).
sis. are not like property.Payment of cash. If you trade property and
5. The property to be received must be identi-cash for other property, the amount you realize
fied in writing within 45 days after the dateis the fair market value of the property you re-
you transfer the property given up in theceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub-How To Figure trade. If you received the replacementtracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basis
property before the end of the 45-day pe-of the property you trade in from the amount youGain or Loss riod, you automatically are treated as hav-realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a
ing met the 45-day written noticegain. If the result is a negative number, it is aYou figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of requirement.loss.property by comparing the amount you realize
6. The property to be received must be re-with the adjusted basis of the property.
No gain or loss. You may have to use a basis ceived by the earlier of:
Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale or for figuring gain that is different from the basis
trade is more than the adjusted basis of the a. The 180th day after the date on whichused for figuring loss. In this case, you may have
property you transfer, the difference is a gain. you transfer the property given up in theneither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in
trade, orthe discussion on the basis of property you re-Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property you ceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost , b. The due date, including extensions, fortransfer is more than the amount you realize, the earlier. your tax return for the year in which thedifference is a loss.
transfer of the property given up occurs.
Amount realized. The amount you realize
from a sale or trade of property is everything you If you trade property with a related party in a
receive for the property. This includes the Nontaxable Trades like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.
money you receive plus the fair market value of See Related Party Transactions , later in this
This section discusses trades that generally doany property or services you receive. chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544
If you finance the buyer's purchase of your not result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss. for more information on exchanges of business
property and the debt instrument does not pro- For more information on nontaxable trades, see property and special rules for exchanges using
vide for adequate stated interest, the unstated chapter 1 of Publication 544. qualified intermediaries or involving multiple
interest that you must report as ordinary income properties.
will reduce the amount realized from the sale. Like-Kind Exchanges Partly nontaxable exchange. If you receiveFor more information, see Publication 537.
money or unlike property in addition to the likeIf a buyer of property issues a debt instru- If you trade business or investment property for property, and the preceding six conditions arement to the seller of the property, the amount other business or investment property of a like met, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You arerealized is determined by reference to the issue kind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deduct taxed on any gain you realize, but only up to theprice of the debt instrument, which may or may any loss until you sell or dispose of the property amount of the money and the fair market valuenot be the fair market value of the debt instru- you receive. To be nontaxable, a trade must of the unlike property you receive. You cannotment. See Regulations section 1.1001-1(g). meet all six of the following conditions. deduct a loss.However, if the debt instrument was previously
1. The property must be business or invest-issued by a third party (one not part of the sale Like property and unlike property trans-
ment property. You must hold both thetransaction), the fair market value of the debt ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-
property you trade and the property youinstrument is used to determine the amount real- tion to the like property, you must recognize gain
receive for productive use in your trade orized. or loss on the unlike property you give up. The
business or for investment. Neither prop- gain or loss is the difference between the ad-Fair market value. Fair market value is the erty may be property used for personal justed basis of the unlike property and its fairprice at which property would change hands purposes, such as your home or family market value.between a buyer and a seller, neither being car.forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable Like property and money transferred. If2. The property must not be held primarily forknowledge of all the relevant facts. conditions (1) ± (6) are met, you have a nontax-sale. The property you trade and the prop- able trade even if you pay money in addition toerty you receive must not be property youExample. You trade A Company stock with the like property.sell to customers, such as merchandise.an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company
Basis of property received. You figure yourstock with a fair market value of $10,000, which 3. The property must not be stocks, bonds, basis in property received in a nontaxable oris your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 notes, choses in action, certificates of trust partly nontaxable trade as explained under Ba-($10,000 ± $7,000). If you also receive a note or beneficial interest, or other securities or sis Other Than Cost, earlier.for $6,000 that has an issue price of $6,000, evidences of indebtedness or interest, in-your gain is $9,000 ($10,000 + $6,000 ± cluding partnership interests. However, Special rules for mutual ditch, reservoir, or$7,000). see Special rules for mutual ditch, reser- irrigation company stock. For purposes of
voir, or irrigation company stock, later.Debt paid off. A debt against the property, item 3 above, stock does not include shares in a
Also, you can have a nontaxable trade ofor against you, that is paid off as a part of the mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation company if
corporate stocks under a different rule, astransaction or that is assumed by the buyer must all of the following conditions are met at the time
discussed later under Corporate Stocks.be included in the amount realized. This is true of the trade.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 45

Page 46 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation same corporation without having a recognized according to the terms of the bond issue, you
company is an organization described in gain or loss. This is true for a trade between two must recognize gain or loss up to the difference
section 501(c)(12)(A) of the Internal Reve- stockholders as well as a trade between a stock- between the fair market value of the stock re-
nue Code (determined without regard to holder and the corporation. ceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex-
the percentage of its income that is col- changed. In some instances, however, such asIf you receive cash for fractional shares, see
lected from its members for the purpose of trades that are part of mergers or other corpo-Fractional shares  under Distributions of stock
meeting losses and expenses). rate reorganizations, you will have no recog-and stock rights in chapter 1.
nized gain or loss if certain requirements are• The shares in the company have been Money or other property received. If in an met. For more information about the tax conse-recognized by the highest court of the otherwise nontaxable trade you receive money quences of converting securities of one corpora-state in which the company was organized or other property in addition to stock, then your tion into common stock of another corporation,or by applicable state statute as constitut- gain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up to under circumstances such as those just de-ing or representing real property or an in- the amount of the money or other property. Any scribed, consult the respective corporations andterest in real property. loss is not recognized. the terms of the bond issue. This information isIf you received cash for fractional shares,• The trade occurred after May 22, 2008. also available on the prospectus of the bondsee Fractional shares  under Distributions of issue.Stock and Stock Rights in chapter 1.How to report. You must report the trade of
Nonqualified preferred stock. Nonquali- Property for stock of a controlled corpora-like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-
fied preferred stock is generally treated as prop- tion. If you transfer property to a corporationnized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it on
erty other than stock. Generally, this applies to solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,Schedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797,
preferred stock with one or more of the followingSales of Business Property, whichever applies. and immediately after the trade you are in con-
features.For information on using Form 4797, see trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not
chapter 4 of Publication 544. recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both• The holder has the right to require the to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-issuer or a related person to redeem or
erty to a corporation. It does not apply if theCorporate Stocks purchase the stock.
corporation is an investment company.
• The issuer or a related person is requiredThe following trades of corporate stocks gener- If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro-to redeem or purchase the stock.ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductible ceeding and you transfer property to a controlled
loss. corporation under a plan, other than a reorgani-• The issuer or a related person has the
zation, you must recognize gain to the extent theright to redeem the stock, and on the issueCorporate reorganizations. In some in- stock you receive in the exchange is used to paydate, it is more likely than not that the rightstances, a company will give you common stock off your debts.will be exercised.for preferred stock, preferred stock for common For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-• The dividend rate on the stock varies withstock, or stock in one corporation for stock in ration, you or your group of transferors mustreference to interest rates, commodityanother corporation. If this is a result of a own, immediately after the exchange, at leastprices, or similar indices.merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlled 80% of the total combined voting power of allcorporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor- For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre- classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani- ferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter- of the outstanding shares of each class of non-zation, you do not recognize gain or loss. nal Revenue Code. voting stock of the corporation.
If this provision applies to you, you may haveExample 1. On April 18, 2008, KP1 Corpo- Convertible stocks and bonds. You gener- to attach to your return a complete statement ofration was acquired by KP2 Corporation. You ally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details,held 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis of convert bonds into stock or preferred stock into see Regulations section 1.351-3.$3,500. As a result of the acquisition, you re- common stock of the same corporation accord-ceived 70 shares of KP2 stock in exchange for ing to a conversion privilege in the terms of the Money or other property received. If, in anyour KP1 stock. You do not recognize gain or bond or the preferred stock certificate. otherwise nontaxable trade of property for cor-loss on the transaction. Your basis in the 70 porate stock, you also receive money or prop-shares of the new stock is still $3,500. Example. In November, you bought for $1 a erty other than stock, you may have a taxable
right issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, on gain. However, you are taxed only up to theExample 2. On July 25, 2008, RGB Corpo- payment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issued amount of money plus the fair market value ofration divests itself of SFH Corporation. You by that corporation. the other property you receive. The rules forhold 75 shares of RGB stock with a basis of On December 2, you subscribed to the bond, figuring taxable gain in this situation generally$5,400. You receive 25 shares of SFH stock as which was issued on December 9. The bond follow those for a partly nontaxable exchangea result of the spin-off. You do not recognize any contained a clause stating that you would re- discussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. Ifgain or loss on the transaction. You receive ceive one share of XYZ Corporation common the property you give up includes depreciableinformation from RGB Corporation that your ba- stock on surrender of one bond and the payment property, the taxable gain may have to be re-sis in SFH stock is equal to 10.9624% of your of $50. ported as ordinary income because of deprecia-basis in RGB stock ($5,400). Thus, your basis in
Later, you presented the bond and $50 and tion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No lossSFH stock is $592.00. Your basis in RGB stock
received one share of XYZ Corporation common is recognized.(after the spin-off) is $4,808 ($5,400 ± $592).
stock. You did not have a recognized gain or Nonqualified preferred stock (described ear-
loss. This is true whether the fair market value ofNote. In the case of a spin-off, the divesting lier under Stock for stock of the same corpora-
the stock was more or less than $150 on thecorporation should send you information that tion) received is generally treated as property
date of the conversion.includes details on how to allocate basis be- other than stock.
The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 +tween the old and new stock. Keep this informa- Basis of stock or other property received.$99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Yourtion until the period of limitations expires for the The basis of the stock you receive is generallyholding period for the part based on your owner-year in which you dispose of the stock in a the adjusted basis of the property you transfer.ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem-taxable disposition. Usually, this is 3 years from Increase this amount by any amount that wasber 2. Your holding period for the part based onthe date the return was due or filed, or 2 years treated as a dividend, plus any gain recognizedyour cash investment ($50 basis) begins on thefrom the date the tax was paid, whichever is on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cashday after you acquired the share of stock.later. you received and the fair market value of any
other property you received.Stock for stock of the same corporation. Bonds for stock of another corporation.
The basis of any other property you receiveYou can exchange common stock for common Generally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo-
is its fair market value on the date of the trade.stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the ration into common stock of another corporation,
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non-Insurance Policies
taxable Trades.and Annuities Transfers Between This rule also applies to trades of property
between related parties, defined next underYou will not have a recognized gain or loss if the Spouses
Losses on Sales or Trades of Property . How-insured or annuitant is the same under both
contracts and you trade: ever, if either you or the related party disposes ofGenerally, no gain or loss is recognized on a
the like property within 2 years after the trade,transfer of property from an individual to (or in• A life insurance contract for another life trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident to you both must report any gain or loss not recog-insurance contract or for an endowment or a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition nized on the original trade on your return for theannuity contract, rule does not apply in the following situations. year in which the later disposition occurs.
• An endowment contract for an annuity This rule generally does not apply to:• The recipient spouse or former spouse iscontract or for another endowment con- a nonresident alien. • Dispositions due to the death of either re-tract that provides for regular payments
lated party,beginning at a date not later than the be- • Property is transferred in trust. Gain must
ginning date under the old contract, or be recognized to the extent the amount of • Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 ofthe liabilities assumed by the trust, plus• An annuity contract for another annuity Publication 544), orany liabilities on the property, exceed thecontract. • Trades and later dispositions whose mainadjusted basis of the property.
purpose is not the avoidance of federal• An installment obligation is transferred inYou also may not have to recognize gain or loss income tax.trust. For information on the disposition offrom an exchange of a portion of an annuity an installment obligation, see Publicationcontract for another annuity contract. See Reve- If a property holder's risk of loss on the prop-537, Installment Sales.nue Ruling 2003-76 and Notice 2003-51 in Inter- erty is substantially diminished during any pe-
nal Revenue Bulletin 2003-33. Revenue Ruling • Certain stock redemptions, which are tax- riod, that period is not counted in determining
2003-76 is available at www.irs.gov/irb/ able to a spouse under the tax law, a di- whether the property was disposed of within 2
2003-33_IRB/ar11.html . Notice 2003-51 is vorce or separation instrument, or a valid years. The property holder's risk of loss is sub-
available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-33_IRB/ar14. written agreement, discussed in Regula- stantially diminished by:
html. tions section 1.1041-2.
• The holding of a put on the property,
Exchanges of contracts not included in this Any transfer of property to a spouse or former • The holding by another person of a right tolist, such as an annuity contract for an endow- spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is acquire the property, orment contract, or an annuity or endowment con- treated by the recipient as a gift and is nottract for a life insurance contract, are taxable. • A short sale or any other transaction.considered a sale or exchange. The recipient's
basis in the property will be the same as the
adjusted basis of the giver immediately before Losses on Sales orDemutualization of Life the transfer. This carryover basis rule applies Trades of PropertyInsurance Companies whether the adjusted basis of the transferred
property is less than, equal to, or greater than You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade ofA life insurance company may change from a
either its fair market value at the time of transfermutual company to a stock company. This is property, other than a distribution in complete
or any consideration paid by the recipient. Thiscommonly called demutualization. If you were a liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is
rule applies for purposes of determining loss aspolicyholder or annuitant of the mutual com- directly or indirectly between you and the follow-
well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transferpany, you may have received either stock in the ing related parties.
in trust increases the basis.stock company or cash in exchange for your • Members of your family. This includes onlyequity interest in the mutual company. A transfer of property is incident to a divorce your brothers and sisters, half-brothersif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the dateIf the demutualization transaction qualifies and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer isas a tax-free reorganization under section ents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-related to the ending of the marriage. For more368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gain scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).information, see Property Settlements in Publi-or loss is recognized on the exchange. Your
cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. • A partnership in which you directly or indi-holding period for the new stock includes the
period you held an equity interest in the mutual rectly own more than 50% of the capital
company as a policyholder or annuitant. interest or the profits interest.
If the demutualization transaction does not • A corporation in which you directly or indi-
qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec- Related Party rectly own more than 50% in value of thetion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, you outstanding stock (see Constructive own-Transactionsmust recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold- ership of stock, later).ing period for the stock does not include the
Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- • A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-period you held an equity interest in the mutual
erty between related parties. ganization that is directly or indirectly con-company.
trolled, in any manner or by any method,If you received cash in exchange for your
by you or by a member of your family,Gain on Sale or Tradeequity interest, you must recognize a capital
whether or not this control is legally en-gain. If you held an equity interest for more than of Depreciable Property
forceable.1 year, your gain is long term.
Your gain from the sale or trade of property to a
related party may be ordinary income, ratherU.S. Treasury In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of propertythan capital gain, if the property can be depreci- is not deductible if the transaction is directly orNotes or Bonds ated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 in indirectly between the following related parties.Publication 544 for more information.You can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasury • A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciaryobligations for other issues, designated by the and beneficiary, of any trust.Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or loss Like-Kind Exchangesrecognized on the trade. • Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the
fiduciary and beneficiary of two differentSee the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S. Generally, if you trade business or investment
trusts, if the same person is the grantor ofTreasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for information property for other business or investment prop-
both trusts.about income from these investments. erty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 47

Page 48 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A trust fiduciary and a corporation of which under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,
more than 50% in value of the outstanding that individual for again applying either rule 2 or you must also identify any unrecaptured section
stock is directly or indirectly owned by or rule 3 to make another person the constructive 1250 gain.
for the trust, or by or for the grantor of the owner of the stock. The correct classification and identification
trust. helps you figure the limit on capital losses andProperty received from a related party. If the correct tax on capital gains. For information• A corporation and a partnership if the you sell or trade at a gain property that you about determining whether your capital gain orsame persons own more than 50% in acquired from a related party, you recognize the loss is short term or long term, see Holdingvalue of the outstanding stock of the cor- gain only to the extent that it is more than the Period, later. For information about 28% rateporation and more than 50% of the capital loss previously disallowed to the related party. gain or loss and unrecaptured section 1250interest, or the profits interest, in the part- This rule applies only if you are the original gain, see Capital Gain Tax Rates under Report-nership. transferee and you acquired the property by ing Capital Gains and Losses, later.purchase or exchange. This rule does not apply• Two S corporations if the same persons
if the related party's loss was disallowed be-own more than 50% in value of the out- Capital or Ordinarycause of the wash sale rules, described laterstanding stock of each corporation.
under Wash Sales. Gain or Loss• Two corporations, one of which is an S If you sell or trade at a loss property that youcorporation, if the same persons own If you have a taxable gain or a deductible lossacquired from a related party, you cannot recog-more than 50% in value of the outstanding from a transaction, it may be either a capital gainnize the loss that was not allowed to the relatedstock of each corporation. or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending onparty.
the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of• An executor and a beneficiary of an estate
a capital asset (defined next) results in a capitalExample 1. Your brother sells you stock for(except in the case of a sale or trade to
gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brothersatisfy a pecuniary bequest).
generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell• Two corporations that are members of the the same stock to an unrelated party for pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss onsame controlled group (under certain con- $10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report- a sale or trade of property used in a trade orditions, however, these losses are not dis- able gain is $500 (the $2,900 gain minus the business may be treated as either capital orallowed but must be deferred). $2,400 loss not allowed to your brother). ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In
• Two partnerships if the same persons some situations, part of your gain or loss may be
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold theown, directly or indirectly, more than 50% a capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi-
stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-of the capital interests or the profit inter- nary gain or loss.
nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minusests in both partnerships.
$6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that was
not allowed to your brother. Capital Assets andMultiple property sales or trades. If you sell Noncapital Assetsor trade to a related party a number of blocks of
stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, you For the most part, everything you own and usemust figure the gain or loss separately for each for personal purposes, pleasure, or investmentCapital Gainsblock of stock or piece of property. The gain on is a capital asset. Some examples are:each item may be taxable. However, you cannot and Losses • Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannot
count,reduce gains from the sales of any of these Terms you may need to knowitems by losses on the sales of any of the other • A house owned and used by you and your(see Glossary):items. family,
Indirect transactions. You cannot deduct • Household furnishings,Call
your loss on the sale of stock through your • A car used for pleasure or commuting,Commodity futurebroker if, under a prearranged plan, a related
party buys the same stock you had owned. This • Coin or stamp collections,Conversion transaction
does not apply to a trade between related par- • Gems and jewelry, andForward contractties through an exchange that is purely coinci-
dental and is not prearranged. • Gold, silver, or any other metal.Limited partner
Listed optionConstructive ownership of stock. In deter- Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-
mining whether a person directly or indirectly cept the following noncapital assets. Nonequity option
owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-
Options dealertion, the following rules apply. 1. Property held mainly for sale to customers
or property that will physically become aPutRule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by part of the merchandise that is for sale toor for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust Regulated futures contract customers. For an exception see Capitalis considered owned proportionately by or for its asset treatment for self-created musicalSection 1256 contractshareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. works, later.StraddleRule 2. An individual is considered to own 2. Depreciable property used in your trade orthe stock that is directly or indirectly owned by or Wash sale business, even if fully depreciated.for his or her family. Family includes only broth-
ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, 3. Real property used in your trade or busi-
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. This section discusses the tax treatment of ness.
gains and losses from different types of invest-Rule 3. An individual owning, other than by 4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artisticment transactions.applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is composition, a letter or memorandum, or
considered to own the stock that is directly or similar property that is:Character of gain or loss. You need to clas-indirectly owned by or for his or her partner. sify your gains and losses as either ordinary or a. Created by your personal efforts,Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock capital gains or losses. You then need to classify
b. Prepared or produced for you (in theconstructively owned by a person under rule 1 is your capital gains and losses as either short
case of a letter, memorandum, or simi-treated as actually owned by that person. But term or long term. If you have long-term gains
stock constructively owned by an individual and losses, you must identify your 28% rate lar property), or
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c. Acquired under circumstances (for ex- You must make a separate election for each Any gain from market discount is usually
musical composition (or copyright in a musical taxable on disposition or redemption ofample, by gift) entitling you to the basis
work) sold or exchanged during the tax year. tax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bondsof the person who created the property
You must make the election on or before the due before May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis-or for whom it was prepared or pro-
date (including extensions) of the income tax count is capital gain. If you bought the bondsduced.
return for the tax year of the sale or exchange. after April 30, 1993, the gain from market dis-For an exception to this rule, see Capital You must make the election on Schedule D count is ordinary income.asset treatment for self-created musical (Form 1040) by treating the sale or exchange as You figure market discount by subtractingworks, later. the sale or exchange of a capital asset, accord- the price you paid for the bond from the sum of
ing to the Schedule D and its instructions. the original issue price of the bond and the5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in
You can revoke the election if you have IRS amount of accumulated OID from the date ofthe ordinary course of a trade or business
approval. To get IRS approval, you must submit issue that represented interest to any earlierfor services rendered or from the sale of
a request for a letter ruling under the appropriate holders. For more information, see Market Dis-property described in (1).
IRS revenue procedure. See, for example, Rev. count Bonds in chapter 1.6. U.S. Government publications that you re- Proc. 2008-1, 2008-1 I.R.B. 1, available at www. A loss on the sale or other disposition of aceived from the government free or for less irs.gov/irb/2008-01_IRB/ar06.html. Alternatively tax-exempt state or local government bond isthan the normal sales price, or that you you are granted an automatic 6-month exten- deductible as a capital loss.acquired under circumstances entitling you sion from the due date of your income tax return Redeemed before maturity. If a state orto the basis of someone who received the (excluding extensions) to revoke the election, local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980,publications free or for less than the nor- provided you timely file your income tax return, is redeemed before it matures, the OID is notmal sales price. and within this 6-month extension period, you taxable to you.file Form 1040X, Amended Individual Income7. Certain commodities derivative financial in- If a state or local bond issued after June 8,Tax Return, that treats the sale or exchange asstruments held by commodities derivatives 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part ofthe sale or exchange of property that is not adealers. For more information, see section the OID that is earned while you hold the bond iscapital asset.1221 of the Internal Revenue Code. not taxable to you. However, you must report the
unearned part of the OID as a capital gain.8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-
action is clearly identified as a hedging Discounted Debt Instruments Example. On July 1, 1997, the date of is-transaction before the close of the day on
sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bondwhich it was acquired, originated, or en- Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,
for $800. The face amount of the bond wastered into. For more information, see the or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument
$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the timeoriginally issued at a discount or bought at adefinition of hedging transaction earlier,
the bond was issued, the issuer had no intentiondiscount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-and the discussion of hedging transactions
of redeeming it before it matured. The bond wasplained in the following discussions.under Commodity Futures, later.
callable at its face amount beginning 10 years
Short-term government obligations. Treat9. Supplies of a type you regularly use or after the issue date.
gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-consume in the ordinary course of your The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of
ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-trade or business. 11 years (July 1, 2008) for its face amount of
gations) as ordinary income up to your ratable $1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The
share of the acquisition discount. This treatment OID earned during the time you held the bond,Investment property. Investment property is applies to obligations that have a fixed maturity $73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annuala capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale or date not more than 1 year from the date of issue. interest also is not taxable. However, you musttrade generally is a capital gain or loss. Acquisition discount is the stated redemption report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a
price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc. capital gain.
tion.These are capital assets except when they are
Long-term debt instruments issued afterHowever, do not treat these gains as incomeheld for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from
1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before Julyto the extent you previously included the dis-their sale or trade generally is a capital gain or
2, 1982, if a government instrument). If youcount in income. See Discount on Short-Termloss.
sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of theseObligations in chapter 1 for more information.Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of debt instruments, the part of your gain that is notShort-term nongovernment obligations.these, including stock received as a dividend, more than your ratable share of the OID at theTreat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-are capital assets except when they are held for time of sale or redemption is ordinary income.gations as ordinary income up to your ratablesale by a securities dealer. However, see The rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however,share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga-Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock there was an intention to call the debt instrumenttions that have a fixed maturity date of not moreand Losses on Small Business Investment before maturity, all of your gain that is not morethan 1 year from the date of issue.Company Stock, later. than the entire OID is treated as ordinary incomeHowever, to the extent you previously in- at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxablecluded the discount in income, you do not havePersonal use property. Property held for per- gain also applies to corporate instruments is-to include it in income again. See Discount onsonal use only, rather than for investment, is a sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com-Short-Term Obligations  in chapter 1 for morecapital asset, and you must report a gain from its mitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, andinformation.sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot at all times thereafter.
deduct a loss from selling personal use property. Tax-exempt state and local government
bonds. If these bonds were originally issued Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov-
Capital asset treatment for self-created mu- at a discount before September 4, 1982, or you ernment bond for $700 at original issue on April
sical works. You can elect to treat musical acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your 1, 1982, and sold it for $900 on April 21, 2008,
compositions and copyrights in musical works part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure for a $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000.
as capital assets when you sell or exchange your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these At the time of original issue, there was no inten-
them if: bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part tion to call the bond before maturity. You have
of the OID. held the bond for 312 full months. Do not count• Your personal efforts created the property, If the bonds were issued after September 3, the additional days that are less than a fullor 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in- month. The number of complete months from
• You acquired the property under circum- crease the adjusted basis by your part of the date of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30
stances (for example, by gift) entitling you OID to figure gain or loss. For more information years). The fraction 312/360 multiplied by the
to the basis of the person who created the on the basis of these bonds, see Discounted discount of $312 ($1,000 − $700) is equal to
property or for whom it was prepared or tax-exempt obligations  under Stocks and $260. This is your ratable share of OID for the
produced. Bonds, earlier in this chapter. period you owned the bond. You must treat any
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 49

Page 50 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
part of the gain up to $260 as ordinary income. • Issued before July 19, 1984, and Deposit in Insolvent or 
As a result, the entire $200 gain is treated as Bankrupt Financial Institution• Purchased by you before May 1, 1993.ordinary income.
If you lose money you have on deposit in a
Long-term debt instruments issued after qualified financial institution that becomes insol-In that case, any gain is treated as interest
May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov- vent or bankrupt, you may be able to deductincome up to the amount of your deferred inter-
ernment instrument). If you hold one of these est deduction for the year you dispose of the your loss in one of three ways.
debt instruments, you must include a part of the bond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (The • Ordinary loss,OID in your gross income each year that you limit on the interest deduction for market dis-
own the instrument. Your basis in that debt in- • Casualty loss, orcount bonds is discussed in chapter 3 under
strument is increased by the amount of OID that When To Deduct Investment Interest.) • Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capitalyou have included in your gross income. See
Report the sale or trade of a market discount loss).Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1.
bond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or lineIf you sell or trade the debt instrument before 8. If the sale or trade results in a gain and you didmaturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if Ordinary loss or casualty loss. If you cannot choose to include market discount in incomeat the time the instrument was originally issued reasonably estimate your loss, you can choosecurrently, enter ªAccrued Market Discountº onthere was an intention to call it before its matur- to treat the estimated loss as either an ordinarythe next line in column (a) and the amount of theity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Eitheraccrued market discount as a loss in column (f).extent of the entire OID reduced by any amounts way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-Also report the amount of accrued market dis-of OID previously includible in your income. In tion.count in column (f) as interest income on Sched-this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain. If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as aule B (Form 1040), line 1, and identify it asAn intention to call a debt instrument before miscellaneous itemized deduction on ScheduleªAccrued Market Discount.ºmaturity means there is a written or oral agree- A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum amountment or understanding not provided for in the Retirement of debt instrument. Any amount you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you aredebt instrument between the issuer and original that you receive on the retirement of a debt married filing separately) reduced by any ex-holder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru- instrument is treated in the same way as if you pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss isment before maturity. In the case of debt instru- had sold or traded that instrument. subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomements that are part of an issue, the agreement or Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligation limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinaryunderstanding must be between the issuer and of an individual that was issued with OID after loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.the original holders of a substantial amount of March 1, 1984, you generally must include the If you claim a casualty loss, attach Formthe debt instruments in the issue. OID in your income currently, and your gain or 4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.
loss on its sale or retirement is generally capital Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your totalExample 1. On February 3, 2006, you gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap- casualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%bought at original issue for $7,600, Jones Cor- plies if the obligation is a loan between individu- of your adjusted gross income.poration's 10-year, 5% bond which has a stated als and all of the following requirements are met.redemption price at maturity of $10,000. On You cannot choose either of these methods
February 4, 2008, you sold the bond for $9,040. • The lender is not in the business of lend- if:
Assume you have included $334 of the OID in ing money. • You own at least 1% of the financial insti-your gross income (including the amount ac- • The amount of the loan, plus the amount tution,crued for 2008) and increased your basis in the of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000bond by that amount. Your basis is now $7,934. • You are an officer of the institution, oror less.If at the time of the original issue there was no • You are related to such an owner or of-intention to call the bond before maturity, your • Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin- ficer. You are related if you and the ownergain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized minus cipal purposes of the loan. or officer are ªrelated parties,º as defined$7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain.
earlier under Related Party Transactions,If the exception applies, or the obligation was
or if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, orExample 2. If, in Example 1, at the time of issued before March 2, 1984, you do not include
niece of the owner or officer.original issue there was an intention to call the the OID in your income currently. When you sell
bond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinary or redeem the obligation, the part of your gain
If the actual loss that is finally determined isincome. You figure this as follows: that is not more than your accrued share of the
more than the amount you deducted as an esti-OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest of
mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as a1) Entire OID ($10,000 stated the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the
redemption price at maturity minus bad debt. If the actual loss is less than thesale or redemption is capital loss.
$7,600 issue price) ......... . $2,400 amount deducted as an estimated loss, you
2) Minus: Amount previously included must include in income (in the final determina-
in income ............... . 334 tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov-Bearer Obligations3) Maximum amount of ordinary eries  in Publication 525, Taxable andincome ................. . $2,066 You cannot deduct any loss on an obligation Nontaxable Income.
required to be in registered form that is insteadBecause the amount in (3) is more than your held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on the Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choosegain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in- sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi- to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty losscome. nary income. However, if the issuer was subject or an ordinary loss, you wait until the year theto a tax when the obligation was issued, thenMarket discount bonds. If the debt instru- amount of the actual loss is determined andyou can deduct any loss, and any gain mayment has market discount and you chose to deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.qualify for capital gain treatment.include the discount in income as it accrued, Report it as a short-term capital loss on Sched-
increase your basis in the debt instrument by the Obligations required to be in registered ule D (Form 1040), as explained under Nonbusi-
accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on form. Any obligation must be in registered ness Bad Debts, later.
its disposition. If you did not choose to include form unless:
the discount in income as it accrued, you must • It is issued by a natural person,report gain as ordinary interest income up to the Sale of Annuity
instrument's accrued market discount. See Mar- • It is not of a type offered to the public,
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuityket Discount Bonds in chapter 1. The rest of the • It has a maturity at the date of issue of notgain is capital gain. contract before its maturity date that is based onmore than 1 year, or interest accumulated on the contract is ordinaryHowever, a different rule applies if you dis-
pose of a market discount bond that was: • It was issued before 1983. income.
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The rates discussed above are published by Hedging transaction.  A futures contract thatConversion Transactions
the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, you is a hedging transaction generally produces or-
Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversion can contact the IRS to get these rates. See dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg-
transaction is treated as ordinary income. This chapter 5 for information on contacting the IRS. ing transaction if you enter into the contract in
applies to gain on the disposition or other termi- the ordinary course of your business primarily to
nation of any position you held as part of a manage the risk of interest rate or price changesNet investment. To determine your net in-conversion transaction that you entered into af- or currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinaryvestment in a conversion transaction, includeter April 30, 1993. property, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or-the fair market value of any position at the time it
dinary property or obligations are those that can-becomes part of the transaction. This meansA conversion transaction is any transaction
not produce capital gain or loss under anythat your net investment generally will be thethat meets both of these tests.
circumstances.) For example, the offset or exer-total amount you invested, less any amount you
1. Substantially all of your expected return cise of a futures contract that protects againstreceived for entering into the position (for exam-
from the transaction is due to the time price changes in your business inventory resultsple, a premium you received for writing a call).
value of your net investment. In other in an ordinary gain or loss.
words, the return on your investment is, in Position with built-in loss. A special rule ap- For more information about hedging transac-substance, like interest on a loan. plies when a position with a built-in loss be- tions, see Regulations section 1.1221-2. Also,
comes part of a conversion transaction. A see Hedging Transactions under Section 12562. The transaction is one of the following.
built-in loss is any loss that you would have Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.
a. A straddle as defined under Straddles, realized if you had disposed of or otherwise If you have numerous transactions inlater, but including any set of offsetting terminated the position at its fair market value at the commodity futures market duringpositions on stock established before the time it became part of the conversion trans- the year, the burden of proof is on you
RECORDSOctober 22, 2004. action. to show which transactions are hedging transac-When applying the conversion transactionb. Any transaction in which you acquire tions. Clearly identify any hedging transactionsrules to a position with a built-in loss, use theproperty (whether or not actively traded) on your books and records before the end of theposition's fair market value at the time it becameat substantially the same time that you day you entered into the transaction. It may bepart of the transaction. But, when you dispose ofcontract to sell the same property, or helpful to have separate brokerage accounts foror otherwise terminate the position in a transac-substantially identical property, at a your hedging and nonhedging transactions. Fortion in which you recognize gain or loss, youprice set in the contract. specific requirements concerning identificationmust recognize the built-in loss. The conversion of hedging transactions and the underlying item,c. Any other transaction that is marketed transaction rules do not affect whether the items, or aggregate risk that is being hedged,or sold as producing capital gains from built-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capital see Regulations section 1.1221-2(f).a transaction described in (1). loss.
Netting rule for certain conversion transac- Gains From Certain ConstructiveAmount treated as ordinary income. The tions. Before determining the amount of gain
Ownership Transactionsamount of gain treated as ordinary income is the treated as ordinary income, you can net certain
smaller of: gains and losses from positions of the same If you have a gain from a constructive ownershipconversion transaction. To do this, you have to• The gain recognized on the disposition or transaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in-dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe-other termination of the position, or volving a financial asset (discussed later) andriod that is within a single tax year. You cannot the gain normally would be treated as long-term• The ªapplicable imputed income amount.º net the built-in loss against the gain. capital gain, all or part of the gain may be treated
instead as ordinary income. In addition, if anyYou can net gains and losses only if
Applicable imputed income amount. Figure gain is treated as ordinary income, your tax isyou identify the conversion transaction
this amount as follows. increased by an interest charge.as an identified netting transaction on
RECORDS
your books and records. Each position of the1. Figure the amount of interest that would conversion transaction must be identified before Constructive ownership transactions. Thehave accrued on your net investment in the end of the day on which the position be- following are constructive ownership transac-the conversion transaction for the period comes part of the conversion transaction. For tions.ending on the earlier of: conversion transactions entered into before
• A notional principal contract in which youFebruary 20, 1996, this requirement is met if thea. The date when you dispose of the posi- have the right to receive all or substantiallyidentification was made by that date.tion, or all of the investment yield on a financial
asset and you are obligated to reimburseb. The date when the transaction stops Options dealers and commodities traders. all or substantially all of any decline inbeing a conversion transaction. These rules do not apply to options dealers and value of the financial asset.commodities traders.To figure this amount, use an interest rate
• A forward or futures contract to acquire aequal to 120% of the ªapplicable rate,º de-
financial asset.fined later. How to report. Use Form 6781, Gains and
Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and Strad- • The holding of a call option and writing of2. Subtract from (1) the amount treated as dles, to report conversion transactions. See the a put option on a financial asset at sub-ordinary income from any earlier disposi- instructions for lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781. stantially the same strike price and matur-tion or other termination of a position held
ity date.as part of the same conversion transac-
tion. Commodity Futures This provision does not apply if all the posi-
tions are marked to market. Marked to marketApplicable rate. If the term of the conver- A commodity futures contract is a standardized, rules for section 1256 contracts are discussed insion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rate exchange-traded contract for the sale or detail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked tois the federal short-term rate in effect under purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at a Market, earlier.section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code future date for a fixed price.during the period of the conversion transaction, If the contract is a regulated futures contract, Financial asset. A financial asset, for thiscompounded daily. the rules described earlier under Section 1256 purpose, is any equity interest in a pass-through
In all other cases, the applicable rate is the Contracts Marked to Market apply to it. entity. Pass-through entities include partner-
ªapplicable federal rateº determined as if the The termination of a commodity futures con- ships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest-
conversion transaction were a debt instrument tract generally results in capital gain or loss ment companies, and real estate investment
and compounded semi-annually. unless the contract is a hedging transaction. trusts.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 51

Page 52 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Amount of ordinary income. Long-term cap- the qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec- Do not reduce the basis of the stock for any
tion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and itsital gain is treated as ordinary income to the other purpose.
regulations.extent it is more than the net underlying
Example. You transfer property with an ad-long-term capital gain. The net underlying The stock must be issued to the person tak- justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value oflong-term capital gain is the amount of net capi- ing the loss. You must be the original owner $250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock.tal gain you would have realized if you acquired of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat- The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figurethe asset for its fair market value on the date the ment. To claim a deductible loss on stock issued the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis ofconstructive ownership transaction was opened, to your partnership, you must have been a part- your stock is $250 ($1,000 minus $750). If youand sold the asset for its fair market value on the ner when the stock was issued and have re- later sell the section 1244 stock for $200, yourdate the transaction was closed. If you do not mained so until the time of the loss. You add $800 loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capitalestablish the amount of net underlying long-term your distributive share of the partnership loss to loss of $750.capital gain by clear and convincing evidence, it any individual section 1244 stock loss you mayis treated as zero. have before applying the ordinary loss limit. Contributions to capital. If the basis of your
Stock distributed by partnership. If your section 1244 stock has increased, through con-More information. For more information
partnership distributes the stock to you, you can- tributions to capital or otherwise, you must treatabout constructive ownership transactions, see
not treat any later loss on that stock as an this increase as applying to stock that is notsection 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code.
ordinary loss. section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinary
loss on its sale.Stock sold through underwriter. Stock
Losses on Section 1244 sold through an underwriter is not section 1244 Example. You buy 100 shares of section(Small Business) Stock stock unless the underwriter only acted as a 1244 stock for $10,000. You are the originalselling agent for the corporation.You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution to
as a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, or Stock dividends and reorganizations. Stock capital that increases the total basis of the 100
worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report the you receive as a stock dividend qualifies as shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 shares
loss on Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, section 1244 stock if: for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You can
line 10. deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 ×  $10,000/$12,000)• You receive it from a small business cor- as an ordinary loss under these rules. The re-Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capital poration in which you own stock, and maining $500 is a capital loss.gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.
• The stock you own meets the require-Do not offset gains against losses that are within Recordkeeping. You must keep rec-ments when the stock dividend is distrib-the ordinary loss limit, explained later in this ords sufficient to show your stock quali-uted.discussion, even if the transactions are in stock fies as section 1244 stock. Your
RECORDS
of the same company. Report the gain on records must also distinguish your section 1244If you trade your section 1244 stock for newSchedule D (Form 1040). stock from any other stock you own in the corpo-stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza-If you must figure a net operating loss, any ration.tion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that isordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stock only a change in identity, form, or place of organ-is a business loss. ization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if the
Losses on Small Businessstock you trade meets the requirements whenOrdinary loss limit. The amount that you can Investment Company Stockthe trade occurs.deduct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000 If you hold section 1244 stock and othereach year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000, A small business investment company (SBIC) isstock in the same corporation, not all of the stockeven if only one spouse has this type of loss. If one that is licensed and operated under theyou receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani-your loss is $110,000 and your spouse has no Small Business Investment Act of 1958.zation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Onlyloss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinary If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you canthat part based on the section 1244 stock youloss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is a deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capitalhold will qualify.capital loss. loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless-
ness of that stock. A gain from the sale or tradeExample. Your basis for 100 shares of XSection 1244 (small business) stock. This is of that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset yourcommon stock is $1,000. These shares qualifystock that was issued for money or property gains and losses, even if they are on stock of theas section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stock(other than stock and securities) in a domestic same company.dividend, you receive 50 more shares of com-small business corporation. During its 5 most mon stock, the basis of which is determined fromrecent tax years before the loss, this corporation How to report. You report this type of ordinarythe 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are alsomust have derived more than 50% of its gross loss on Form 4797, Part II, line 10. In addition tosection 1244 stock.receipts from other than royalties, rents, divi- the information required by the form, you mustIf you also own stock in the corporation thatdends, interest, annuities, and gains from sales include the name and address of the companyis not section 1244 stock when you receive theand trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora- that issued the stock. If applicable, also includestock dividend, you must divide the shares yoution was in existence for at least 1 year, but less the reason the stock is worthless and the ap-receive as a dividend between the section 1244than 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax proximate date it became worthless. Report astock and the other stock. Only the shares fromyears ending before the loss. If the corporation capital gain from the sale of SBIC stock onthe former can be section 1244 stock.was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% test Schedule D of Form 1040.
Contributed property. To determine ordinaryapplies to the entire period the corporation was
loss on section 1244 stock you receive in a tradein existence before the day of the loss. However, Short sale. If you close a short sale of SBICfor property, you have to reduce the basis of theif the corporation's deductions (other than the stock with other SBIC stock that you bought onlystock if:net operating loss and dividends received de- for that purpose, any loss you have on the sale is
ductions) were more than its gross income dur- a capital loss. See Short Sales , later in this• The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of theing this period, this 50% test does not apply. chapter, for more information.property, immediately before the trade,
The corporation must have been largely an was more than its fair market value, and
operating company for ordinary loss treatment Holding Period• The basis of the stock is determined byto apply.
the basis of the property.If the stock was issued before July 19, 1984, If you sold or traded investment property, you
the stock must be common stock. If issued after must determine your holding period for the prop-Reduce the basis of the stock by the difference
July 18, 1984, the stock may be either common erty. Your holding period determines whetherbetween the adjusted basis of the property and
or preferred. For more information about the any capital gain or loss was a short-term or aits fair market value at the time of the trade. You
requirements of a small business corporation or long-term capital gain or loss.reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss.
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Long-term or short-term. If you hold invest- is considered to have started on the same day Commodity futures. Futures transactions in
ment property more than 1 year, any capital gain the donor's holding period started. any commodity subject to the rules of a board of
or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If you If your basis is determined by the fair market trade or commodity exchange are long term if
hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gain value of the property, your holding period starts the contract was held for more than 6 months.
or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss. on the day after the date of the gift. Your holding period for a commodity re-
To determine how long you held the invest- ceived in satisfaction of a commodity futuresInherited property. If you inherit investmentment property, begin counting on the date after contract, other than a regulated futures contractproperty, your capital gain or loss on any laterthe day you acquired the property. The day you subject to Internal Revenue Code section 1256,disposition of that property is treated as adisposed of the property is part of your holding includes your holding period for the futures con-long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-period. tract if you held the contract as a capital asset.gardless of how long you actually held the prop-
erty. Securities futures contract. Your holding pe-Example. If you bought investment property
riod for a security received in satisfaction of aon February 5, 2007, and sold it on February 5, Real property bought. To figure how long securities futures contract, other than one that is2008, your holding period is not more than 1 you have held real property bought under an a section 1256 contract, includes your holdingyear and you have a short-term capital gain or unconditional contract, begin counting on the period for the futures contract if you held theloss. If you sold it on February 6, 2008, your day after you received title to it or on the day contract as a capital asset.holding period is more than 1 year and you have after you took possession of it and assumed the Your holding period for a security received ina long-term capital gain or loss. burdens and privileges of ownership, whichever satisfaction of a securities futures contract tohappened first. However, taking delivery or pos-Securities traded on an established market. sell, other than one that is a section 1256 con-session of real property under an option agree-For securities traded on an established securi- tract, is determined by the rules that apply toment is not enough to start the holding period.ties market, your holding period begins the day short sales, discussed later under Short Sales.The holding period cannot start until there is anafter the trade date you bought the securities,
actual contract of sale. The holding period of theand ends on the trade date you sold them. Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6
seller cannot end before that time. months or less. If you hold stock in a mutualDo not confuse the trade date with the fund (or other regulated investment company) orsettlement date, which is the date by Real property repossessed. If you sell real real estate investment trust (REIT) for 6 monthswhich the stock must be delivered and property but keep a security interest in it, and
CAUTION
! or less and then sell it at a loss (other than underpayment must be made. then later repossess the property under the a periodic liquidation plan), special rules mayterms of the sales contract, your holding period apply.for a later sale includes the period you held theExample. You are a cash method, calendar
Capital gain distributions received. Theproperty before the original sale and the periodyear taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-
loss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi-after the repossession. Your holding periodcember 29, 2008. According to the rules of the
dends you received, as explained next) isdoes not include the time between the originalstock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery
treated as a long-term capital loss up to the totalsale and the repossession. That is, it does notof the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on
of any capital gain distributions you receivedinclude the period during which the first buyerJanuary 2, 2009. You received payment of the
and your share of any undistributed capitalheld the property.sale price on that same day. Report your gain on
gains. Any remaining loss is short-term capitalyour 2008 return, even though you received the Stock dividends. The holding period for stock loss.payment in 2009. The gain is long term or short you received as a taxable stock dividend beginsterm depending on whether you held the stock Exempt-interest dividends on mutual fundon the date of distribution.more than 1 year. Your holding period ended on stock. If you received exempt-interest divi-The holding period for new stock you re-December 29. If you had sold the stock at a loss, dends on the stock, at least part of your loss isceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onyou would also report it on your 2008 return. disallowed. You can deduct only the amount ofthe same day as the holding period of the old loss that is more than the exempt-interest divi-U.S. Treasury notes and bonds. The holding stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired in dends.period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold at a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock or
auction on the basis of yield starts the day after securities in a controlled corporation. Loss on stock that paid qualified dividends.the Secretary of the Treasury, through news Any loss on the sale or trade of stock must beNontaxable stock rights. Your holding periodreleases, gives notification of acceptance to treated as a long-term capital loss to the extentfor nontaxable stock rights begins on the samesuccessful bidders. The holding period of U.S. you received, from that stock, qualified divi-day as the holding period of the underlyingTreasury notes and bonds sold through an offer- dends (defined in chapter 1) that are extraordi-stock. The holding period for stock acquireding on a subscription basis at a specified yield nary dividends. This is true regardless of howthrough the exercise of stock rights begins onstarts the day after the subscription is submitted. long you actually held the stock. Generally, anthe date the right was exercised. extraordinary dividend is a dividend that equalsAutomatic investment service.  In determin-
or exceeds 10% (5% in the case of preferredSection 1256 contracts. Gains or losses oning your holding period for shares bought by the
stock) of your adjusted basis in the stock.section 1256 contracts open at the end of thebank or other agent, full shares are considered
year, or terminated during the year, are treatedbought first and any fractional shares are con-
as 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-sidered bought last. Your holding period starts Nonbusiness Bad Debts
less of how long the contracts were held. Seeon the day after the bank's purchase date. If a
Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , ear-share was bought over more than one purchase If someone owes you money that you cannot
lier.date, your holding period for that share is a split collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to
holding period. A part of the share is considered deduct the amount owed to you when you figureOption exercised. Your holding period forto have been bought on each date that stock your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-property you acquire when you exercise an op-was bought by the bank with the proceeds of less.tion begins the day after you exercise the option.available funds. There are two kinds of bad debtsÐbusiness
and nonbusiness. A business bad debt, gener-Wash sales. Your holding period for substan-Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investment ally, is one that comes from operating your tradetially identical stock or securities you acquire in aproperty in a trade for other investment property or business and is deductible as a business loss.wash sale includes the period you held the oldand your basis for the new property is deter- All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad debtsstock or securities.mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the and are deductible as short-term capital losses.old property, your holding period for the new Qualified small business stock. Your hold-property begins on the day following the date ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-free Example. An architect made personal loansyou acquired the old property. rollover of gain from a sale of qualified small to several friends who were not clients. She
Property received as a gift. If you receive a business stock, described later under Gains on could not collect on some of these loans. They
gift of property and your basis is determined by Qualified Small Business Stock , includes the are deductible only as nonbusiness bad debts
the donor's adjusted basis, your holding period period you held the old stock. because the architect was not in the business of
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 53

Page 54 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lending money and the loans do not have any 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights, Secondary liability on home mortgage. If
relationship to her business. the buyer of your home assumes your mort-and Claims for Refund.
gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re-
Business bad debts. For information on busi- payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyerLoan guarantees. If you guarantee a debtness bad debts of an employee, see Publication defaults on the loan and the house is then soldthat becomes worthless, you cannot take a bad529. For information on other business bad for less than the amount outstanding on thedebt deduction for your payments on the debtdebts, see chapter 10 of Publication 535. mortgage, you may have to make up the differ-unless you can show either that your reason for
ence. You can take a bad debt deduction for themaking the guarantee was to protect your in-Deductible nonbusiness bad debts. To be amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if youvestment or that you entered the guaranteedeductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to- cannot collect it from the buyer.transaction with a profit motive. If you make thetally worthless. You cannot deduct a partly
guarantee as a favor to friends and do not re-worthless nonbusiness debt. Worthless securities. If you own securitiesceive any consideration in return, your pay- that become totally worthless, you can take aGenuine debt required. A debt must be ments are considered a gift and you cannot take deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. Seegenuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is a deduction. Worthless Securities  under What Is a Sale orgenuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela-
Trade, earlier in this chapter.tionship based on a valid and enforceable obli- Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin-gation to repay a fixed or determinable sum of cipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation, Recovery of a bad debt. If you deducted amoney. guaranteed payment of a bank loan the corpora- bad debt and in a later tax year you recover
tion received. The corporation defaulted on theLoan or gift. For a bad debt, you must show (collect) all or part of it, you may have to include
loan and Henry made full payment. Because hethat there was an intention at the time of the the amount you recover in your gross income.
transaction to make a loan and not a gift. If you guaranteed the loan to protect his investment in However, you can exclude from gross income
lend money to a relative or friend with the under- the corporation, Henry can take a nonbusiness the amount recovered up to the amount of the
standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid- deduction that did not reduce your tax in the yearbad debt deduction.
ered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a bad deducted. See Recoveries in Publication 525.
debt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a bad Example 2. Milt and John are co-workers.
How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi-debt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela- Milt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note at
ness bad debts as short-term capital losses ontionship between you and the person or organi- their local credit union. John does not pay the
Schedule D (Form 1040).zation that owes you the money. note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off the
On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the nameWhen minor children borrow from their par- note. However, since he did not enter into the of the debtor and ªstatement attachedº in col-ents to pay for their basic needs, there is no guarantee agreement to protect an investment umn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt ingenuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deducted or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debt parentheses in column (f). Use a separate linefor such a loan. deduction. for each bad debt.
Basis in bad debt required. To deduct a Deductible in year paid. Unless you have For each bad debt, attach a statement to
bad debt, you must have a basis in it Ðthat is, rights against the borrower, discussed next, a your return that contains:
you must have already included the amount in payment you make on a loan you guaranteed is • A description of the debt, including theyour income or loaned out your cash. For exam- deductible in the year you make the payment. amount, and the date it became due,ple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for
Rights against the borrower. When youcourt-ordered child support not paid to you by • The name of the debtor, and any businessmake payment on a loan that you guaranteed,your former spouse. If you are a cash method or family relationship between you and theyou may have the right to take the place of thetaxpayer (most individuals are), you generally debtor,lender (the right of subrogation). The debt iscannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid
• The efforts you made to collect the debt,then owed to you. If you have this right, or somesalaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,
andother right to demand payment from the bor-and similar items.
rower, you cannot take a bad debt deduction • Why you decided the debt was worthless.When deductible. You can take a bad debt until these rights become totally worthless. For example, you could show that the bor-deduction only in the year the debt becomes rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-worthless. You do not have to wait until a debt is Debts owed by political parties. You cannot gal action to collect would probably notdue to determine whether it is worthless. A debt take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for any result in payment of any part of the debt.becomes worthless when there is no longer any worthless debt owed to you by:
chance that the amount owed will be paid.
• A political party,It is not necessary to go to court if you can Short Sales
show that a judgment from the court would be • A national, state, or local committee of a
uncollectible. You must only show that you have A short sale occurs when you agree to sellpolitical party, or
taken reasonable steps to collect the debt. property you do not own (or own but do not wish• A committee, association, or organizationBankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi- to sell). You make this type of sale in two steps.that either accepts contributions or spendsdence of the worthlessness of at least a part of • You sell short. You borrow property andmoney to influence elections.an unsecured and unpreferred debt. deliver it to a buyer.If your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in a
financial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent or • You close the sale. At a later date, youMechanics' and suppliers' liens. Workers
Bankrupt Financial Institution, earlier. either buy substantially identical propertyand material suppliers may file liens against
and deliver it to the lender or make deliv-property because of debts owed by a builder orFiling a claim for refund. If you do not ery out of property that you held at thecontractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo-deduct a bad debt on your original return for the time of the sale. Delivery of property bor-sure and loss of your property, you are entitledyear it becomes worthless, you can file a claim rowed from another lender does not sat-to repayment from the builder or contractor. Iffor a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do isfy this requirement.the debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debtthis, use Form 1040X to amend your return for
deduction.the year the debt became worthless. You must
file it within 7 years from the date your original You do not realize gain or loss until delivery of
Insolvency of contractor. You can take areturn for that year had to be filed, or 2 years property to close the short sale. You will have a
bad debt deduction for the amount you depositfrom the date you paid the tax, whichever is capital gain or loss if the property used to close
with a contractor if the contractor becomes insol-later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthless the short sale is a capital asset.
vent and you are unable to recover your deposit.securities generally must be filed within 3 years
If the deposit is for work unrelated to your tradefrom the date a return is filed, or 2 years from the Exception if property becomes worthless.
or business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc-date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) For more A different rule applies if the property sold short
tion.information about filing a claim, see Publication becomes substantially worthless. In that case,
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you must recognize gain as if the short sale were Losses. If, on the date of the short sale, you you buy more shares equal to a stock distribu-
tion issued on the borrowed stock during yourheld substantially identical property for moreclosed when the property became substantially
short position, you have a capital expense. Youthan 1 year, any loss you realize on the shortworthless.
must add the payment to the cost of the stocksale is a long-term capital loss, even if you held
sold short.the property used to close the sale for 1 year orException for constructive sales. Entering
less. Certain losses on short sales of stock orinto a short sale may cause you to be treated as Exception. If you close the short sale withinsecurities are also subject to wash sale treat-having made a constructive sale of property. In 45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay inment. For information, see Wash Sales, later.that case, you will have to recognize gain on the lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to the
date of the constructive sale. For details, see extent the payments are more than the amountMixed straddles. Under certain elections,
Constructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po- that you receive as ordinary income from theyou can avoid the treatment of loss from a short
sitions, earlier. lender of the stock for the use of collateral withsale as long term under the special rule. These
the short sale. This exception does not apply toelections are for positions that are part of aExample. On May 2, 2008, you bought 100 payments in place of extraordinary dividends.mixed straddle. See Other elections  undershares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000. Mixed Straddle Elections , later, for more infor-
On September 3, 2008, you sold short 100 Extraordinary dividends. If the amount ofmation about these elections.
any dividend you receive on a share of preferredshares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. You
stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case ofmade no other transactions involving Baker
other stock) of the amount realized on the shortstock for the rest of 2008 and the first 30 days of Reporting Substitute Payments
sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi-2009. Your short sale is treated as a construc-
nary dividend.If any broker transferred your securities for usetive sale of an appreciated financial position
in a short sale, or similar transaction, and re-because a sale of your Baker stock on the date
ceived certain substitute dividend payments onof the short sale would have resulted in a gain. Wash Sales
your behalf while the short sale was open, thatYou recognize a $600 short-term capital gain
broker must give you a Form 1099-MISC or a You cannot deduct losses from sales or tradesfrom the constructive sale and your new holding
similar statement, reporting the amount of these of stock or securities in a wash sale.period in the Baker stock begins on September
A wash sale occurs when you sell or tradepayments. Form 1099-MISC must be used for3.
stock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysthose substitute payments totaling $10 or more
before or after the sale you:that are known on the payment's record date to
be in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi-Short-Term or Long-Term 1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution,Capital Gain or Loss ties,or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, or
As a general rule, you determine whether you that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do not 2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-
have short-term or long-term capital gain or loss treat these substitute payments as dividends or curities in a fully taxable trade,
on a short sale by the amount of time you actu- interest. Instead, report the substitute payments 3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-ally hold the property eventually delivered to the shown on Form 1099-MISC as ªOther incomeº stantially identical stock or securities, orlender to close the short sale. on line 21 of Form 1040.
4. Acquire substantially identical stock for
Example. Even though you do not own any Substitute payment. A substitute payment your individual retirement account (IRA) or
stock of the Ace Corporation, you contract to sell Roth IRA.means a payment in lieu of:
100 shares of it, which you borrow from your
• Tax-exempt interest (including OID) thatbroker. After 13 months, when the price of the If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora-has accrued while the short sale wasstock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Ace tion you control buys substantially identicalopen, andCorporation stock and immediately deliver them stock, you also have a wash sale.to your broker to close out the short sale. Your • A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is after If your loss was disallowed because of theloss is a short-term capital loss because your the transfer of stock for use in a short sale wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to theholding period for the delivered property is less and before the closing of the short sale. cost of the new stock or securities (except in (4)than 1 day. above). The result is your basis in the new stock
Payments in lieu of dividends. If you borrow or securities. This adjustment postpones theSpecial rules. Special rules may apply to stock to make a short sale, you may have to loss deduction until the disposition of the newgains and losses from short sales of stocks, stock or securities. Your holding period for theremit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi-securities, and commodity and securities futures new stock or securities begins on the same daydends distributed while you maintain your short(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac- as the holding period of the stock or securitiesposition. You can deduct these payments only ifquired property substantially identical to prop- sold.you hold the short sale open at least 46 dayserty that sold short. But if the amount of property (more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinaryyou sold short is more than the amount of that Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stockdividend as defined below) and you itemize yoursubstantially identical property, the special rules for $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 anddeductions.do not apply to the gain or loss on the excess. within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 sharesYou deduct these payments as investment
of the same stock for $800. Because you boughtGains and holding period. If you held the interest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter-
substantially identical stock, you cannot deductsubstantially identical property for 1 year or less est Expenses in chapter 3 for more information.
your loss of $250 on the sale. However, you addon the date of the short sale, or if you acquired If you close the short sale by the 45th day the disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of thethe substantially identical property after the after the date of the short sale (1 year or less in new stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the newshort sale and by the date of closing the short the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can- stock, which is $1,050.sale, then: not deduct the payment in lieu of the dividend
that you make to the lender. Instead, you must Example 2. You are an employee of a cor-increase the basis of the stock used to close the poration that has an incentive pay plan. UnderRule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close short sale by that amount. this plan, you are given 10 shares of the corpo-the short sale is a short-term capital gain, To determine how long a short sale is kept ration's stock as a bonus award. You include theand open, do not include any period during which fair market value of the stock in your gross
you hold, have an option to buy, or are under aRule 2. The holding period of the substan- income as additional pay. You later sell these
contractual obligation to buy substantially identi-tially identical property begins on the date shares at a loss. If you receive another bonus
cal stock or securities.of the closing of the short sale or on the award of substantially identical stock within 30
date of the sale of this property, whichever If your payment is made for a liquidating days of the sale, you cannot deduct your loss on
comes first. distribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or if the sale.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 55

Page 56 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Options and futures contracts. The wash Example 1. You bought 100 shares of M This treatment also applies to losses from
stock on September 24, 2007, for $5,000. On the sale, exchange, or termination of a securitiessale rules apply to losses from sales or trades of
December 18, 2007, you bought 50 shares of futures contract to sell.contracts and options to acquire or sell stock or
substantially identical stock for $2,750. On De-securities. They do not apply to losses from
Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares ofcember 26, 2007, you bought 25 shares of sub-sales or trades of commodity futures contracts
stock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares ofstantially identical stock for $1,125. On Januaryand foreign currencies. See Coordination of
the stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7,7, 2008, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares youLoss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules under
you buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750.bought in September. You have a $1,000 lossStraddles, later, for information about the tax You close the short sale on November 17 byon the sale. However, because you bought 75treatment of losses on the disposition of posi- delivering the shares bought on June 2. Youshares of substantially identical stock within 30tions in a straddle. cannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750)days before the sale, you cannot deduct the loss
Securities futures contract to sell. Losses because the date of entering into the short sale($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the loss
from the sale, exchange, or termination of a (October 6) is considered the date the sale is($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of the
securities futures contract to sell generally are complete for wash sale purposes and you50 shares bought on December 18, 2007, is
bought substantially identical stock within 30treated in the same manner as losses from the increased by two-thirds (50 ÷  75) of the $750
days from that date.closing of a short sale, discussed later in this disallowed loss. The new basis of those shares
is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25section under Short sales. Residual interests in a REMIC. The washshares bought on December 26, 2007, is in-Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if you sale rules generally will apply to the sale of yourcreased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125sell common stock at a loss and, at the same residual interest in a real estate mortgage in-+ $250).time, buy warrants for common stock of the vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the period
same corporation. But if you sell warrants at a beginning 6 months before the sale of the inter-Example 2. You bought 100 shares of M
est and ending 6 months after that sale, youloss and, at the same time, buy common stock in stock on September 24, 2007. On February 3,
acquire any residual interest in any REMIC orthe same corporation, the wash sale rules apply 2008, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss.
any interest in a taxable mortgage pool that isonly if the warrants and stock are considered On each of the 4 days from February 11-14,
comparable to a residual interest. REMICs aresubstantially identical, as discussed next. 2008, you bought 50 shares of substantially
discussed in chapter 1.identical stock. You cannot deduct your $1,000
Substantially identical. In determining loss. You must add half the disallowed loss How to report. Report a wash sale or trade onwhether stock or securities are substantially ($500) to the basis of the 50 shares bought on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),identical, you must consider all the facts and February 11. Add the other half ($500) to the whichever is appropriate. Show the full amountcircumstances in your particular case. Ordinar- basis of the shares bought on February 12. of the loss in parentheses in column (f). On theily, stocks or securities of one corporation are next line, enter ªWash Saleº in column (a) andLoss and gain on same day. Loss from anot considered substantially identical to stocks the amount of the loss not allowed as a positivewash sale of one block of stock or securitiesor securities of another corporation. However, amount in column (f).cannot be used to reduce any gains on identicalthey may be substantially identical in some blocks sold the same day.cases. For example, in a reorganization, the
stocks and securities of the predecessor and Securities Futures ContractsExample. During 2003, you bought 100successor corporations may be substantially shares of X stock on each of three occasions. A securities futures contract is a contract of saleidentical. You paid $158 a share for the first block of 100 for future delivery of a single security or of aSimilarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor- shares, $100 a share for the second block, and narrow-based security index.poration are not ordinarily considered substan- $95 a share for the third block. On December 23, Gain or loss from the contract generally willtially identical to the common stock of the same 2008, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 a be treated in a manner similar to gain or losscorporation. However, where the bonds or pre- share. On January 6, 2009, you bought 250 from transactions in the underlying security. Thisferred stock are convertible into common stock shares of identical X stock. You cannot deduct means gain or loss from the sale, exchange, orof the same corporation, the relative values, the loss of $33 a share on the first block because termination of the contract will generally haveprice changes, and other circumstances may within 30 days after the date of sale you bought the same character as gain or loss from transac-make these bonds or preferred stock and the 250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, you tions in the property to which the contract re-common stock substantially identical. For exam- cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale of lates. Any capital gain or loss on a sale,the second and third blocks of stock by this loss.ple, preferred stock is substantially identical to exchange, or termination of a contract to sellthe common stock if the preferred stock: property will be considered short term, regard-Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to a
less of how long you hold the contract. These• Is convertible into common stock, dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from a
contracts are not section 1256 contracts (unlesstransaction made in the ordinary course of busi-• Has the same voting rights as the com- they are dealer securities futures contracts).ness.mon stock,
Short sales. The wash sale rules apply to a• Is subject to the same dividend restric- Options
loss realized on a short sale if you sell, or entertions,
into another short sale of, substantially identical Options are generally subject to the rules de-• Trades at prices that do not vary signifi- stock or securities within a period beginning 30 scribed in this section. If the option is part of acantly from the conversion ratio, and days before the date the short sale is complete straddle, the loss deferral rules covered later
and ending 30 days after that date. under Straddles may also apply. For special• Is unrestricted as to convertibility.
For purposes of the wash sale rules, a short rules that apply to nonequity options and dealer
sale is considered complete on the date the equity options, see Section 1256 ContractsMore or less stock bought than sold. If the short sale is entered into, if: Marked to Market, earlier.number of shares of substantially identical stock Gain or loss from the sale or trade of an• On that date, you own stock or securitiesor securities you buy within 30 days before or option to buy or sell property that is a capitalidentical to those sold short (or by thatafter the sale is either more or less than the asset in your hands, or would be if you acquireddate you enter into a contract or option tonumber of shares you sold, you must determine it, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not, oracquire that stock or those securities), andthe particular shares to which the wash sale would not be, a capital asset, the gain or loss is
rules apply. You do this by matching the shares • You later deliver the stock or securities to ordinary gain or loss.
bought with an equal number of the shares sold. close the short sale.
Match the shares bought in the same order that Example 1. You purchased an option to buy
you bought them, beginning with the first shares Otherwise, a short sale is not considered 100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stock
bought. The shares or securities so matched are complete until the property is delivered to close increases in value and you sell the option for
subject to the wash sale rules. the sale. more than you paid for it. Your gain is capital
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gain because the stock underlying the option in, cash or property other than the underlying Conversely, a ªcall optionº is the right to buy
would have been a capital asset in your hands. property. from the writer of the option, at any time before a
specified future date, a stated number of shares
How to report. Gain or loss from the closing orExample 2. The facts are the same as in of stock at a specified price.
expiration of an option that is not a section 1256Example 1, except that the stock decreases in
Holders of puts and calls. If you buy a put orcontract, but that is a capital asset in your hands,value and you sell the option for less than you
a call, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capitalis reported on Schedule D (Form 1040).paid for it. Your loss is a capital loss.
expenditure.If an option you purchased expired, enter the
If you sell the put or the call before youOption not exercised. If you have a loss be- expiration date in column (c) and enter ªExpiredº
exercise it, the difference between its cost andcause you did not exercise an option to buy or in column (d).
the amount you receive for it is either asell, you are considered to have sold or traded If an option that you wrote expired, enter the long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de-the option on the date that it expired. expiration date in column (b) and enter ªExpiredº pending on how long you held it.in column (e).Writer of option. If you write (grant) an option, If the option expires, its cost is either a
how you report your gain or loss depends on long-term or short-term capital loss, depending
whether it was exercised. on your holding period, which ends on the expi-Puts and CallsIf you are not in the business of writing op- ration date.
tions and an option you write on stocks, securi- If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basisPuts and calls are options on securities and areties, commodities, or commodity futures is not of the stock you bought. If you exercise a put,covered by the rules just discussed for options.exercised (or repurchased), the amount you re- reduce your amount realized on the sale of theThe following are specific applications of theseceive is a short-term capital gain. underlying stock by the cost of the put whenrules to holders and writers of options that areIf an option requiring you to buy or sell prop- figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on thebought, sold, or ªclosed outº in transactions on aerty is exercised, see Writers of puts and calls , sale of the underlying stock is long term or shortnational securities exchange, such as the Chi-later. term depending on your holding period for thecago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section
underlying stock.1256 Contracts Marked to Market , earlier, forSection 1256 contract options. Gain or loss special rules that may apply to nonequity op- Put option as short sale. Buying a put op-is recognized on the exercise of an option on a tions and dealer equity options.) These rules are tion is generally treated as a short sale, and thesection 1256 contract. Section 1256 contracts also presented in Table 4-1. exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos-are defined under Section 1256 Contracts Puts and calls are issued by writers (grant- ing of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. IfMarked to Market, earlier. ors) to holders for cash premiums. They are you have held the underlying stock for 1 year orended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse.Cash settlement option. A cash settlement less at the time you buy the put, any gain on the
option is treated as an option to buy or sell A ªput optionº is the right to sell to the writer, exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a
property. A cash settlement option is any option at any time before a specified future date, a short-term capital gain. The same is true if you
that on exercise is settled in, or could be settled stated number of shares at a specified price. buy the underlying stock after you buy the put
but before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Your
Table 4-1. Puts and Calls holding period for the underlying stock begins on
the earliest of:
Puts • The date you dispose of the stock,
• The date you exercise the put,When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
• The date you sell the put, or
Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from Reduce your basis in the stock you
• The date the put expires.sale of the underlying stock by the buy by the amount you received for
cost of the put. the put.
Writers of puts and calls. If you write (grant)Expires Report the cost of the put as a capital Report the amount you received for a put or a call, do not include the amount youloss on the date it expires.* the put as a short-term capital gain. receive for writing it in your income at the time of
receipt. Carry it in a deferred account until:Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you
cost of the put and the amount you buy back the put, report the • Your obligation expires,
receive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you
• You buy, in the case of a put, or sell, in thepay and the amount you received for
the put as a short-term capital gain case of a call, the underlying stock when
or loss.) the option is exercised, or
• You engage in a closing transaction.
Calls
If your obligation expires, the amount you re-
ceived for writing the call or put is short-termWhen a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
capital gain.
If a put you write is exercised and you buyIs exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis Increase your amount realized on
the underlying stock, decrease your basis in thein the stock purchased. sale of the stock by the amount you
received for the call. stock by the amount you received for the put.
Your holding period for the stock begins on the
Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital Report the amount you received for date you buy it, not on the date you wrote the
loss on the date it expires.* the call as a short-term capital gain. put.
If a call you write is exercised and you sell
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you the underlying stock, increase your amount real-
cost of the call and the amount you buy back the call, report the ized on the sale of the stock by the amount youreceive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you received for the call when figuring your gain orpay and the amount you received for loss. The gain or loss is long term or short termthe call as a short-term capital gain depending on your holding period of the stock.or loss.)
If you enter into a closing transaction by
paying an amount equal to the value of the put or*See Holders of puts and calls and Writers of puts and calls in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or loss
is short term or long term. call at the time of the payment, the difference
between the amount you pay and the amount
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 57

Page 58 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you receive for the put or call is a short-term positions is a position on that stock or sub- during the same period. If you take into account
part or all of the gain or loss for a position held bycapital gain or loss. stantially similar or related property.
a flowthrough entity, such as a partnership or2. The stock is in a corporation formed orExamples of non-dealer transactions. trust, you are also considered to hold that posi-availed of to take positions in personal tion.property that offset positions taken by any1. Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is-
shareholder.sued on April 8, 2008, for $4,000. These
equity options expired in December 2008, Loss Deferral Rules
without being exercised. If you were a Note. For positions established before Oc-
holder (buyer) of the options, you would Generally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi-tober 22, 2004, condition (1) above does not
recognize a short-term capital loss of tion of one or more positions only to the extentapply. Instead, personal property includes stock
$4,000. If you were a writer of the options, that the loss is more than any unrecognized gainif condition (2) above applies or the stock was
you have on offsetting positions. Unused lossesyou would recognize a short-term capital part of a straddle in which at least one of the
are treated as sustained in the next tax year.gain of $4,000. offsetting positions was:
2. Closing transaction. The facts are the Unrecognized gain. This is:• An option to buy or sell the stock or sub-
same as in (1), except that on May 9, stantially identical stock or securities, • The amount of gain you would have had2008, the options were sold for $6,000. If on an open position if you had sold it on• A securities futures contract on the stockyou were the holder of the options who the last business day of the tax year at itsor substantially identical stock or securi-sold them, you would recognize a fair market value, andties, orshort-term capital gain of $2,000. If you
were the writer of the options and you • The amount of gain realized on a position• A position on substantially similar or re-
bought them back, you would recognize a if, as of the end of the tax year, gain haslated property (other than stock).short-term capital loss of $2,000. been realized, but not recognized.
3. Exercise. The facts are the same as in (1), Position. A position is an interest in personal
except that the options were exercised on Example. On July 1, 2008, you entered intoproperty. A position can be a forward or futures
May 27, 2008. The buyer adds the cost of a straddle. On December 16, 2008, you closedcontract, or an option.
the options to the basis of the stock bought one position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000.An interest in a loan that is denominated in athrough the exercise of the options. The On December 31, 2008, the end of your taxforeign currency is treated as a position in thatwriter adds the amount received from writ- year, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750currency. For the straddle rules, foreign cur-ing the options to the amount realized from in the offsetting open position. On your 2008rency for which there is an active interbank mar-selling the stock to figure gain or loss. The return, your deductible loss on the position youket is considered to be actively-traded personalgain or loss is short term or long term de- closed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750).property. See also Foreign currency contractpending upon the holding period of the You must carry forward to 2009 the unused lossunder Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar-stock. of $12,750.ket, earlier.
4. Section 1256 contracts. The facts are the Note. If you physically settle a position es-Offsetting position. This is a position thatsame as in (1), except the options were tablished after October 21, 2004, that is part of asubstantially reduces any risk of loss you maynonequity options, subject to the rules for straddle by delivering property to which the posi-have from holding another position. However, ifsection 1256 contracts. If you were a buyer tion relates (and you would realize a loss on thata position is part of a straddle that is not anof the options, you would recognize a position if you terminated it), you are treated asidentified straddle (described later), do not treatshort-term capital loss of $1,600, and a having terminated the position for its fair marketit as offsetting to a position that is part of anlong-term capital loss of $2,400. If you value immediately before the settlement and asidentified straddle.were a writer of the options, you would having sold the property used to physically settlerecognize a short-term capital gain of Presumed offsetting positions. Two or the position at its fair market value.$1,600, and a long-term capital gain of more positions will be presumed to be offsetting$2,400. See Section 1256 Contracts Exceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap-if:Marked to Market, earlier, for more infor- ply to:• The positions are established in the samemation.
personal property (or in a contract for this 1. Positions established after October 21,
property), and the value of one or more 2004, comprising an identified straddle,
Straddles positions varies inversely with the value of 2. Certain straddles consisting of qualifiedone or more of the other positions, covered call options and the stock to beThis section discusses the loss deferral rules
• The positions are in the same personal purchased under the options,that apply to the sale or other disposition of
property, even if this property is in a sub-positions in a straddle. These rules do not apply 3. Hedging Transactions, described earlierstantially changed form, and the positions'to the straddles described under Exceptions, under Section 1256 Contracts Marked tovalues vary inversely as described in thelater. Market, andfirst condition,A straddle is any set of offsetting positions on
4. Straddles consisting entirely of sectionpersonal property. For example, a straddle may • The positions are in debt instruments with 1256 contracts, as described earlier underconsist of a purchased option to buy and a a similar maturity, and the positions' val- Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Marketpurchased option to sell on the same number of ues vary inversely as described in the first (but see Identified straddle, next).shares of the security, with the same exercise condition,
price and period. • The positions are sold or marketed as off- Note. For positions established before Oc-setting positions, whether or not the posi-Personal property. This is any property of a tober 22, 2004, the loss deferral rules also dotions are called a straddle, spread,type that is actively traded. It includes stock not apply to a straddle that is an identified strad-butterfly, or any similar name, oroptions and contracts to buy stock, but generally dle at the end of the tax year.
does not include stock. • The aggregate margin requirement for the Identified straddle. Any straddle (otherpositions is lower than the sum of the mar-Straddle rules for stock. Although stock is than a straddle described in (2) or (3) above) isgin requirements for each position if heldgenerally excluded from the definition of per- an identified straddle if all of the following condi-separately.sonal property when applying the straddle rules, tions exist.
it is included in the following two situations. 
Related persons. To determine if two or • You clearly identified the straddle on your
1. The stock is of a type which is actively more positions are offsetting, you will be treated records before the close of the day on
traded and at least one of the offsetting as holding any position that your spouse holds which you acquired it.
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• For straddles acquired after December 29, loss deferral rules for straddles if both of the price of one share of XYZ stock on May 12,
2007, you identified the positions in the following are true. 2008, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/
straddle that are offsetting with respect to September call options offered on May 13,• All of the offsetting positions consist of oneone another (for example, position A off- 2008, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125,or more qualified covered call options andsets position D, and position B offsets po- $130, and $135. Because the option has a termthe stock to be purchased from you undersition C). of more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, thethe options. second highest strike price that is less than• The straddle is not part of a larger strad- • The straddle is not part of a larger strad- $130.25, the applicable stock price. The calldle. dle. option is a deep-in-the-money option because
its strike price is lower than the LQB. Therefore,If there is a loss from any position in an identi- the option is not a qualified covered call option,fied straddle, you must increase the basis of  But see Special year-end rule , later, for an and the loss deferral rules apply if you closed outeach of the positions that offset the loss position exception. the option or the stock at a loss during the year.in the identified straddle. The increase is the loss A qualified covered call option is any optionmultiplied by the following fraction: Capital loss on qualified covered call op-you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stock tions. If you hold stock and you write a quali-you acquire in connection with granting the op-Unrecognized gain (if any) on the fied covered call option on that stock with ation), but only if all of the following are true.offsetting position strike price less than the applicable stock price,
• The option is traded on a national securi- treat any loss from the option as long-term capi-The total unrecognized gain on all ties exchange or other market approved tal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gainpositions that offset the loss position by the Secretary of the Treasury. on the sale or exchange of the stock would bein the identified straddle
treated as long-term capital gain. The holding• The option is granted more than 30 daysFor this purpose, your unrecognized gain is period of the stock does not include any periodbefore its expiration date.the excess of the fair market value of the posi- during which you are the writer of the option.For covered call options entered into aftertion that is part of an identified straddle at the July 28, 2002, the option is granted not Special year-end rule. The loss deferraltime you incur a loss on another position in the more than 12 months before its expiration rules for straddles apply if all of the following areidentified straddle, over the fair market value of date or satisfies term limitation and quali- true.that position when you identified it as a position fied benchmark requirements published inin the straddle. • The qualified covered call options arethe Internal Revenue Bulletin. closed or the stock is disposed of at a lossIf the application of the above rule does not
• The option is not a deep-in-the-money op- during any tax year.result in the increase in basis of any offsetting
tion.position in the identified straddle, you must in- • Gain on disposition of the stock or gain oncrease the basis of each of the offsetting posi- • You are not an options dealer who granted the options is includible in gross income intions in the straddle in a manner that: the option in connection with your activity a later tax year.
of dealing in options.• Is reasonable, • The stock or options were held less than
• Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or• Is consistently applied by you, 30 days after the closing of the options or
loss. the disposition of the stock.• Is consistent with the purposes of the
identified straddle rules, and  A deep-in-the-money option is an option with
How To Report Gainsa strike price lower than the lowest qualified• Results in a total increase in the basis of and Losses (Form 6781)benchmark (LQB). The strike price is the price atthose offsetting positions that is equal to
which the option is to be exercised. Strike pricesthe loss. Report each position (whether or not it is part ofare listed in the financial section of many news- a straddle) on which you have unrecognizedpapers. The LQB is the highest available strikeIf you adopt an allocation method under this gain at the end of the tax year and the amount ofprice that is less than the applicable stock price.rule, you must describe that method in your this unrecognized gain in Part III of Form 6781.However, the LQB for an option with a term ofbooks and records. Use Part II of Form 6781 to figure your gains andmore than 90 days and a strike price of moreThe identified straddle rules also apply to losses on straddles before entering thesethan $50 is the second highest available strikepositions that are or have been a liability or amounts on Schedule D (Form 1040). Include aprice that is less than the applicable stock price.obligation to you (for example, a debt obligation copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.The availability of strike prices for equity op-you issued, a written option, or a notional princi-
tions with flexible terms does not affect the de-pal contract you entered into).
termination of the LQB for an option that is notNeither you nor anyone else can take into Coordination of Loss Deferralan equity option with flexible terms.account any loss on a position that is part of an Rules and Wash Sale RulesThe applicable stock price for any stock foridentified straddle to the extent that the loss
which an option has been granted is:increases the basis of any positions that offset Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to any
the loss position in the identified straddle. disposition of a position or positions of a strad-1. The closing price of the stock on the most dle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, thenrecent day on which that stock was tradedNote. For positions established before Oc- apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only ifbefore the date on which the option wastober 22, 2004, identified straddles have to meet stocks or securities make up a position that isgranted, ortwo additional conditions: part of the straddle. If a position in the straddle
does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2.2. The opening price of the stock on the day1. All of the original positions that you identify on which the option was granted, but onlywere acquired on the same day. Rule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-if that price is greater than 110% of the
sition of shares of stock or securities that makeprice determined in (1).2. All of the positions included in item (1)
up the positions of a straddle if, within a periodwere disposed of on the same day during If the applicable stock price is $25 or less, the beginning 30 days before the date of that dispo-the tax year, or none of the positions were LQB will be treated as not less than 85% of the sition and ending 30 days after that date, youdisposed of by the end of the tax year. applicable stock price. If the applicable stock acquired substantially identical stock or securi-price is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated asAlso, the losses from positions are deferred until ties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to thenot less than an amount that is $10 below theyou dispose of all the positions in the straddle. following tax year, subject to any further applica-applicable stock price.The rule discussed above for increasing the tion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will alsobasis of each of the positions does not apply. apply if you entered into a contract or option toExample. On May 13, 2008, you held XYZ
acquire the stock or securities within the timeQualified covered call options and op- stock and you wrote an XYZ/September call
period described above. See Loss carryover ,tioned stock. A straddle is not subject to the option with a strike price of $120. The closing
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 59

Page 60 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
later, for more information about how to treat the entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2008 be- Holding Period and
loss in the following tax year. cause there is a total of $10 of unrecognized Loss Treatment Rules
gain in the successor long position and offset-Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se- The holding period of a position in a straddleting short position.curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any generally begins no earlier than the date on
losses you sustained in the ordinary course of which the straddle ends (the date you no longerExample 3. The facts are the same as inyour business. hold an offsetting position). This rule does notExample 1, except that at year end you have $8 apply to any position you held more than 1 yearof unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-Example. You are not a dealer in stock or before you established the straddle. But seetion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsettingsecurities. On December 2, 2008, you bought Exceptions, later.short position. Under these circumstances, $8 ofstock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off-
setting put option. On December 12, 2008, there the total $10 realized loss will be disallowed for Example. On March 6, 2007, you acquired
was $20 of unrealized gain in the put option and 2008 because there is $8 of unrecognized gain gold. On January 4, 2008, you entered into an
you sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem- in the successor long position. offsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu-
ber 16, the value of the put option had declined, lated futures contract). On April 1, 2008, you
eliminating all unrealized gain in the position. On disposed of the short gold forward contract at noLoss carryover. If you have a disallowed lossDecember 16, you bought a second XX stock gain or loss. On April 8, 2008, you sold the goldthat resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2,position that is substantially identical to the XX at a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1you must carry it over to the next tax year andstock you sold on December 12. At the end of year or less before the offsetting short positionapply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss.the year there is no unrecognized gain in the put was entered into, the holding period for the gold
For example, a loss disallowed in 2007 underoption or in the XX stock. Under these circum- begins on April 1, 2008, the date the straddle
Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2008, unless thestances, the $20 loss will be disallowed for 2008 ended. Gain recognized on the sale of the gold
under Rule 1 because, within a period beginning substantially identical stock or securities (which will be treated as short-term capital gain.
30 days before December 12, and ending 30 caused the loss to be disallowed in 2007) were
Loss treatment. Treat the loss on the sale ofdays after that date, you bought stock substan- disposed of during 2008. In addition, the carry-
one or more positions (the loss position) of atially identical to the XX stock you sold. over loss will not be allowed in 2008 if Rule 1 or
straddle as a long-term capital loss if both of theRule 2 disallows it. following are true.Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-
sition of less than all of the positions of a strad- Example. The facts are the same as in the • You held (directly or indirectly) one or
dle (your loss position) to the extent that any example under Rule 1 above. On December 30, more offsetting positions to the loss posi-
unrecognized gain at the close of the tax year in 2009, you sell the second XX stock at a $20 loss tion on the date you entered into the loss
one or more of the following positions is more and there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the put position.
than the amount of any loss disallowed under option. Under these circumstances, you cannot • You would have treated all gain or loss onRule 1. deduct in 2009 either the $20 loss disallowed in one or more of the straddle positions as
2008 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De-• Successor positions. long-term capital gain or loss if you had
cember 30, 2009, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 does sold these positions on the day you en-• Offsetting positions to the loss position. not apply because the substantially identical XX tered into the loss position.
• Offsetting positions to any successor posi- stock was sold during the year and no substan-
tion. Mixed straddles. Special rules apply to atially identical stock or securities were bought
loss position that is part of a mixed straddle andwithin the 61-day period. However, Rule 2 doesSuccessor position. A successor position that is a non-section 1256 position. A mixedapply because there is $40 of unrecognized gainis a position that is or was at any time offsetting straddle is a straddle:in the put option, an offsetting position to the lossto a second position, if both of the following positions. • That is not part of a larger straddle,conditions are met.
Capital loss carryover. If the sale of a loss • In which all positions are held as capital• The second position was offsetting to the position would have resulted in a capital loss, assets,loss position that was sold.
you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss on • In which at least one (but not all) of the• The successor position is entered into dur- the date it is allowed, even if you would treat the positions is a section 1256 contract, anding a period beginning 30 days before, gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi-and ending 30 days after, the sale of the • For which the mixed straddle electionnary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of aloss position. (Election A, discussed later) has not beenloss position (in the case of section 1256 con-
made.tracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-term
Example 1. On November 3, 2008, you en- capital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss,
tered into offsetting long and short positions in Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss andyou treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule,
non-section 1256 contracts. On November 12, 40% short-term capital loss, if all of the followingeven if you would treat any gain or loss on any
2008, you disposed of the long position at a $10 conditions apply.successor positions as 100% long-term orloss. On November 14, you entered into a new short-term capital gain or loss. • Gain or loss from the sale of one or morelong position (successor position) that is offset- of the straddle positions that are sectionting to the retained short position, but that is not 1256 contracts would be considered gainExceptions. The rules for coordinating strad-substantially identical to the long position dis- or loss from the sale or exchange of adle losses and wash sales do not apply to theposed of on November 12. You held both posi- capital asset.tions through year end, at which time there was following loss situations.
$10 of unrecognized gain in the successor long • The sale of no position in the straddle,• Loss on the sale of one or more positionsposition and no unrecognized gain in the offset- other than a section 1256 contract, wouldin a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans-ting short position. Under these circumstances, result in a long-term capital gain or loss.actions are described under Section 1256the entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2008 • You have not made a straddle-by-straddleContracts Marked to Market, earlier.)because there is $10 of unrecognized gain in the identification election (Election B) or mixedsuccessor long position. • Loss on the sale of a loss position in a straddle account election (Election C),
mixed straddle account. (See Mixed strad- both discussed later.Example 2. The facts are the same as in dle account (Election C), later.)Example 1, except that at year end you have $4
• Loss on the sale of a position that is partof unrecognized gain in the successor long posi- Example. On March 3, 2008, you entered
of a straddle consisting only of sectiontion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsetting into a long gold forward contract. On July 15,
1256 contracts.short position. Under these circumstances, the 2008, you entered into an offsetting short gold
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
regulated futures contract. You did not make an • Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac- contracts, the amount is treated as 60%
count for a class of activities for which long-term and 40% short-term capital gain orelection to offset gains and losses from positions
gains and losses will be recognized and loss.in a mixed straddle. On August 8, 2008, you
offset on a periodic basis.disposed of the long forward contract at a loss. On the last business day of the tax year, you
Because the gold forward contract was part of a determine the ªannual account net gain or lossº
mixed straddle and the disposition of this for each account by netting the daily accountThese two elections are alternatives to thenon-section 1256 position would not result in amounts for that account for the tax year. Themixed straddle election. You can choose onlylong-term capital loss, the loss recognized on ªtotal annual account net gain or lossº is deter-one of the three elections. Use Form 6781 to mined by netting the annual account amountsthe termination of the gold forward contract will indicate your election choice by checking box A, for all mixed straddle accounts that you hadbe treated as a 60% long-term and 40% B, or C, whichever applies. established.short-term capital loss.
Straddle-by-straddle identification elec- The net amounts keep their long-term or
tion (Election B). Under this election, you short-term classification. However, no moreExceptions. The special holding period and
must clearly identify each position that is part of than 50% of the total annual account net gain forloss treatment for straddle positions does not
the identified mixed straddle by the earlier of: the tax year can be treated as long-term capitalapply to positions that:
gain. Any remaining gain is treated as• The close of the day the identified mixed• Constitute part of a hedging transaction, short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40%straddle is established, or
of the total annual account net loss can be• Are included in a straddle consisting only
• The time the position is disposed of. treated as short-term capital loss. Any remainingof section 1256 contracts, or
loss is treated as long-term capital loss.• Are included in a mixed straddle account The election to establish one or more mixedIf you dispose of a position in the mixed straddle(Election C), discussed later. straddle accounts for each tax year must bebefore the end of the day on which the straddle
made by the due date (without extensions) ofis established, this identification must be made
your income tax return for the immediately pre-Mixed Straddle Elections by the time you dispose of the position. You are
ceding tax year. If you begin trading in a newpresumed to have properly identified a mixedIf you disposed of a position in a mixed straddle class of activities during a tax year, you muststraddle if independent verification is used.and make one of the elections described in the make the election for the new class of activities
The basic tax treatment of gain or loss underfollowing discussions, report your gain or loss as by the later of either:
this election depends on which side of the strad-indicated in those discussions. If you do not • The due date of your return for the imme-dle produced the total net gain or loss. If the netmake any of the elections, report your gain or diately preceding tax year (without exten-gain or loss from the straddle is due to theloss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed of sions), orsection 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated asthe section 1256 component of the straddle,
60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40%enter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or • 60 days after you entered into the first
short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gainyour gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Form mixed straddle in the new class of activi-
or loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify the6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 13 ties.
election by checking box B.(Part II).
If the net gain or loss is due to the You make the election on Form 6781 by
non-section 1256 positions, gain or loss is checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in-Mixed straddle election (Election A). You
short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain come tax return for the immediately precedingcan elect out of the marked to market rules,
or loss on Part I of Schedule D and identify the tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies.discussed under Section 1256 Contracts
election. Report the annual account net gain or loss fromMarked to Market , earlier, for all section 1256
a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781.contracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In- For the specific application of the rules of this
In addition, you must attach a statement to Formstead, the gain and loss rules for straddles will election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-3T.
6781 specifically designating the class of activi-apply to these contracts. However, if you make
ties for which a mixed straddle account is estab-Example. On April 1, you entered into athis election for an option on a section 1256
lished.non-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec-contract, the gain or loss treatment discussed
tion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec- For the specific application of the rules of thisearlier under Options will apply, subject to the
tion to treat this straddle as an identified mixed election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-4T.gain and loss rules for straddles.
straddle. On April 8, you disposed of theYou can make this election if: Interest expense and carrying charges re-non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and the lating to mixed straddle account positions.• At least one (but not all) of the positions is section 1256 contract at an $800 gain. Under You cannot deduct interest and carryinga section 1256 contract, and these circumstances, the $600 loss on the charges that are allocable to any positions heldnon-section 1256 position will be offset against• Each position forming part of the straddle in a mixed straddle account. Treat thesethe $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. Theis clearly identified as being part of that charges as an adjustment to the annual accountnet gain of $200 from the straddle will be treatedstraddle on the day the first section 1256 net gain or loss and allocate them proportion-as 60% long-term capital gain and 40%contract forming part of the straddle is ac- ately between the net short-term and the netshort-term capital gain because it is due to thequired. long-term capital gains or losses.section 1256 contract. To find the amount of interest and carrying
If you make this election, it will apply for all Mixed straddle account (Election C). You charges that is not deductible and that must be
later years as well. It cannot be revoked without may elect to establish one or more accounts for added to the annual account net gain or loss,
the consent of the IRS. If you made this election, determining gains and losses from all positions apply the rules described earlier to the positions
check box A of Form 6781. Do not report the in a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa- held in the mixed straddle account. See Interest
section 1256 component in Part I. rate mixed straddle account for each separate expense and carrying charges on straddles  in
designated class of activities. chapter 3 under Nondeductible Expenses.
Other elections. You can avoid the 60% Generally, you must determine gain or losslong-term capital loss treatment required for a for each position in a mixed straddle account as Sales of Stock to ESOPsnon-section 1256 loss position that is part of a of the close of each business day of the tax year. or Certain Cooperativesmixed straddle, described earlier, if you choose You offset the net section 1256 contractseither of the two following elections to offset against the net non-section 1256 positions to If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3gains and losses for these positions. determine the ªdaily account net gain or loss.º years to an employee stock ownership plan
• Election B. Make a separate identification If the daily account amount is due to (ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative,
of the positions of each mixed straddle for non-section 1256 positions, the amount is you may be able to elect to postpone all or part
which you are electing this treatment (the treated as short-term capital gain or loss. If the of the gain on the sale if you bought qualified
straddle-by-straddle identification method). daily account amount is due to section 1256 replacement property (certain securities) within
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 61

Page 62 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the period that began 3 months before the sale 3. A verified written statement of the domes- • $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married
and ended 12 months after the sale. If you make and file a separate return), minus thetic corporation whose employees are cov-
the election, you must recognize gain on the amount of gain you postponed for all ear-ered by the ESOP acquiring the securities,
sale only to the extent the proceeds from the lier years.or of any authorized officer of the coopera-
sale exceed the cost of the qualified replace- tive, consenting to the taxes under sec-
ment property. tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internal Basis of replacement property. You mustYou must reduce the basis of the replace- Revenue Code on certain dispositions, and subtract the amount of postponed gain from thement property by any postponed gain. If you prohibited allocations of the stock pur- basis of your replacement property.dispose of any replacement property, you may chased by the ESOP or cooperative.
How to report and postpone gain. Reporthave to recognize all of the postponed gain.
the entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 orGenerally, to qualify for the election the
More information. For details, see section line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever isESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of
1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Regula- appropriate. To make the choice to postponethe outstanding stock of the corporation that
tions section 1.1042-1T. gain, enter ªSSBIC Rolloverº in column (a) of theissued the qualified securities. Also, the quali-
line directly below the line on which you reportedfied replacement property must have been is-
the gain. Enter the amount of gain postponed insued by a domestic operating corporation. Rollover of Gain
column (f). Enter it as a loss (in parentheses).From Publicly Also, attach a schedule showing how youHow to make the election. You must make Traded Securities figured the postponed gain, the name of thethe election no later than the due date (including
SSBIC in which you purchased common stockextensions) for filing your tax return for the year You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain or a partnership interest, the date of thatin which you sold the stock. If your original return gains from the sale of publicly traded securities. purchase, and your new basis in that SSBICwas filed on time, you may make the election on This means that if you buy certain replacement stock or partnership interest.an amended return filed no later than 6 months property and make the choice described in this You must make the choice to postpone gainafter the due date of your return (excluding ex- section, you postpone part or all of your gain. no later than the due date (including extensions)tensions). Enter ªFiled pursuant to section
You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis for filing your tax return for the year in which you301.9100-2º at the top of the amended return,
of the replacement property as described in Ba- sold the securities. If your original return wasand file it at the same address you used for your
sis of replacement property , later. This filed on time, you may make the choice on anoriginal return.
postpones your gain until the year you dispose amended return filed no later than 6 monthsHow to report and postpone gain. Report of the replacement property. after the due date of your return (excluding ex-the entire gain realized on line 8 of Schedule D. tensions). Enter ªFiled pursuant to sectionYou qualify to make this choice if you meetTo make the choice to postpone gain, enter 301.9100-2º at the top of the amended return,all the following tests.ªSection 1042 electionº in column (a) of the line and file it at the same address you used for yourdirectly below the line on which you reported the • You sell publicly traded securities at a original return.gain. Enter in column (f) the amount of the gain gain. Publicly traded securities are securi- Your choice is revocable with the consent ofyou are postponing or expecting to postpone. ties traded on an established securities the IRS.Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). If the actual market.
postponed gain is different from the amount you • Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. Gains on Qualifiedreport, file an amended return.
Small Business StockAlso attach the following statements. • During the 60-day period beginning on the
date of the sale, you buy replacement
This section discusses two provisions of the law1. A ªstatement of electionº that indicates you property. This replacement property must that may apply to gain from the sale or trade ofare making an election under section be either common stock or a partnership qualified small business stock. You may qualify1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and interest in a specialized small business in- for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain.that includes the following information. vestment company (SSBIC). This is any You may be able to exclude part of the gain frompartnership or corporation licensed by thea. A description of the securities sold, the your income.Small Business Administration under sec-date of the sale, the amount realized on
tion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest- Qualified small business stock. This isthe sale, and the adjusted basis of the
ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13, stock that meets all the following tests.securities.
1993.
b. The name of the ESOP or cooperative 1. It must be stock in a C corporation.
to which the qualified securities were 2. It must have been originally issued afterAmount of gain recognized. If you make thesold. August 10, 1993.choice described in this section, you must rec-
c. For a sale that was part of a single, ognize gain only up to the following amount: 3. The corporation must have total gross as-interrelated transaction under a prear- sets of $50 million or less at all times after• The amount realized on the sale, minusranged agreement between taxpayers August 9, 1993, and before it issued theinvolving other sales of qualified securi- • The cost of any common stock or partner- stock. Its total gross assets immediately af-ties, the names and identifying numbers ship interest in an SSBIC that you bought ter it issued the stock must also be $50of the other taxpayers under the agree- during the 60-day period beginning on the million or less.ment and the number of shares sold by date of sale (and did not previously take When figuring the corporation's totalthe other taxpayers. into account on an earlier sale of publicly gross assets, you must also count the as-
traded securities). sets of any predecessor of the corporation.2. A notarized ªstatement of purchaseº In addition, you must treat all corporationsdescribing the qualified replacement prop- that are members of the same par-If this amount is less than the amount of yourerty, date of purchase, and the cost of the ent-subsidiary controlled group as one cor-gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,property and declaring the property to be poration. subject to the limit described next. If this amountqualified replacement property for the qual-
is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,ified stock you sold. The statement must 4. You must have acquired the stock at its
you must recognize the full amount of your gain.have been notarized no later than 30 days original issue, directly or through an under-
after the purchase. If you have not yet pur- writer, in exchange for money or otherLimit on gain postponed. The amount ofchased the qualified replacement property, property (not including stock), or as pay forgain you can postpone each year is limited to theyou must attach the notarized ªstatement services provided to the corporation (othersmaller of:of purchaseº to your income tax return for than services performed as an underwriter
• $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married andthe year following the election year (or the of the stock). In certain cases, your stock
file a separate return), orelection will not be valid). may also meet this test if you acquired it
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
from another person who met this test, or • Any farming business (including the busi- you held an interest in the entity for the entire
ness of raising or harvesting trees), period the entity held the stock, you also maythrough a conversion or trade of qualified
choose to postpone gain if you, rather than thesmall business stock that you held. • Any business involving the production or pass-through entity, buy the replacement stockextraction of products for which percent-5. The corporation must have met the active within the 60-day period.age depletion can be claimed, orbusiness test, defined next, and must have
been a C corporation during substantially How to report gain. Report the entire gain• Any business of operating a hotel, motel,
all the time you held the stock. realized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 ofrestaurant, or similar business.
Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is appropri-6. Within the period beginning 2 years before
ate. To make the choice to postpone the gain,and ending 2 years after the stock was Rollover of Gain enter ªSection 1045 Rolloverº in column (a) ofissued, the corporation cannot have the line directly below the line on which youYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capitalbought more than a de minimis amount of reported the gain. Enter the amount of gaingain from the sale of qualified small businessits stock from you or a related party. postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (instock held more than 6 months. This means that,7. Within the period beginning 1 year before parentheses).if you buy certain replacement stock and makeand ending 1 year after the stock was is- You must make the choice to postpone gainthe choice described in this section, you post-sued, the corporation cannot have bought no later than the due date (including extensions)pone part or all of your gain.
more than a de minimis amount of its stock for filing your tax return for the year in which youYou postpone the gain by adjusting the basis
sold the stock. If your original return was filed onfrom anyone, unless the total value of the of the replacement stock as described in Basis
time, you may make the choice on an amendedstock it bought is 5% or less of the total of replacement stock, later. This postpones your
return filed no later than 6 months after the duevalue of all its stock. gain until the year you dispose of the replace-
date of your return (excluding extensions). Enterment stock.For more information about tests 6 and 7, see ªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2º at the topYou can make this choice if you meet all thethe regulations under section 1202 of the Inter- of the amended return, and file it at the samefollowing tests.nal Revenue Code. address you used for your original return.
• You buy replacement stock during the
60-day period beginning on the date of theActive business test. A corporation meets
sale.this test for any period of time if, during that Section 1202 Exclusion
period, both the following are true. • The replacement stock is qualified small You generally can exclude from your income upbusiness stock.• It was an eligible corporation, defined be- to 50% of your gain from the sale or trade of
low. qualified small business stock held by you for• The replacement stock continues to meet
more than 5 years. The exclusion can be up tothe active business requirement for small• It used at least 80% (by value) of its as-
60% for certain empowerment zone businessbusiness stock for at least the first 6sets in the active conduct of at least one
stock. See Empowerment zone business stock,months after you buy it.qualified trade or business, defined below.
later.
The eligible gain minus your section 1202Exception for SSBIC. Any specialized Amount of gain recognized. If you make the exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See Capital Gainsmall business investment company (SSBIC) is choice described in this section, you must rec- Tax Rates, later.treated as meeting the active business test. An ognize the capital gain only up to the following
SSBIC is an eligible corporation that is licensed amount: SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized smallto operate under section 301(d) of the Small • The amount realized on the sale, minus business investment company (SSBIC) stockBusiness Investment Act of 1958 as in effect on that you bought as replacement property forMay 13, 1993. • The cost of any qualified small business publicly traded securities you sold at a gain, youstock you bought during the 60-day periodEligible corporation. This is any U.S. cor- must reduce the basis of the stock by thebeginning on the date of sale (and did notporation other than: amount of any postponed gain on that earlierpreviously take into account on an earlier sale, as explained earlier under Rollover of Gainsale of qualified small business stock).• A Domestic International Sales Corpora- From Publicly Traded Securities. But do not re-tion (DISC) or a former DISC, duce your basis by that amount when figuring
If this amount is less than the amount of your your section 1202 exclusion.• A corporation that has made, or whose
capital gain, you can postpone the rest of thatsubsidiary has made, an election under
Limit on eligible gain. The amount of yourgain. If this amount equals or is more than thesection 936 of the Internal Revenue Code,
gain from the stock of any one issuer that isamount of your capital gain, you must recognize• A regulated investment company, eligible for the exclusion in 2008 is limited to thethe full amount of your gain.
greater of:• A real estate investment trust (REIT),
Basis of replacement stock. You must sub- • Ten times your basis in all qualified stock• A real estate mortgage investment conduit tract the amount of postponed gain from the of the issuer that you sold or exchanged(REMIC), basis of your replacement stock. during the year, or
• A financial asset securitization investment Holding period of replacement stock. Your • $10 million ($5 million for married individu-trust (FASIT), or holding period for the replacement stock in- als filing separately) minus the amount of
• A cooperative. cludes your holding period for the stock sold, gain from the stock of the same issuer that
except for the purpose of applying the 6-month you used to figure your exclusion in earlier
Qualified trade or business. This is any holding period requirement for choosing to roll years.
over the gain on its sale.trade or business other than:
• One involving services performed in the Pass-through entity. A pass-through entity (a How to report gain. Report the entire gain
fields of health, law, engineering, architec- partnership, S corporation, or mutual fund or realized from the sale on Schedule D (Form
ture, accounting, actuarial science, per- other regulated investment company) also may 1040), line 8, column (f). Directly below the line
forming arts, consulting, athletics, financial make the choice to postpone gain. The benefit of on which you report the gain, enter ªSection
services, or brokerage services, the postponed gain applies to your share of the 1202 exclusionº in column (a) and enter the
entity's postponed gain if you held an interest in amount of the allowable exclusion in column (f).• One whose principal asset is the reputa- the entity for the entire period the entity held the Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). If you aretion or skill of one or more employees, stock. completing line 18 of Schedule D, enter as a
• Any banking, insurance, financing, leas- If a pass-through entity sold qualified small positive number the amount of the exclusion on
ing, investing, or similar business, business stock held for more than 6 months and line 2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 63

Page 64 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D instructions. But if you excluded If this amount is equal to or more than the rules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade of
60% of the gain, enter 2/3 of the exclusion. amount of your gain, you must recognize the full an asset used in an activity to which the at-risk
amount of your gain. If this amount is less than rules apply. For more information, see Publica-
More information. For information about ad- the amount of your gain, you can postpone the tion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules.
ditional requirements that may apply, see sec- rest of your gain by adjusting the basis of your Use Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figure
tion 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code. replacement property as described next. the amount of loss you can deduct.
Empowerment zone business stock. You Passive activity gains and losses. If youBasis of replacement property. You must
can exclude up to 60% of your gain if you meet have gains or losses from a passive activity, yousubtract the amount of postponed gain from the
all of the following additional requirements. may also have to report them on Form 8582. Inbasis of the qualified empowerment zone assets
some cases, the loss may be limited under theyou bought as replacement property.1. You sell or trade stock in a corporation that passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and itsqualifies as an empowerment zone busi- How to report and postpone capital gain. separate instructions for more information aboutness during substantially all of the time you Report the entire gain realized from the sale on reporting capital gains and losses from a pas-held the stock, and Schedule D (Form 1040), line 8, as you other- sive activity.wise would without regard to the choice to post-2. You acquired the stock after December 21, pone gain. To make the choice to postpone gain, Form 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop-2000. enter ªSection 1397B Rolloverº in column (a) of erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-the line directly below the line on which you ties, through a broker, you should receive FormCondition (1) will still be met if the corporation reported the gain. Enter the amount of gain 1099-B or an equivalent statement from the bro-ceased to qualify after the 5-year period that postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (in ker. Use the Form 1099-B or equivalent state-begins on the date you acquired the stock. How- parentheses). ment to complete Schedule D.ever, the gain that qualifies for the 60% exclu- Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 ofMore information. For more informationsion cannot be more than the gain you would Form 1099-B as the gross sales price in columnabout empowerment zones, see Publicationhave had if you had sold the stock on the date (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Communi-the corporation ceased to qualify. whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-ties. For more information about this rollover ofFor more information about empowerment vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that grossgain, see section 1397B of the Internal Revenuezone businesses, see Publication 954, Tax In- proceeds (gross sales price) less commissionsCode.centives for Distressed Communities. and option premiums were reported to the IRS,
enter that net sales price in column (d) of either
Rollover of Gain line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies.
From Sale of If the net sales price is entered in column (d),Reporting Capital
do not include the commissions and option pre-Empowerment Zone Assets
miums in column (e).Gains and Losses
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain Section 1256 contracts and straddles.gains from the sale of qualified empowerment This section discusses how to report your capital Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses fromzone assets. This means that if you buy certain gains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). section 1256 contracts and straddles before en-replacement property and make the choice de- Enter your sales and trades of stocks, bonds, tering these amounts on Schedule D. Include ascribed in this section, you postpone part or all of etc., and real estate (if not reported on Form copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.the recognition of your gain. 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or 8824) on line 1 of
You qualify to make this choice if you meet Market discount bonds. Report the sale orPart I or line 8 of Part II, as appropriate. Include
all the following tests. trade of a market discount bond on Schedule Dall these transactions even if you did not receive
(Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If the sale or tradea Form 1099-B or 1099-S (or substitute state-• You hold a qualified empowerment zone results in a gain and you did not choose toment). You can use Schedule D-1 as a continua-asset for more than 1 year and sell it at a include market discount in income currently,tion schedule to report more transactions.gain. enter ªAccrued Market Discountº on the next lineBe sure to add all sales price entries in col-
• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. in column (a) and the amount of the accruedumn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total on
market discount as a loss in column (f). Alsoline 3. Also add all sales price entries in column• During the 60-day period beginning on the report the amount of accrued market discount as(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.date of the sale, you buy a replacement interest income on Schedule B (Form 1040), lineThen add the following amounts reported to youqualified empowerment zone asset in the 1, and identify it as ªAccrued Market Discount.ºfor 2008 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-Ssame zone as the asset sold. (or on substitute statements):
Form 1099-CAP transactions. If a corpora-• Proceeds from transactions involving tion in which you own stock has had a change inAny part of the gain that is ordinary stocks, bonds, and other securities, and control or a substantial change in capital struc-income cannot be postponed and must
ture, you should receive Form 1099-CAP or anbe recognized. • Gross proceeds from real estate transac-
CAUTION
!
equivalent statement from the corporation. Usetions (other than the sale of your main
the Form 1099-CAP or equivalent statement tohome if you had no taxable gain) not re-Qualified empowerment zone asset. This figure the gain to report on Schedule D (Formported on another form or schedule.means certain stock or partnership interests in 1040). You cannot claim a loss on Schedule Dan enterprise zone business. It also includes (Form 1040) as a result of this transaction.certain tangible property used in an enterprise If this total is more than the total of lines 3 and Report the aggregate amount receivedzone business. You must have acquired the 10, attach a statement to your return explaining shown in box 2 of Form 1099-CAP as the grossasset after December 21, 2000. the difference. sales price in column (d) of either line 1 or line 8
of Schedule D, whichever applies.Amount of gain recognized. If you make the Installment sales. You cannot use the install-choice described in this section, you must rec- ment method to report a gain from the sale of Form 1099-S transactions. If you sold orognize gain only up to the following amount: stock or securities traded on an established se- traded reportable real estate, you generallycurities market. You must report the entire gain• The amount realized on the sale, minus should receive from the real estate reportingin the year of sale (the year in which the trade person a Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Real• The cost of any qualified empowerment date occurs). Estate Transactions, showing the gross pro-zone asset that you bought during the
ceeds.60-day period beginning on the date of At-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to
sale (and did not previously take into ac- most income-producing activities. These rules ªReportable real estateº is defined as any
count in rolling over gain on an earlier sale limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the present or future ownership interest in any of the
of qualified empowerment zone assets). amount you risk losing in the activity. The at-risk following:
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Improved or unimproved land, including air If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total of Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain or
space, loss on the sale or trade of investment propertylines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your return
held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain orexplaining the reason for the difference.• Inherently permanent structures, including loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If theFile Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with theany residential, commercial, or industrial amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show itIRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi-building, in parentheses.nee in 2008, you must file a Form 1099-B or• A condominium unit and its accessory fix- You combine your share of short-term capitalForm 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS.tures and common elements, including gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with aland, and and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital lossForm 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of carryover, with your other short-term capital• Stock in a cooperative housing corporation U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve- gains and losses to figure your net short-term(as defined in section 216 of the Internal nue Service Center by March 2, 2009 (March 31, capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.Revenue Code). 2009, if you file Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S
electronically). Give the actual owner of the pro- Long-term gains and losses. A capital gainA ªreal estate reporting personº could include ceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or Form or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-the buyer's attorney, your attorney, the title or 1099-S by February 17, 2009. On Form 1099-B, erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capitalescrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro- you should be listed as the ªPayer.º The other gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Scheduleker, the buyer's broker, or the person acquiring owner should be listed as the ªRecipient.º On D. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,the biggest interest in the property. Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the ªFiler.º show it in parentheses.Your Form 1099-S will show the gross pro- The other owner should be listed as the ªTrans- You also report the following in Part II ofceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol- feror.º You do not, however, have to file a Form Schedule D:low the instructions for Schedule D to report 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds for
these transactions, and include them on line 1 or • Undistributed long-term capital gains fromyour spouse. For more information about the
8 as appropriate. However, report like-kind ex- a mutual fund (or other regulated invest-reporting requirements and the penalties for fail-
changes on Form 8824 instead. ment company) or real estate investmenture to file (or furnish) certain information returns,
It is unlawful for any real estate reporting trust (REIT),see the General Instructions for Forms 1099,
person to separately charge you for complying 1098, 5498, and W-2G. • Your share of long-term capital gains orwith the requirement to file Form 1099-S. losses from partnerships, S corporations,Sale of property bought at various times. If and fiduciaries,Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a you sell a block of stock or other property that
nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your • All capital gain distributions from mutualyou bought at various times, report the
name but actually belong to someone else), funds and REITs not reported directly onshort-term gain or loss from the sale on one line
report on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only the line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Formin Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain or
proceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol- 1040, andloss on one line in Part II. Enter ªVariousº in
lowing amounts reported to you for 2008 on column (b) for the ªDate acquired.º See the • Long-term capital loss carryovers.Forms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state- Comprehensive Example later in this chapter.
ments) that you are not reporting on another
The result after combining these items withform or schedule included with your return: Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba- your other long-term capital gains and losses issis any expense of sale such as broker's fees,1. Proceeds from transactions involving your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 ofcommissions, state and local transfer taxes, andstocks, bonds, and other securities, and Schedule D).option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in
column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac- Capital gain distributions only. You do
D, whichever applies, unless you reported thetions (other than the sale of your main not have to file Schedule D if both of the follow-
net sales price amount in column (d).home if you are not required to report it). ing are true.
Worksheet 4-1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2008 to 2009 if Schedule D, line 21, is a loss and (a) that loss is a
smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D, line 16, or (b) Form 1040, line 41, reduced by any amount on Form 8914, line 2, is less
than zero. Otherwise, you do not have any carryovers. 
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 41. If a loss, enclose the amount in parentheses ............ . 1.
2. Did you file Form 8914 (to claim an exemption amount for housing a Midwestern displaced individual)?
 No. Enter -0-.
 Yes. Enter the amount from your Form 8914, line 2 .................................... . 2.
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1. If the result is less than zero, enclose it in parentheses ................ . 3.
4. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 21, as a positive amount ............................... . 4.
5. Combine lines 3 and 4. If zero or less, enter -0- ......................................... . 5.
6. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 5 .................................................. . 6.
If line 7 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 7; otherwise, enter -0- on line 7and go to line 11.
7. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 7, as a positive amount ................................ . 7.
8. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 15. If a loss, enter -0- ................... . 8.
9. Add lines 6 and 8 .............................................................. . 9.
10. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2009. Subtract line 9 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... . 10.
If line 15 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 11; otherwise, skip lines 11 through 15.
11. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 15, as a positive amount ............................... . 11.
12. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 7 .................................. . 12.
13. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................... . 13.
14. Add lines 12 and 13 ............................................................ . 14.
15. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2009. Subtract line 14 from line 11. If zero or less, enter -0- .... . 15.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 65

Page 66 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The only amounts you would have to re- Capital loss carryover. If you have a total net losses, use the long-term capital losses until you
reach the limit.loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more thanport on Schedule D are capital gain distri-
the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, youbutions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (or Decedent's capital loss. A capital losscan carry over the unused part to the next yearsubstitute statement). sustained by a decedent during his or her lastand treat it as if you had incurred it in that next tax year (or carried over to that year from an• You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c, year. If part of the loss is still unused, you can earlier year) can be deducted only on the finalor 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substitute carry it over to later years until it is completely return filed for the decedent. The capital lossstatement). used up. limits discussed earlier still apply in this situa-
When you figure the amount of any capital tion. The decedent's estate cannot deduct anyIf both of the above statements are true, report loss carryover to the next year, you must take of the loss or carry it over to following years.
your capital gain distributions directly on line 13 the current year's allowable deduction into ac- Joint and separate returns. If you and yourof Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also, count, whether or not you claimed it and whether spouse once filed separate returns and are nowuse the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain or not you filed a return for the current year. filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to When you carry over a loss, it remains long tal loss carryovers. However, if you and yourfigure your tax. term or short term. A long-term capital loss you spouse once filed a joint return and are nowcarry over to the next tax year will reduce thatYou can report your capital gain distributions filing separate returns, any capital loss carryoveryear's long-term capital gains before it reduceson line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form from the joint return can be deducted only on thethat year's short-term capital gains.1040, if both of the following are true. return of the spouse who actually had the loss.
Figuring your carryover. The amount of• None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substitute
your capital loss carryover is the amount of your Capital Gain Tax Ratesstatements) you received have an amount
total net loss that is more than the lesser of:in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.
The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are
• You do not have to file Form 1040 for any 1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for generally lower than the tax rates that apply to
other capital gains or losses. the year, or other income. These lower rates are called the
maximum capital gain rates.2. Your taxable income increased by your al- The term ªnet capital gainº means theTotal net gain or loss. To figure your total net lowable capital loss deduction for the year amount by which your net long-term capital gaingain or loss, combine your net short-term capital and your deduction for personal exemp- for the year is more than your net short-termgain or loss (line 7) with your net long-term tions. capital loss.capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result on If your deductions are more than your gross For 2008, the maximum capital gain ratesSchedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses are income for the tax year, use your negative tax- are 0%, 15%, 25%, and 28%. See Table 4-2 formore than your gains, see Capital Losses, next. able income in computing the amount in item (2). details.If both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 of
Complete Worksheet 4-1 to determine theForm 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain If you figure your tax using the maxi-part of your capital loss for 2008 that you canTax Rates, later. mum capital gain rate and the regular
carry over to 2009. tax computation results in a lower tax,
TIP
the regular tax computation applies.Capital Losses Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities in
2008. The sales resulted in a capital loss ofIf your capital losses are more than your capital Example. All of your net capital gain is from$7,000. They had no other capital transactions.gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction. selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate wouldTheir taxable income was $26,000. On their jointReport the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040, be 28%. Because you are single and your tax-2008 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-enclosed in parentheses. able income is $25,000, none of your taxableused part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), income will be taxed above the 15% rate. Thecan be carried over to 2009.Limit on deduction. Your allowable capital 28% rate does not apply.
If their capital loss had been $2,000, theirloss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the
Investment interest deducted. If you claim acapital loss deduction would have been $2,000.lesser of: deduction for investment interest, you may haveThey would have no carryover.
• $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file to reduce the amount of your net capital gain
Use short-term losses first. When you fig-a separate return), or that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.
ure your capital loss carryover, use your Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gain• Your total net loss as shown on line 16 of short-term capital losses first, even if you in- you choose to include in investment incomeSchedule D. curred them after a long-term capital loss. If you when figuring the limit on your investment inter-
You can use your total net loss to reduce your have not reached the limit on the capital loss est deduction. This is done on the Schedule D
income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit. deduction after using the short-term capital Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-
Table 4-2. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate? tion about the limit on investment interest, see
Interest Expenses in chapter 3.
THEN your maximum 
28% rate gain. This gain includes gain or lossIF your net capital gain is from ... capital gain rate is ...
from the sale of collectibles and the eligible gain
collectibles gain 28% from the sale of qualified small business stock
minus the section 1202 exclusion.eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the
Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain orsection 1202 exclusion 28%
loss from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,
unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25% antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-
num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25% erage held more than 1 year.or higher 15% Collectibles gain includes gain from the sale
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is lower of an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or
than 25% 0% trust due to unrealized appreciation of col-
lectibles.1ªOther gainº means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Gain on qualified small business stock. If
you realized a gain from qualified small business
stock that you held more than 5 years, you
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
generally can exclude up to 50% of your gain shown on the Forms 1099-B she received fromComprehensive Example
from your income. The exclusion can be up to her broker. For 2008, the total of lines 3 and 10
60% for certain empowerment zone business Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wages of Schedule D is $14,100, which is the same
stock. The eligible gain minus your section 1202 from her job, she has income from stocks and amount reported by the broker on Forms 1099-B
exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See Gains on other securities. For the 2008 tax year, she had (not shown).
Qualified Small Business Stock , earlier in this the following capital gains and losses, which she Form 6781. On June 2, 2008, Emily had achapter. reports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule D
realized loss from a regulated futures contract ofis shown at the end of this example.Unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Generally, $11,000. She also had an unrealized marked tothis is any part of your capital gain from selling Capital gains and losses Ð Schedule D. market gain on open contracts of $27,000 at thesection 1250 property (real property) that is due Emily sold stock in two different companies that end of 2008. She had reported an unrealizedto depreciation (but not more than your net sec- she held for less than a year. In June, she sold marked to market gain of $1,000 on her 2007 taxtion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the 100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she had return. (This $1,000 must be subtracted from her28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250 bought in February. She had an adjusted basis 2008 profit.) These amounts are shown in boxesGain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions of $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for a 8, 9, and 10 of the Form 1099-B she receivedto figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain. loss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares of from her broker for these transactions. Box 11For more information about section 1250 prop- Computer Co. stock that she bought in June. shows her combined profit of $15,000 ($27,000erty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000 − $1,000 − $11,000). She reports this gain inPublication 544. and sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. She Part I of Form 6781 (not shown). She showsreports these short-term transactions on line 1 inTax computation using maximum capital 40% ($6,000) as short-term gain on line 4 ofPart I of Schedule D.gains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends and Schedule D and 60% ($9,000) as long-term gainEmily had three other stock sales that sheCapital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D on line 11 of Schedule D.reports as long-term transactions on line 8 inTax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure
Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60 The Form 1099-B that Emily received fromyour tax if you have qualified dividends or net
shares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-
the Car stock from her father. Its fair marketule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains. Capital loss carryover from 2007. Emilyvalue at the time of his death was $2,500, whichSchedule D Tax Worksheet. You must use has a capital loss carryover to 2008 of $800, ofbecame her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.the Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500Because she had inherited the stock, her loss isD instructions to figure your tax if: is long-term capital loss. She enters thesea long-term loss, regardless of how long she and
amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. Sheher father actually held the stock. She enters the• You have to file Schedule D, and
also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-loss in column (f) of line 8.• Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or line ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is sheet.stock for $5,000. She had bought 100 of thosemore than zero. shares in 1997, for $1,000. She had bought 100 She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-
more shares in 1999 for $2,200, and an addi-See the Comprehensive Example  later for an over Worksheet in her 2007 edition of Publica-
tional 300 shares in 2002 for $1,500. Her totalexample of how to figure your tax using the tion 550 (not shown), so she could properly
basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300Schedule D Tax Worksheet. report her loss carryover for the 2008 tax year($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she without refiguring it.Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax enters in column (f) of line 8.Worksheet. If you do not have to use the In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained Tax computation. Because Emily has gainsstock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi-above) and any of the following apply, use the on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D, sheness stock that she had bought in SeptemberQualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work- 2003. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 checks the ªYesº box on line 17 and goes to linesheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form gain, which she enters in column (f) of line 8. 18. On line 18 she enters $1,000 from line 7 of1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax. Because she held the stock more than 5 years, the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18
she has a $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She• You received qualified dividends. (See is greater than zero, she checks the ªNoº box on
claims the exclusion on the line below by enter-Qualified Dividends in chapter 1.) line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheet
ing $1,500 as a loss in column (f). She also to figure her tax.• You do not have to file Schedule D and enters the exclusion as a positive amount on line After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13you received capital gain distributions. 2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet.(See Capital gain distributions only, ear- of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofShe received a Form 1099-B (not shown)lier.) Form 1040 through line 43. She enters thefrom her broker for each of these transactions. amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of theThe entries shown in box 2 of these forms total• Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out the$14,100.more than zero.
rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax as
Reconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emily $2,768. This is less than the tax she would have
Alternative minimum tax. These capital gain makes sure that the total of the amounts re- figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,103.rates are also used in figuring alternative mini- ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-  mum tax. ule D is not less than the total of the amounts
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 67

Page 68 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 15093R13 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
Emily Jones 111 00 1111
100 sh
Trucking Co.
25 sh
Computer Co.
2-12-08
6-30-08
6-12-08
7-30-08
400
2,500
1,150
2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
60 sh
Car Co.
500 sh
Furniture Co.
20 sh
Toy Co.
INHERITED
VARIOUS
9-29-03
2-13-08
6-30-08
12-15-08
2,100
5,000
4,100
11,200
2,500
4,700
1,100
300
500
(750)
5,450
(400)
3,000
9,000
9,900
Section 1202
exclusion (1,500)
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in
column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f)
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts. Add lines 8 and 9 in
column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions
14
15
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 13 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ()
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to
Part III on the back 15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 or Form 1040NR instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2008Cat. No. 11338H
()
4 4
Part I
Part II
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
7
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
2008
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
15,350
1,000
/H12011
/H12011
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2008
Summary
Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result16 16
18
Part III
Page 2
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-8 of the
instructions /H17075
Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank?
19
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2008
21
Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on 
page D-9 of the instructions /H17075
20
If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14, the smaller
of:
21
19
● The loss on line 16 or
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below.
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete the
Schedule D Tax Worksheet on page D-10 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and
22 below.
Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b?22
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR).
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
( )
Are lines 15 and 16 both gains?17
Yes. Go to line 18.
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22.
Note. When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers.
If line 16 is:
● A gain, enter the amount from line 16 on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14. Then
go to line 17 below.
● A loss, skip lines 17 through 20 below. Then go to line 21. Also be sure to complete line 22.
● Zero, skip lines 17 through 21 below and enter -0- on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR,
line 14. Then go to line 22.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 69

Page 70 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b); or
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) is zero or less.
Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40). (However, if you are filing Form 2555 or
2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned income), enter instead the amount from line 3 of the Foreign Earned Income Tax
Worksheet on page 37 of the Form 1040 instructions) ............................................ . 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or Form
1040NR, line 10b)* .............................. . 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952 (used to
figure investment interest expense deduction),
line 4g ........................... . 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e** . . 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ......... . 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0- ..................... . 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ........ . 7. 9,900
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 ................... . 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0-* .................... . 9. 9,900
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ........................................................ . 10. 9,900
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D* ............................... . 11. 1,000
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 ........................................... . 12. 1,000
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10. ............................................................. . 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. ............................................. . 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
}
• The amount on line 1 or
• $32,550 if single or married filing separately; ...... . 15. 30,000
$65,100 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$43,650 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15 .............................. . 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ........ . 17. 20,100
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 .......................................... . © 18. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip line 19 and go to line 20. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15 ............................................... . © 19. 8,900
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 20 through 32 and go to line 33. Otherwise, go to line 20.
20. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 .............................. . 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-) ............... . 21.
22. Subtract line 21 from line 20. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. . © 22.
23. Multiply line 22 by 15% (.15) ............................................................. . 23.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 24 through 29 and go to line 30. Otherwise, go to line 24.
24. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 ................. . 24.
25. Add lines 10 and 18 ............................. . 25.
26. Enter the amount from line 1 above ................... . 26.
27. Subtract line 26 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- ................... . 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 24. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. . © 28.
29. Multiply line 28 by 25% (.25) ............................................................. . 29.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 30 through 32 and go to line 33. Otherwise, go to line 30.
30. Add lines 18, 19, 22, and 28 ................................................. . 30.
31. Subtract line 30 from line 1 .................................................. . 31.
32. Multiply line 31 by 28% (.28) ............................................................. . 32.
33. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ..... . 33. 2,768
34. Add lines 23, 29, 32, and 33 ............................................................. . 34. 2,768
35. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ...... . 35. 4,103
36. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 34 or line 35.
Also include this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41). (If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, do
not enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44. Instead, enter it on line 4 of the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet in
the Form 1040 instructions) ............................................................. . 36. 2,768
*If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the footnote in the Foreign Income Tax Worksheet on page 37 of the Form
1040 instructions before completing this line.
**If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
Page 70 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 71 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% Rate Gain WorksheetÐLine 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of
Schedules D and D-1 .......................................................... . 1.
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain .. . 2. 1,500.00
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ........................... . 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
............ . 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. ( 500.00)box 11, code C ............................................................... .
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- .................... . 6. -0-
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18 ............................................................ . 7. 1,000.00
XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, PA 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
(11,000)
27,000
1,000
15,000
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
OMB No. 1545-0715PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale or exchange1a Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
TransactionsCUSIP no.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$
Gross proceeds less commissions and option premiums
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$$
RECIPIENT’S name No. of shares exchanged5
Street address (including apt. no.) Description7
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B
/H20854
(keep for your records)
CORRECTED (if checked)
Form 1099-B
8
$
Profit or (loss) realized in
2008
9 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2007
10 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts–12/31/2008
11 Aggregate profit or (loss)
$
$$
Classes of stock
exchanged
6
CORPORATION’S name
12 If the box is checked, the recipient cannot take a loss on
their tax return based on the amount in box 2
2008
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 71

Page 72 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
statement should be attached to either yourHow To Report
2008 individual income tax return or a requestSpecial Rules for
for an extension of time to file that return. TheTransactions from trading activities result in cap-
statement must include the following informa-ital gains and losses and must be reported onTraders in Securities
tion.Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from these
Special rules apply if you are a trader in securi- transactions are subject to the limit on capital • That you are making an election underties in the business of buying and selling securi- losses explained earlier in this chapter. section 475(f) of the Internal Revenueties for your own account. To be engaged in Code.business as a trader in securities, you must Mark-to-market election made. If you made • The first tax year for which the election ismeet all the following conditions.
the mark-to-market election, you should report effective.• You must seek to profit from daily market all gains and losses from trading as ordinary • The trade or business for which you aremovements in the prices of securities and gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, instead making the election.not from dividends, interest, or capital ap- of as capital gains and losses on Schedule D. In
preciation. that case, securities held at the end of the year If you are not required to file a 2008 incomein your business as a trader are marked to mar-• Your activity must be substantial. tax return, you make the election by placing theket by treating them as if they were sold (and above statement in your books and records no• You must carry on the activity with con- reacquired) for fair market value on the last later than March 15, 2009. Attach a copy of thetinuity and regularity. business day of the year. But do not mark to statement to your 2009 return.market any securities you held for investment. If your method of accounting for 2008 isThe following facts and circumstances should Report sales from those securities on Schedule inconsistent with the mark-to-market election,be considered in determining if your activity is a D, not Form 4797. you must change your method of accounting forsecurities trading business.
securities under Revenue Procedure 2008-52• Typical holding periods for securities (or its successor) available at www.irs.gov/irb/Expenses. Interest expense and other invest-bought and sold. 2008-36_IRB/ar09.html . Revenue Procedurement expenses that an investor would deduct on
2008-52 requires you to file Form 3115, Applica-• The frequency and dollar amount of your Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by a
tion for Change in Accounting Method. Follow itstrades during the year. trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or instructions. Enter ª64º on line 1a of the FormLoss From Business, if the expenses are from• The extent to which you pursue the activity 3115.the trading business. Commissions and otherto produce income for a livelihood. Once you make the election, it will apply tocosts of acquiring or disposing of securities are 2009 and all later tax years, unless you get• The amount of time you devote to the ac- not deductible but must be used to figure gain or permission from IRS to revoke it. The effect oftivity. loss. The limit on investment interest expense, making the election is described underwhich applies to investors, does not apply to Mark-to-market election made, earlier.If your trading activities are not a business, interest paid or incurred in a trading business. For more information on this election, seeyou are considered an investor, and not a trader.
Revenue Procedure 99-17, on page 52 of Inter-It does not matter whether you call yourself a
nal Revenue Bulletin 1999-7 attrader or a ªday trader.º Self-employment tax. Gains and losses from
 www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb99-07.pdf.selling securities as part of a trading business
Note. You may be a trader in some securi- are not subject to self-employment tax. This is
ties and have other securities you hold for in- true whether the election is made or not.
vestment. The special rules discussed here do
not apply to the securities held for investment.
You must keep detailed records to distinguish How To Make the 
the securities. The securities held for investment Mark-to-Market Election
must be identified as such in your records on the
To make the mark-to-market election for 2009,day you got them (for example, by holding them
you must file a statement by April 15, 2009. Thisin a separate brokerage account).
Page 72 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 73 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the phone book under United States Govern-
Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near- ment, Internal Revenue Service.
est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access5. visit AARP's website at to TTY/TDD equipment, callwww.aarp.org/money/taxaide. 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toFor more information on these programs, go order forms and publications.to www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in theHow To Get Tax • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-upper right-hand corner.
ten to pre-recorded messages coveringInternet. You can access the IRS web- various tax topics.Help site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7
• Refund information. To check the status ofdays a week to:
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, your 2008 refund, call 1-800-829-1954• E-file your return. Find out about commer-order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- during business hours or 1-800-829-4477cial tax preparation and e-file servicestions, and get information from the IRS in sev- (automated refund information 24 hours aavailable free to eligible taxpayers.eral ways. By selecting the method that is best day, 7 days a week). Wait at least 72
for you, you will have quick and easy access to hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt• Check the status of your 2008 refund. Go
tax help. of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks afterto www.irs.gov and click on Where's My
mailing a paper return. If you filed FormRefund. Wait at least 72 hours after theContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The 8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11IRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filedTaxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- weeks if you filed electronically). Havereturn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing apendent organization within the IRS whose em- your 2008 tax return available so you canpaper return. If you filed Form 8379 withployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing provide your social security number, youryour return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks ifeconomic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- filing status, and the exact whole dollaryou filed electronically). Have your 2008ing tax problems that have not been resolved amount of your refund. Refunds are senttax return available so you can providethrough normal channels, or who believe that an out weekly on Fridays. If you check theyour social security number, your filingIRS system or procedure is not working as it status of your refund and are not given thestatus, and the exact whole dollar amountshould. date it will be issued, please wait until theof your refund.You can contact the TAS by calling the TAS next week before checking back.toll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or • Download forms, instructions, and publica-
TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi- • Other refund information. To check thetions.
ble for assistance. You can also call or write your status of a prior year refund or amended• Order IRS products online.local taxpayer advocate, whose phone number return refund, call 1-800-829-1954.
and address are listed in your local telephone • Research your tax questions online.
directory and in Publication 1546, Taxpayer Ad- Evaluating the quality of our telephone• Search publications online by topic orvocate Service ÐYour Voice at the IRS. You services. To ensure IRS representatives givekeyword.can file Form 911, Request for Taxpayer Advo- accurate, courteous, and professional answers,
cate Service Assistance (And Application for we use several methods to evaluate the quality• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)
Taxpayer Assistance Order), or ask an IRS em- of our telephone services. One method is for apublished in the last few years.
ployee to complete it on your behalf. For more second IRS representative to listen in on or• Figure your withholding allowances usinginformation, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. record random telephone calls. Another is to askthe withholding calculator online at some callers to complete a short survey at theLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). www.irs.gov/individuals. end of the call.LITCs are independent organizations that pro- • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed byvide low income taxpayers with representation Walk-in. Many products and servicesusing our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)in federal tax controversies with the IRS for free are available on a walk-in basis.Assistant.or for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide
tax education and outreach for taxpayers who • Sign up to receive local and national tax
• Products. You can walk in to many postspeak English as a second language. Publica- news by email.
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick uption 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List, • Get information on starting and operating certain forms, instructions, and publica-provides information on clinics in your area. It is a small business. tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, groceryavailable at www.irs.gov or your local IRS office.
stores, copy centers, city and county gov-
Free tax services. To find out what services ernment offices, credit unions, and office
are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to supply stores have a collection of productsPhone. Many services are available by
Free Tax Services. It contains lists of free tax available to print from a CD or photocopyphone. 
information sources, including publications, from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS
services, and free tax education and assistance offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-programs. It also has an index of over 100 enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenuetions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur-TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) you Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-rent-year forms, instructions, andcan listen to on your telephone. able for research purposes.publications, and prior-year forms and in-Accessible versions of IRS published prod- • Services. You can walk in to your localstructions. You should receive your orderucts are available on request in a variety of Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-within 10 days.alternative formats for people with disabilities. ness day for personal, face-to-face tax• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withFree help with your return. Free help in pre- help. An employee can explain IRS letters,your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.paring your return is available nationwide from request adjustments to your tax account,
IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income • Solving problems. You can get or help you set up a payment plan. If you
Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to face-to-face help solving tax problems need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-
help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun- every business day in IRS Taxpayer As- tions about how the tax law applies to your
seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed sistance Centers. An employee can ex- individual tax return, or you are more com-
to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their plain IRS letters, request adjustments to fortable talking with someone in person,
tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronic your account, or help you set up a pay- visit your local Taxpayer Assistance
filing and all volunteers will let you know about ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis- Center where you can spread out your
credits and deductions you may be entitled to tance Center for an appointment. To find records and talk with an IRS representa-
claim. To find the nearest Vita or TCE site, call the number, go to tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-
1-800-829-1040. www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 73

Page 74 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can call your local Center and leave a • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and • Helpful information, such as how to pre-
message requesting an appointment to re- pare a business plan, find financing forfinding aid.
solve a tax account issue. A representa- your business, and much more.• Tax law frequently asked questions.tive will call you back within 2 business • All the business tax forms, instructions,days to schedule an in-person appoint- • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re- and publications needed to successfullyment at your convenience. If you have an sponse system. manage a business.ongoing, complex tax account problem or • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the • Tax law changes for 2009.a special need, such as a disability, an U.S. Code.appointment can be requested. All other • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andissues will be handled without an appoint- • Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax finding aid.ment. To find the number of your local forms.
• Web links to various government agen-office, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or
• Internal Revenue Bulletins. cies, business associations, and IRS orga-look in the phone book under United
nizations.States Government, Internal Revenue • Toll-free and email technical support.
Service. • ªRate the Productº surveyÐyour opportu-• Two releases during the year.
nity to suggest changes for future editions.± The first release will ship the beginningMail. You can send your order for of January 2009. • A site map of the guide to help you navi-forms, instructions, and publications to ± The final release will ship the beginning gate the pages with ease.the address below. You should receive
 of March 2009.a response within 10 days after your request is • An interactive ªTeens in Bizº module that
received. gives practical tips for teens about startingPurchase the DVD from National Technical their own business, creating a businessInformation Service (NTIS) at Internal Revenue Service plan, and filing taxes.www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no handling fee)1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVDBloomington, IL 61705-6613 The information is updated during the year.for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee). The price is Visit www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªSBRGº inDVD for tax products. You can order discounted to $25 for orders placed prior to the upper right-hand corner for more informa-Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products December 1, 2008. tion.DVD, and obtain:
Small Business Resource Guide• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub- 2009. This online guide is a must forlications. every small business owner or any tax-
payer about to start a business. This year's• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-
tions. guide includes:
Page 74 Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help

Page 75 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary 2. The transaction is one of the Investment interest: The inter- Passive activity: An activity in-
volving the conduct of a trade orare the meanings of the terms as following. est you paid or accrued on money
business in which you do not mate-used in this publication. The same you borrowed that is allocable toa. A straddle, including any rially participate and any rental ac-term used in another publication property held for investment.set of offsetting positions tivity. However, the rental of realmay have a slightly different mean-
on stock. Limited partner: A partner estate is not a passive activity ifing.
whose participation in partnership both of the following are true.b. Any transaction in whichAccrual method: An accounting activities is restricted, and whoseyou acquire property • More than one-half of the per-method under which you report personal liability for partnership(whether or not actively sonal services you performyour income when you earn it, debts is limited to the amount oftraded) at substantially the during the year in all trades orwhether or not you have received it. money or other property that he orsame time that you con- businesses are performed inYou generally deduct your ex- she contributed or may have totract to sell the same prop- real property trades or busi-penses when you incur a liability for contribute.erty or substantially nesses in which you materi-them, rather than when you pay identical property at a price ally participate.Listed option: Any option that isthem. set in the contract. traded on, or subject to the rules of, • You perform more than 750At-risk rules: Rules that limit the a qualified board or exchange.c. Any other transaction that hours of services during theamount of loss you may deduct to is marketed or sold as pro- year in real property trades orthe amount you risk losing in the Marked to market rule: The businesses in which you ma-ducing capital gains from aactivity. treatment of each section 1256 terially participate.transaction described in contract (defined later) held by a(1).Basis: Basis is the amount of taxpayer at the close of the year as Portfolio income: Gross incomeyour investment in property for tax if it were sold for its fair market from interest, dividends, annuities,purposes. The basis of property Demand loan: A loan payable in value on the last business day of or royalties that is not derived in theyou buy is usually the cost. Basis is full at any time upon demand by the the year. ordinary course of a trade or busi-used to figure gain or loss on the lender. ness. It includes gains from thesale or disposition of investment Market discount: The stated re- sale or trade of property (other thanproperty. Dividend: A distribution of demption price of a bond at matur- an interest in a passive activity)money or other property made by a ity minus your basis in the bondBelow-market loan: A demand producing portfolio income or heldcorporation to its shareholders out immediately after you acquire it.loan (defined later) on which inter- for investment.of its earnings and profits. Market discount arises when theest is payable at a rate below the value of a debt obligation de- Premium: The amount by whichapplicable federal rate, or a term Equity option: Any option: creases after its issue date. your cost or other basis in a bondloan where the amount loaned is • To buy or sell stock, or right after you get it is more thanmore than the present value of all Market discount bond: Any the total of all amounts payable onpayments due under the loan. • That is valued directly or indi- bond having market discount ex- the bond after you get it (other thanrectly by reference to any cept:Call: An option that entitles the payments of qualified stated inter-stock or narrow-based secur-purchaser to buy, at any time est).• Short-term obligations withity index.before a specified future date, fixed maturity dates of up to 1 Private activity bond: A bondproperty such as a stated number year from the date of issue,Fair market value: The price at that is part of a state or local gov-of shares of stock at a specified • Tax-exempt obligations thatwhich property would change ernment bond issue of which:price.
you bought before May 1,hands between a willing buyer and
1. More than 10% of the pro-1993,Cash method: An accounting a willing seller, both having reason-
ceeds are to be used for amethod under which you report able knowledge of the relevant • U.S. savings bonds, and private business use, andyour income in the year in which facts.
• Certain installment obliga-you actually or constructively re- 2. More than 10% of the pay-Forgone interest: The amountceive it. You generally deduct your tions. ment of the principal or inter-of interest that would be payable forexpenses in the year you pay them. est is:any period if interest accrued at the Nominee: A person who re-Commodities trader: A person applicable federal rate and was a. Secured by an interest inceives, in his or her name, incomewho is actively engaged in trading payable annually on December 31, property to be used for athat actually belongs to someonesection 1256 contracts and is regis- minus any interest payable on the private business use (orelse.tered with a domestic board of loan for that period. payments for the property),
trade designated as a contract orNonequity option: Any listedForward contract: A contract tomarket by the Commodities Fu- option that is not an equity option, b. Derived from payments fordeliver a substantially fixed amounttures Trading Commission. such as debt options, commodity property (or borrowedof property (including cash) for a futures options, currency options,Commodity future: A contract money) used for a privatesubstantially fixed price. and broad-based stock index op-made on a commodity exchange, business use.
tions.Futures contract: An ex-calling for the sale or purchase of a
change-traded contract to buy orfixed amount of a commodity at a Options dealer: Any person reg- Put: An option that entitles thesell a specified commodity or finan-future date for a fixed price. istered with an appropriate national purchaser to sell, at any timecial instrument at a specified price securities exchange as a marketConversion transaction: Any before a specified future date,at a specified future date. See also maker or specialist in listed op-transaction that you entered into property such as a stated numberCommodity future. tions.after April 30, 1993, that meets of shares of stock at a specified
Gift loan: Any below-market loanboth of these tests. price.Original issue discount (OID):where the forgone interest is in the The amount by which the stated1. Substantially all of your ex- Real estate mortgage invest-nature of a gift.
redemption price at maturity of apected return from the trans- ment conduit (REMIC): An en-
debt instrument is more than its is-Interest: Compensation for theaction is due to the time value tity that is formed for the purpose of
of your net investment. use or forbearance of money. sue price. holding a fixed pool of mortgages
Publication 550 (2008) Page 75

Page 76 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
secured by interests in real prop- Restricted stock: Stock you get borrow the property to deliver to a b. Does not participate in cor-
buyer and, at a later date, you buy porate growth to any signif-for services you perform that iserty, with multiple classes of inter-
substantially identical property and icant extent, andnontransferable and is subject to aests held by investors. These
deliver it to the lender.substantial risk of forfeiture.interests may be either regular or c. Has a fixed redemptionresidual. price.Straddle: Generally, a set of off-Section 1256 contract: Any:
setting positions on personal prop-Regulated futures contract: A • Regulated futures contract, erty. A straddle may consist of asection 1256 contract that: Term loan: Any loan that is not apurchased option to buy and a pur-• Foreign currency contract as demand loan.• Provides that amounts that chased option to sell on the samedefined in chapter 4 undermust be deposited to, or may number of shares of the security,Section 1256 Contracts Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-be withdrawn from, your mar- with the same exercise price andMarked to Market, curities at a loss within 30 daysgin account depend on daily period. before or after you buy or acquire in• Nonequity option,market conditions (a system a fully taxable trade, or acquire aStripped preferred stock: Stockof marking to market), and • Dealer equity option, or contract or option to buy, substan-that meets the following tests. tially identical stock or securities.• Is traded on, or subject to the • Dealer securities futures con-
rules of, a qualified board of 1. There has been a separationtract.
in ownership between theexchange, such as a domes-
stock and any dividend on thetic board of trade designated Securities futures contract: A stock that has not becomeas a contract market by the contract of sale for future delivery payable.Commodity Futures Trading of a single security or of a nar-
Commission or any board of row-based security index. 2. The stock:trade or exchange approved
by the Secretary of the Trea- Short sale: The sale of property a. Is limited and preferred as
sury. that you generally do not own. You to dividends, ■
Page 76 Publication 550 (2008)

Page 77 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Par value ................. . 44 Children: Discount on debtA
instruments ........... . 13-16Premiums on ....... . 34, 44, 75 Alaska Permanent FundAbusive tax shelters  (See Tax
Certificates of deposit ...... . 14Private activity ........ . 12, 75 dividends ............... . 33shelters)
Election to report all interest asRedemption or retirement Capital gain distributions ... . 33Accounting fees ............ . 35
OID .................... . 16of ...................... . 38 Custodian account for ...... . 3Accrual method ..... . 7, 17, 25, Face-amount certificates ... . 14Sold between interest32, 75 Gifts to .................... . 5dates ................... . 11 Gain or loss treatment ..... . 49Accuracy-related penalty .... . 5 Investment income of .... . 3, 33State and local Inflation-indexed .......... . 14Acquisition discount ... . 16, 44 Qualified dividends ........ . 33government ............. . 49 Market discount bonds (SeeAdjusted basis ...... . 21, 42, 44 Savings account with parent asStripped ........... . 12, 14, 44 Market discount bonds)trustee ................... . 5Alaska Permanent Fund Tax-exempt ............... . 49 Original issue discount (Seedividends ............ . 23, 33 U.S. savings bond owner ... . 8 Original issue discount (OID))Traded flat ................. . 6
Amortization of bond Clerical help ................ . 35U.S. savings (See U.S. savings Short-term obligations .... . 16,
premium .............. . 34-35 Collateralized debt obligationsbonds) 49
Annuities: (CDOs) ................... . 26U.S. Treasury (See U.S. Stripped bonds and
Borrowing on .............. . 36 Comments on publication ... . 2Treasury bills, notes, and coupons ................ . 14
Interest on ................. . 6 bonds) Commodities traders ....... . 75 Discounted debt
Life insurance proceeds used to Brokerage fees ......... . 35, 65 instruments .............. . 13Commodity futures ..... . 51, 53,buy ..................... . 12 75 Discounted tax-exemptSale of .................... . 50 obligations ............... . 44Community property:Single-premium ........... . 36 C Dividends  (See also FormU.S. savings bonds ......... . 8Trade for .............. . 38, 47 Calls and puts .......... . 57, 75 1099-DIV) ......... . 19-25, 75Constructive ownershipApplicable federal rate ...... . 6 Table 4-1 ................. . 57 Alaska Permanenttransactions ......... . 48, 51Appreciated financial Capital assets .............. . 48 Fund ............... . 23, 33Constructive receipt ........ . 16positions ................. . 39 Capital gain Exempt-interest ..... . 5, 23, 53Constructive sales ......... . 39Arbitrage bonds ............ . 12 distributions ..... . 21, 24, 33, Extraordinary ............. . 55Contractors, insolvencyAssistance  (See Tax help) 53 Holding period ............ . 20of ........................ . 54At-risk rules ......... . 31, 64, 75 Capital gain tax Insurance policies ......... . 23Conversioncomputation ............. . 67 Money market funds ....... . 21Attorneys' fees ............. . 35 transactions ......... . 51, 75 Nominees ............. . 20, 24Capital gains andAutomatic investment Convertible stocks and Ordinary .................. . 20losses ................. . 48-53service ............ . 35, 43, 53 bonds .................... . 46 Patronage ................ . 23Constructive ownership Cooperatives, sales of stock Payments in lieu of ........ . 55transactions ............ . 51 to ........................ . 61 Qualified ........... . 20, 23, 33B Definition ................. . 48
Co-owners of U.S. savings Qualified foreignEmpowerment zoneBackup withholding ......... . 3 bonds ..................... . 8 corporation ............. . 20assets .................. . 64Bad debts .............. . 50, 53 Corporate distributions .... . 19 Received in January ....... . 20Investment property ....... . 49Bankrupt financial institutions: Capital gain ........ . 24, 33, 53 Reinvestment plans ... . 21, 35,Long-term ............ . 55, 65Deposit in ................. . 50
43Constructive .............. . 22Long-term debtBargain purchases ......... . 41 Reporting requirements ... . 19,instruments ............. . 49 Dividends (See Dividends)Basis ................ . 41-47, 75 23-25Losses, limit on ........... . 66 Fractional shares .......... . 22Adjusted ........... . 21, 42, 44 Restricted stock ........... . 23Passive activities .......... . 64 Liquidating ............ . 21, 25Cost ...................... . 41 Sale or trade vs. ........... . 38Qualified covered call Nondividend .......... . 21, 24Inherited property ......... . 42 Scrip ..................... . 23options ................. . 59Investment property ....... . 41 Return of capital ........... . 21 Sold stock ................ . 20Qualified small businessLike-kind exchanges ....... . 45 Stock rights ............... . 22 Stock ................. . 43, 53stock ................... . 62Other than cost ............ . 41 Undistributed capital Underreported ............. . 4Reporting requirements ... . 59,REITs .................... . 43 gains ................... . 21 Veterans' insurance ..... . 5, 2363, 64REMIC, residual interest ... . 26 CorporateRollover of gain from sale of Divorce ................ . 42, 47Replacement stock ........ . 63 reorganizations .......... . 46securities ............... . 62Stocks and bonds ..... . 21, 22, Cost basis .................. . 41Short-term ............ . 55, 6534, 43 Coupon bonds ............. . 17 ETax rates ................. . 66Bearer obligations ...... . 14, 50 28% rate gain worksheet, Education Savings BondBelow-market loans .... . 6-7, 75 completed sample .... . 66 Program .............. . 10-11Bonds: DTable 4-2 ............... . 66 Interest excluded under .... . 19Accrued interest on ........ . 19 Day traders ................. . 72 RecordkeepingCapital loss carryover ..... . 60,Amortization of premium ... . 33 Dealer equity options ....... . 40 requirements ............ . 1166, 67Arbitrage .................. . 12 Dealer securities futuresWorksheet 4-1 ............ . 65 Employee stock ownershipBasis ................. . 34, 43 contracts ................. . 40 plans (ESOPs), sales of stockCash method ..... . 7, 16, 32, 75Capital asset .............. . 49 to ........................ . 61Debt instruments, retirementReporting options for savingsConvertible ............... . 46 of ........................ . 50bond interest ............. . 7 Employer identificationCoupon ................... . 17 numbers (EINs) .......... . 27Decedents .............. . 42, 66Cash-settled options ....... . 40Enterprise zone facility ..... . 13
U.S. savings bond interest, Empowerment zone ........ . 64Casualty losses ............ . 50Federally guaranteed ...... . 12
reporting of .............. . 9 Endowment contracts ...... . 36CDOs (Collateralized debtIdentification .............. . 43
Demand loans .............. . 75obligations) .............. . 26 Enterprise zone facilityMarket discount ... . 13, 32, 44,
Demutualization ............ . 47 bonds .................... . 1350, 64, 75 Certificates of deposit
New York Liberty bonds ... . 13 (CDs) .................... . 14 Deposits, loss on ........... . 50 Equity option ........... . 40, 75
Publication 550 (2008) Page 77

Page 78 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Estate income received by Frozen deposits .......... . 6, 19 Condemnation awards ...... . 6 Liquidating
beneficiary ................ . 3 distributions ......... . 21, 44Deferred interestFutures contracts:
accounts ................ . 5Exempt-interest dividends on Definition ................. . 75 Listed options .......... . 40, 75
Dividends on deposit or sharemutual fund stock ........ . 53 Regulated ............ . 39, 76 Loans:
accounts ................ . 5Securities ............. . 53, 56Expenses of producing Below-market ......... . 6-7, 75
Frozen deposits ......... . 6, 19income ................... . 35 Futures, commodity .... . 51, 53, Gift and demand ........ . 6, 75
Gift for opening account .... . 6 Guarantees ............... . 5475
Individual retirement Term ................... . 6, 76Wash sales ............... . 56
arrangements (IRAs) ..... . 5F Local government obligations
Installment saleFace-amount certificates ... . 14 (See State or local government
payments ................ . 6GFair market value ... . 41, 42, 45, obligations)
Insurance dividends ........ . 6Gains on qualified small75 Long-term capital gains andMoney market funds ........ . 5business stock ........... . 62Federal guarantee on losses ................ . 55, 65Nominee distributions ....... . 5Gains on sales or trades  (Seebonds .................... . 12 Long-term debtPrepaid insurancealso Capital gains andFees to buy or sell ......... . 35 instruments .............. . 49premiums ................ . 6losses) ............ . 45, 47, 48Financial asset securitization Losses on sales or trades  (SeeReporting .............. . 16-19Gifts ............. . 5, 42, 53, 75investment trusts also Capital gains andSeller-financedGlossary ................ . 75-76(FASITs) ................. . 26 losses) ................... . 48mortgage ........... . 17, 19Government obligations .... . 16 Amount calculation ........ . 45Foreign currency Tax refunds ................ . 6 Carryback election .... . 40, 41transactions ............. . 40 Taxable ........... . 5-6, 11, 12 Mutual fund or REIT stock heldForeign income ............. . 2 Tax-exempt ........... . 12, 17H 6 months or less ........ . 53Forgone interest ........... . 75 U.S. savings bonds, personHedging transactions ..... . 40, Passive activities ...... . 26, 27,responsible for tax (TableForm: 41, 51 31, 331-2) ..................... . 81066 (Schedule Q) ........ . 36 Related parties ............ . 47Help  (See Tax help) Underreported ............. . 43115 ...................... . 8 Section 1244 (small business)Holding period: Usurious interest ........... . 64952 ..................... . 33 stock ................... . 52Investment property ....... . 52 VA insurance dividends ..... . 5Form 1040 .............. . 17, 23 Small business investmentReplacement stock ........ . 63 Investment clubs ........ . 26-27 company stock .......... . 52Schedule B ............... . 17 Straddles ................. . 60 Investment counsel and Wash sales ............... . 59Form 1040, Schedule D .... . 54, advice .................... . 3556, 63, 67 Investment expenses .... . 31-37IWorksheet, completed MAllocated ................. . 25Income from sources outsidesample ................. . 70 At-risk rules ............... . 31 Marked to market rules .... . 40,U.S. ....................... . 2Form 1040A ............ . 17, 23 Deductible ................ . 35 72, 75Income tax treaties (TableForm 1040X ................ . 39 Limits on deductions ....... . 31 Market discount bonds .... . 13,1-3) ...................... . 21Form 1041 .................. . 27 Nondeductible ............ . 36 15-16, 32, 44, 50, 64, 75Indian tribal government ... . 12 Pass-through entities ...... . 36Form 1065 .................. . 27 Accrued marketIndividual retirement Reporting requirements .... . 37Schedule K-1 ............. . 27 discount ................ . 15arrangements (IRAs): Investment income .......... . 3Form 1066, Schedule Q ..... . 26 Mark-to-market election .... . 72Interest income ............. . 5 Children ................ . 3, 33Form 1096 ........... . 19, 24, 65 Maximum rate of capital gainsInflation-indexed debt General Information ........ . 3 (Table 4-2) ............... . 66Form 1099-B .... . 38, 64, 65, 67 instruments .......... . 14, 15 Net income ............... . 33 Mechanics' and suppliers'Form 1099-CAP ............ . 64 Inherited property: Records to keep ............ . 3 liens ..................... . 54Form 1099-DIV ... . 3, 19, 23, 24 Basis ..................... . 42 Reporting of (Table 1-1) .... . 4 Meetings, expenses ofForm 1099-INT .... . 3, 5, 10, 17, Holding period ............ . 53 Investment property ........ . 31 attending ................. . 3619, 25, 26 Transfer by inheritance .... . 38 Basis ..................... . 41 Missing children, photographsForm 1099-MISC ........ . 20, 55 Insolvency of Definition ................. . 38 of ......................... . 2Form 1099-OID ... . 5, 13, 17, 25, contractors .............. . 54 Gain or loss treatment ..... . 49 Mixed straddles ........ . 55, 6026 Installment sales ........... . 64 Gift, received as ........... . 42
Money market funds ....... . 21Form 1099-S ........... . 64, 65 Holding period ............ . 52Insurance: Interest income ............. . 5Liquidation, received in .... . 44Form 1120 .................. . 27 Borrowing on .............. . 36
More information  (See Tax help)Nontaxable trades, receivedDividends, interest on .... . 6, 23Form 2439 .................. . 21
Mortgages:in ...................... . 42Interest option on .......... . 12Form 3115 ............ . 8, 35, 72
Revenue bonds ........... . 12Sales and trades .......... . 38Life insurance companies,Form 4684 .................. . 50 Secondary liability onServices, received for ...... . 41demutualization ......... . 47Form 4797 .............. . 46, 52 home ................... . 54Spouse, received from ..... . 42Life, paid to beneficiary .... . 11Form 4952 .................. . 33 Seller-financed ............ . 19Taxable trades, receivedPrepaid premiums .......... . 6Form 6198 .................. . 64 in ...................... . 42 Municipal bonds  (See also StateSingle-premium life ........ . 36
Form 6781 .... . 41, 51, 59, 64, 67 or local governmentTrades .................... . 47
Form 8275 .................. . 30 obligations) ........ . 12, 17, 49Veterans' dividends, interest
JForm 8275-R ............... . 30 on .................... . 5, 23 Mutual funds .... . 21, 31, 33, 36,
Joint accounts .............. . 5Form 8582 .................. . 26 Interest expenses: 43, 53
Joint and separateAllocation of ............... . 31 publicly offered ............ . 36Form 8614 ................... . 3
returns ............... . 30, 66Investment interest .... . 31, 75Form 8815 .............. . 10, 19
Limit on ................. . 32Form 8824 .................. . 46 NWhen to deduct ......... . 32Form 8832 .................. . 27 New York Liberty bonds .... . 13LMargin accounts .......... . 32Form 8886 .............. . 29, 30 Nominee distributions:Life insurance companies:Paid in advance ........... . 32Form SS-4 .................. . 27 Dividends ............. . 20, 24demutualization ........... . 47Straddles ................. . 36Form W-8BEN ............... . 4 Interest income .......... . 5, 19Unstated .................. . 41 Like-kind exchanges ... . 45, 47
Form W-9 ................... . 4 Original issue discount ..... . 13Basis of propertyInterest income ............. . 5
Forward contracts .......... . 75 Nominee, defined .......... . 75received ................ . 45Annuity contracts ........... . 6
Fractional shares ....... . 22, 53 Reporting requirements .... . 46 Nonbusiness bad debts ... . 50,Bonds traded flat ........... . 6
Free tax services ........... . 73 Certificates of deposits ..... . 5 Limited partners ............ . 75 53
Page 78 Publication 550 (2008)

Page 79 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Noncapital assets .......... . 48 Premiums on bonds .... . 34, 44, Repossession of real Specialized small business
property .................. . 53 investment company75Nondeductible investment
stock ................. . 44, 63expenses ................ . 36 Restricted property ......... . 41Private activity bonds ..... . 12,
Spouses:75Nondividend Restricted stock ........ . 23, 76
Transfers between (See alsodistributions ............. . 21 Public utility stock Retirement of debt
Related partyreinvestment ............. . 43Nonequity options ...... . 40, 75 instrument ............... . 50
transactions) ........ . 42, 47Publications  (See Tax help)Nonqualified preferred Return of capital  (See
State or local governmentstock ..................... . 46 Nondividend distributions)Puts and calls .......... . 57, 75
obligations ............ . 12-13Table 4-1 ................. . 57Nonresident aliens: Revocable trust, trustee's Market discount bonds (SeeBackup withholding ......... . 4 commissions for ......... . 36 Market discount bonds)Nontaxable return of Rollover of gain from sale: Private activity bonds ..... . 12,Qcapital ................... . 21 Empowerment zone 75Qualified dividends ......... . 23 assets .................. . 64Nontaxable stock rights .... . 53 Registration requirement ... . 12Qualified small business Securities ............. . 62, 63Nontaxable trades ...... . 45, 53 Taxable interest ........... . 12stock .............. . 44, 53, 62Notes: Tax-exempt interest ....... . 12Gains on .................. . 62Individuals, bought at Stock:Sdiscount ................ . 50 Basis .......... . 21, 22, 43, 63S corporations ......... . 26, 44U.S. Treasury (See U.S. Capital asset .............. . 49R Safe deposit box ........... . 36Treasury bills, notes, and Constructive ownership .... . 48Real estate investment trusts Sales and trades of investmentbonds) Convertible ............... . 46(REITs) ............ . 21, 43, 53 property ............... . 38-72 Corporate ................. . 46Real estate mortgage Definition ................. . 38 Dividends (See Dividends)investment conduitsO Savings bonds  (See U.S. Fractional shares ...... . 22, 53(REMICs) ....... . 25-26, 36, 75Office expenses ............ . 35 savings bonds) Identification .............. . 43Regular interest ........... . 25Options ................. . 56-57 SBIC stock  (See Small business Installment sales .......... . 64Residual interest ...... . 26, 56Calls and puts ......... . 57, 75 investment company stock) Nonqualified preferredRecordkeeping ............. . 52Cash settlement ....... . 40, 57 Scrip dividends ............ . 23 stock ................... . 46Dealer equity .............. . 40 Recordkeeping requirements: Section 1202 gain .......... . 63 Public utility,Deep-in-the-money ........ . 59 Education Savings Bond reinvestment ............ . 43Section 1244 stock ......... . 52Equity ................ . 40, 75 Program ................ . 11 Redemption of ............ . 38Section 1256 contracts .... . 39,Gain or loss ........... . 56, 59 Investment income ......... . 3 Replacement stock ........ . 6353, 57, 64, 76Holding period ............ . 53 Small business stock ...... . 52 Restricted stock ....... . 23, 76Net gain on ............... . 40Listed ................ . 40, 75 Redemption of stock ....... . 38 Rights ............. . 22, 44, 53Net loss on ............... . 40Nonequity ............. . 40, 75 S corporations ............ . 44Redemption or retirement of Reporting requirements .... . 41Qualified covered call ...... . 59 Sales to ESOPs orbonds .................... . 38 Securities:Reporting requirements .... . 57 cooperatives ............ . 61Regulated futures Holding period ............ . 52Section 1256 contracts ... . 39, Small business ........ . 44, 53contract .............. . 39, 76 Installment sales .......... . 6457 Specialized small businessREITs  (See Real estate Lost, stolen, etc., cost ofWash sales ............... . 56 investment company .... . 44investment trusts (REITs)) replacing ............... . 35Options dealer ............. . 75 Splits ..................... . 44Rollover of gain fromRelated partyOrdinary gains and Straddles (See Straddles)sale ................ . 62, 63transactions ...... . 37, 47-48losses ................ . 48, 50 Stripped preferred stock .. . 25,Traders in ................. . 67Related persons ............ . 58Original issue discount 76Worthless ............. . 39, 54REMICs  (See Real estate(OID) ....... . 12, 13-15, 44, 75 Surrender of .............. . 38Securities futuresmortgage investment conduitsAdjustment to ............. . 19 Trades .................... . 46contracts ...... . 40, 53, 56, 76(REMICs))Reporting requirements .... . 13 Trust instruments treatedSelf-employment income ... . 41Reorganizations,Rules ..................... . 14 as ...................... . 39Self-employment tax ....... . 72corporate ................ . 46 Straddles ................ . 58-61Seller-financedReporting requirements: Defined ................... . 76mortgages ............... . 19P Bad debts ................. . 54 Holding period ............ . 60
Bond premium Short sales .............. . 54-55Passive activities ........... . 75 Interest expense and carrying
amortization ............ . 35 Adjusted basis ............ . 44Gains and losses ...... . 26, 27, charges ................ . 36
Defined ................... . 7631, 33, 64 Capital gains and Loss deferral rules ......... . 58
Expenses of .............. . 36losses ........... . 59, 63, 64Pass-through entities: Mixed ............. . 55, 60, 61
Extraordinary dividends .... . 55Dividend income .......... . 23Rollover of gain ........... . 63 Reporting requirements .... . 64
Puts ...................... . 57Exempt-interest dividends ... . 5Patronage dividends ....... . 23 Stripped bonds andSmall business investmentInterest on U.S. savingsPenalties: coupons .......... . 12, 14, 44company stock .......... . 52bonds ................. . 7, 8Accuracy-related ........ . 5, 29 Stripped preferred stock .. . 25,Short-term capital gains andInvestment expenses ...... . 37Backup withholding ......... . 4 76losses ................ . 55, 65Like-kind exchanges ....... . 46Civil fraud ................. . 30 Substitute payments ....... . 55Short-term obligations .... . 16,Options ................... . 57Early withdrawal ......... . 5, 19 Suggestions for44, 49Original issue discount ..... . 13Failure to pay tax .......... . 30 publication ................ . 2Interest deduction, limitFailure to supply SSN ...... . 3 S corporation income,
on ...................... . 32Substantial deductions, and
Sixty/forty rule ............. . 40understatement ......... . 30 credits .................. . 26 T
Valuation misstatement .... . 30 Section 1256 contracts .... . 41 Small business investment Tables:
company stock ....... . 52, 63Political parties: State or local government Capital gains maximum rate
Reporting requirements .... . 52Debts owed by ............ . 54 obligations .............. . 12 (Table 4-2) .............. . 66
Straddles ................. . 64 Small business stock ...... . 44,Portfolio income ........... . 75 Income tax treaties (Table
Substitute payments ....... . 55 52, 53, 62Preferred stock: 1-3) .................... . 21
Tax-exempt interest Social security number (SSN):Nonqualified .............. . 46 Investment income, reporting of
income ................. . 17 Custodial accounts ......... . 3Redeemable at a (Table 1-1) ............... . 4
Trades .................... . 72 Joint accounts ............. . 3premium ................ . 22 Puts and calls (Table
Requirement to give ........ . 3Stripped .............. . 25, 76 Wash sales ............... . 56 4-1) .................... . 57
Publication 550 (2008) Page 79

Page 80 of 80 of Publication 550 12:24 -  6-JAN-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tables: (Cont.) Tax-exempt obligations ... . 12, Treasury inflation-protected V
U.S. savings bonds, person securities (TIPS) ..... . 11, 1415, 44 Veterans' insurance:
responsible for tax (Table Treaties, income tax (TableTaxpayer Advocate ......... . 73 Dividends on .............. . 23
1-2) ..................... . 8 1-3) ...................... . 21Taxpayer identification
Tax help .................... . 73 Trust income received bynumbers (TINs): WTax rates: beneficiary ................ . 3Aliens ..................... . 2 Warrants ................... . 56Capital gain and losses .... . 66 Trustee's commission forTerm loans ............... . 6, 76 Wash sales .......... . 55-56, 76Tax refunds: revocable trust ........... . 36Trade or business .......... . 31 Holding period ............ . 53Interest on ................. . 6 TTY/TDD information ....... . 73Traders in securities ....... . 72 Loss deferral rules,Tax shelters ............. . 28-30 Trades: straddles ............... . 59Penalties ................. . 29 Insurance ................. . 47 Reporting requirements .... . 56UReporting requirements .... . 29 Investment property ....... . 38 Withholding, backup ........ . 3U.S. savings bonds  (See alsoRules to curb abuse ....... . 28 Like-kind .............. . 45, 47 Education Savings Bond Worksheets:Taxable income, expenses Nontaxable ........ . 42, 45, 53 Program) ......... . 6, 7-11, 11 Capital gains, 28% rateof ........................ . 36 Reporting requirements .... . 72 Reporting interest on ..... . 6, 7 worksheet, completedTaxes: Stock ..................... . 46 Retirement or profit-sharing sample ................. . 71State and local transfer .... . 36 Taxable ................... . 42 plan, distributed from ..... . 9 Capital loss carryover ...... . 65State income .............. . 36 U.S. Treasury notes or Worksheet .............. . 18 Worthless securities ... . 39, 54bonds .................. . 47Tax-exempt bonds ......... . 49 Tax, responsible person (Table
■Treasury bills, notes, and bondsTax-exempt income: 1-2) ..................... . 8
(See U.S. Treasury bills, notes,Expenses of .............. . 36 U.S. Treasury bills, notes, andand bonds)Interest on ............ . 12, 17 bonds ....... . 6, 11-13, 47, 53
Treasury inflation-indexed Usurious interest ............ . 6securities ................ . 14
Page 80 Publication 550 (2008)