Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P502.SGM (17-Nov-2006) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ContentsDepartment of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service What’s New ............................... 1
Reminder ................................. 1
Publication 502 Introduction.............................. 2Cat. No. 15002Q
What Are Medical Expenses? ................ 2
What Expenses Can You Include ThisMedical and Year? ................................. 2
How Much of the Expenses Can You
Dental Deduct? .............................. 3
Whose Medical Expenses Can You
Include? .............................. 3Expenses
What Medical Expenses Are Includible?........ 5
(Including the Health What Expenses Are Not Includible?........... 14
Coverage Tax Credit) How Do You Treat Reimbursements? .......... 16
How Do You Figure and Report theFor use in preparing Deduction on Your Tax Return?........... 20
Sale of Medical Equipment or Property......... 212006 Returns
Damages for Personal Injuries................ 23
Impairment-Related Work Expenses........... 24
Health Insurance Costs for Self-Employed
Persons ............................... 24
Health Coverage Tax Credit.................. 25
How To Get Tax Help....................... 29
Index .................................... 31
What’s New
Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate al-
lowed for operating expenses for a car when you use it for
medical reasons is 18 cents per mile. See Transportation
under What Medical Expenses Are Includible.
Medicare Part D.A new voluntary prescription drug insur-
ance program called Medicare Part D went into effect on
January 1, 2006. If you enrolled in this program, the premi-
ums you pay are reduced by a federal subsidy. The value
of the federal subsidy, like all Medicare benefits, is ex-
cluded from your income.
You can include in medical expenses the premiums you
pay for Medicare Part D insurance. See Insurance Premi-
ums  under What Medical Expenses Are Includible.
Get forms and other information Reminderfaster and easier by:
Internet • www.irs.gov Photographs of missing children.The Internal Reve-
nue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for

Page 2 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missing
National Distribution Centerchildren selected by the Center may appear in this publica-
P.O. Box 8903tion on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can help
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903bring these children home by looking at the photographs
and calling 1-800-THE-LOST (1-800-843-5678) if you rec-
ognize a child. Tax questions.If you have a tax question, visit www.
irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax
questions sent to either of the above addresses.
Introduction
Useful ItemsThis publication explains the itemized deduction for medi-
You may want to see:cal and dental expenses that you claim on Schedule A
(Form 1040). It discusses what expenses, and whose
Publicationexpenses, you can and cannot include in figuring the
deduction. It explains how to treat reimbursements and❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Other
how to figure the deduction. It also tells you how to reportTax-Favored Health Plans
the deduction and what to do if you sell medical property or
receive damages for a personal injury. Forms (and Instructions)
Medical expenses include dental expenses, and in this❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Returnpublication, the term “medical expenses” is often used to
refer to medical and dental expenses. ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductions
You can deduct only the part of your medical and dental❏ 8853 Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care Insuranceexpenses that is more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross Contractsincome. If your medical and dental expenses are not more
❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Creditthan 7.5% of your adjusted gross income, you cannot claim
a deduction.
After discussing the medical and dental expenses de-
duction, this publication explains how to treat impair-What Are Medical Expenses?
ment-related work expenses, health insurance premiums if
Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, cure, mitiga-you are self-employed, and the health coverage tax credit
tion, treatment, or prevention of disease, and the costs forthat is available to certain individuals.
treatments affecting any part or function of the body. TheySee How To Get Tax Help near the end of this publica-
include the costs of equipment, supplies, and diagnostiction for information about getting publications and forms.
devices needed for these purposes. They also include
dental expenses.Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com-
Medical care expenses must be primarily to alleviate orments about this publication and your suggestions for
prevent a physical or mental defect or illness. They do notfuture editions.
include expenses that are merely beneficial to generalYou can write to us at the following address: health, such as vitamins or a vacation.
Medical expenses include the premiums you pay for
Internal Revenue Service insurance that covers the expenses of medical care, and
Individual Forms and Publications Branch the amounts you pay for transportation to get medical care.
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I Medical expenses also include amounts paid for qualified
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406 long-term care services and limited amounts paid for any
Washington, DC 20224 qualified long-term care insurance contract.
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
What Expenses Can Youwould be helpful if you would include your daytime phone
number, including the area code, in your correspondence.
Include This Year?You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
must be included in the address.) Please put “PublicationsYou can include only the medical and dental expenses youComment” on the subject line. Although we cannot re-paid this year, regardless of when the services were pro-spond individually to each email, we do appreciate yourvided. (But see Decedent under Whose Medical Expensesfeedback and will consider your comments as we reviseCan You Include, later, for an exception.) If you pay medi-our tax products. cal expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver the
Ordering forms and publications.Visit www.irs.gov/ check generally is the date of payment. If you use a
formspubs to download forms and publications, call“pay-by-phone” or “online” account to pay your medical
1-800-829-3676, or write to the address below and receiveexpenses, the date reported on the statement of the finan-
a response within 10 business days after your request iscial institution showing when payment was made is the
received. date of payment. If you use a credit card, include medical
Page 2 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 3 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expenses you charge to your credit card in the year the your spouse or your dependent either when the services
charge is made, not when you actually pay the amount were provided or when you paid for them. There are
charged. different rules for decedents and for individuals who are
the subject of multiple support agreements.If you did not claim a medical or dental expense that
would have been deductible in an earlier year, you can file
What if you are claimed as a dependent on someoneForm 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-
else’s return?Even if you, or your spouse if you are filingturn, for the year in which you overlooked the expense. Do
a joint return, are claimed as a dependent on someonenot claim the expense on this year’s return. Generally, an
else’s return, you can include the medical expenses of anyamended return must be filed within 3 years from the date
person you could have claimed as a dependent if you, orthe original return was filed or within 2 years from the time
your spouse if filing jointly, were not being claimed as athe tax was paid, whichever is later.
dependent on someone else’s return.You cannot include medical expenses that were paid by
an insurance company or other sources. This is true
whether the payments were made directly to you, to the
Spouse
patient, or to the provider of the medical services.
You can include medical expenses you paid for your
Separate returns.If you and your spouse live in a non-spouse. To include these expenses, you must have been
community property state and file separate returns, each ofmarried either at the time your spouse received the medi-
you can include only the medical expenses each actuallycal services or at the time you paid the medical expenses.
paid. Any medical expenses paid out of a joint checking
account in which you and your spouse have the same Example 1. Mary received medical treatment before
interest are considered to have been paid equally by eachshe married Bill. Bill paid for the treatment after they
of you, unless you can show otherwise. married. Bill can include these expenses in figuring his
medical expense deduction even if Bill and Mary file sepa-Community property states.If you and your spouserate returns.live in a community property state and file separate re-If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could not includeturns, any medical expenses paid out of community fundsMary’s expenses in his separate return. Mary would in-are divided equally. Each of you should include half theclude the amounts she paid during the year in her separateexpenses. If medical expenses are paid out of the separatereturn. If they filed a joint return, the medical expensesfunds of one spouse, only the spouse who paid the medicalboth paid during the year would be used to figure theirexpenses can include them. If you live in a communitymedical expense deduction.property state, are married, and file a separate return, see
Publication 555, Community Property. Example 2. This year, John paid medical expenses for
his wife Louise, who died last year. John married Belle this
year and they file a joint return. Because John was married
How Much of the Expenses to Louise when she received the medical services, he can
include those expenses in figuring his medical deduction
Can You Deduct? for this year.
You can deduct only the amount of your medical and
Dependentdental expenses that is more than 7.5% of your adjusted
gross income (Form 1040, line 38). You can include medical expenses you paid for your de-In this publication, the term “7.5% limit” is used to referpendent. For you to include these expenses, the personto 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. The phrase “sub-must have been your dependent either at the time theject to the 7.5% limit” is also used. This phrase means thatmedical services were provided or at the time you paid theyou must subtract 7.5% (.075) of your adjusted grossexpenses. A person generally qualifies as your dependentincome from your medical expenses to figure your medicalfor purposes of the medical expense deduction if both ofexpense deduction. the following requirements are met.
Example. Your adjusted gross income is $40,000, 1. The person was a qualifying child or a qualifying7.5% of which is $3,000. You paid medical expenses ofrelative, and$2,500. You cannot deduct any of your medical expenses
2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national or a resi-because they are not more than 7.5% of your adjusted
dent of the United States, Canada, or Mexico. If yourgross income.
qualifying child was adopted, see Exception for
adopted child, next.
Whose Medical Expenses
Exception for adopted child.If you are a U.S. citizen or
national and your adopted child lived with you as a mem-Can You Include?
ber of your household for 2006, that child does not have to
You can generally include medical expenses you pay forbe a U.S. citizen or national, or a resident of the United
yourself as well as those you pay for someone who wasStates, Canada, or Mexico.
Publication 502 (2006) Page 3

Page 4 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This does not apply if the child’s exemption is beingQualifying Child
claimed under a multiple support agreement.
A qualifying child is a child who:
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother,Qualifying Relative
sister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of any
A qualifying relative is a person:of them (for example, your grandchild, niece, or
nephew), 1. Who is your:
2. At the end of 2006 was:
a. Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a de-
a. Under age 19, scendant of any of them (for example, your
grandchild),b. Under age 24 and a full-time student, or
b. Brother, sister, or a son or daughter of either ofc. Permanently and totally disabled,
them,
3. Lived with you for more than half of 2006, and c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sibling of either
of them (for example, your grandmother, grandfa-4. Did not provide over half of his or her own support for
ther, aunt, or uncle),2006.
d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, stepmother,
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law,Adopted child.A legally adopted child is treated as your
mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, orown child. This child includes a child lawfully placed with
you for legal adoption. e. Any other person (other than your spouse) who
You can include medical expenses that you paid for a lived with you all year as a member of your
child before adoption, if the child qualified as your depen-household if your relationship did not violate localdent when the medical services were provided or when thelaw,expenses were paid.
If you pay back an adoption agency or other persons for2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Qualifying childmedical expenses they paid under an agreement with you,above) of any taxpayer for 2006, andyou are treated as having paid those expenses provided
3. For whom you provided over half of the support inyou clearly substantiate that the payment is directly attribu-
2006. But see Children of divorced or separated par-table to the medical care of the child.
ents, earlier, Support claimed under a multiple sup-But if you pay the agency or other person for medical
care that was provided and paid for before adoption negoti-port agreement, next, and Kidnapped child in
ations began, you cannot include them as medical ex- Publication 501.
penses.
You may be able to take a credit for other ex-Support claimed under a multiple support agreement.
penses related to an adoption. See the Instruc- If you are considered to have provided more than half of a
tions for Form 8839, for more information. qualifying relative’s support under a multiple support
TIP
agreement, you can include medical expenses you pay for
that person. A multiple support agreement is used whenChild of divorced or separated parents.For purposes two or more people provide more than half of a person’sof the medical and dental expenses deduction, a child ofsupport, but no one alone provides more than half.divorced or separated parents can be treated as a depen-
For rules regarding what expenses you can include thisdent of both parents. Each parent can include the medical
year, see What Expenses Can You Include This Year,expenses he or she pays for the child, even if the other
earlier.parent claims the child’s dependency exemption, if:
Any medical expenses paid by others who joined you in1. The child is in the custody of one or both parents forthe agreement cannot be included as medical expenses bymore than half the year, anyone. However, you can include the entire un-
reimbursed amount you paid for medical expenses.2. The child receives over half of his or her support
during the year from his or her parents, and
Example. You and your three brothers each provide3. The child’s parents: one-fourth of your mother’s total support. Under a multiple
support agreement, you treat your mother as your depen-a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree
dent. You paid all of her medical expenses. Your brothersof divorce or separate maintenance,
repaid you for three-fourths of these expenses. In figuringb. Are separated under a written separation agree-your medical expense deduction, you can include onlyment, or one-fourth of your mother’s medical expenses. Your broth-
ers cannot include any part of the expenses. However, ifc. Live apart at all times during the last 6 months of
you and your brothers share the nonmedical support itemsthe year.
Page 4 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 5 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and you separately pay all of your mother’s medical ex-Abortionpenses, you can include the amount you paid for her
medical expenses in your medical expenses. You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for a legal abortion.
Decedent
Acupuncture
Medical expenses paid before death by the decedent are
included in figuring any deduction for medical and dentalYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
expenses on the decedent’s final income tax return. Thisfor acupuncture.
includes expenses for the decedent’s spouse and depen-
dents as well as for the decedent. AlcoholismThe survivor or personal representative of a decedent
can choose to treat certain expenses paid by the dece-You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
dent’s estate for the decedent’s medical care as paid byan inpatient’s treatment at a therapeutic center for alcohol
the decedent at the time the medical services were pro-addiction. This includes meals and lodging provided by the
vided. The expenses must be paid within the 1-year periodcenter during treatment.
beginning with the day after the date of death. If you are theYou can also include in medical expenses amounts you
survivor or personal representative making this choice,pay for transportation to and from Alcoholics Anonymous
you must attach a statement to the decedent’s Form 1040meetings in your community if the attendance is pursuant
(or the decedent’s amended return, Form 1040X) sayingto medical advice that membership in Alcoholics Anony-
that the expenses have not been and will not be claimed onmous is necessary for the treatment of a disease involving
the estate tax return. the excessive use of alcoholic liquors.
 Qualified medical expenses paid before death by
the decedent are not deductible if paid with aAmbulance
tax-free distribution from any Archer MSA orCAUTION
!
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forhealth savings account.
ambulance service.
What if the decedent’s return had been filed and the
medical expenses were not included?Form 1040X can Artificial Limb
be filed for the year or years the expenses are treated as
paid, unless the period for filing an amended return for thatYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
year has passed. Generally, an amended return must befor an artificial limb.
filed within 3 years of the date the original return was filed,
or within 2 years from the time the tax was paid, whicheverArtificial Teethdate is later.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
Example. John properly filed his 2005 income tax re-for artificial teeth.
turn. He died in 2006 with unpaid medical expenses of
$1,500 from 2005 and $1,800 in 2006. His survivor orAutoettepersonal representative can file an amended return for
2005 claiming a deduction based on the $1,500 medicalSee Wheelchair, later.expenses. The $1,800 of medical expenses from 2006 can
be included on the decedent’s final return for 2006.
Bandages
What if you pay medical expenses of a deceased
You can include in medical expenses the cost of medicalspouse or dependent?If you paid medical expenses for
supplies such as bandages used to cover torn skin.your deceased spouse or dependent, include them as
medical expenses on your Form 1040 in the year paid,
whether they are paid before or after the decedent’s death.
Breast Reconstruction Surgery
The expenses can be included if the person was your
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you payspouse or dependent either at the time the medical serv-
for breast reconstruction surgery following a mastectomyices were provided or at the time you paid the expenses.
for cancer.
Birth Control PillsWhat Medical Expenses Are
You can include in medical expenses the amount you payIncludible?
for birth control pills prescribed by a doctor.
Following is a list of items that you can include in figuring
your medical expense deduction. The items are listed in
alphabetical order.
Publication 502 (2006) Page 5

Page 6 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Modifying areas in front of entrance and exit door-Braille Books and Magazines ways.
You can include in medical expenses the part of the cost of• Grading the ground to provide access to the resi-Braille books and magazines for use by a visually impaireddence.person that is more than the cost of regular printed edi-
tions. Only reasonable costs to accommodate a home to a
disabled condition are considered medical care. Additional
Capital Expenses costs for personal motives, such as for architectural or
aesthetic reasons, are not medical expenses.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forCapital expense worksheet.Use Worksheet A to figurespecial equipment installed in a home, or for improve-the amount of your capital expense to include in yourments, if their main purpose is medical care for you, yourmedical expenses.spouse, or your dependent. The cost of permanent im-
Worksheet A. Capital Expense Worksheetprovements that increase the value of your property may
be partly included as a medical expense. The cost of the
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any,improvement is reduced by the increase in the value ofof your medical expenses due to a home improvement.your property. The difference is a medical expense. If the
value of your property is not increased by the improve-1.Enter the amount you paid for the homement, the entire cost is included as a medical expense.improvement..................... 1.Certain improvements made to accommodate a home
2.Enter the value of your hometo your disabled condition, or that of your spouse or your
immediately after thedependents who live with you, do not usually increase the
improvement............ 2.value of the home and the cost can be included in full as
medical expenses. These improvements include, but are3.Enter the value of your homenot limited to, the following items. immediately before the
improvement............ 3.• Constructing entrance or exit ramps for your home.
4.Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the• Widening doorways at entrances or exits to your
increase in the value of your home due tohome.
the improvement................... 4.
• Widening or otherwise modifying hallways and inte-
• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1,rior doorways.
you have no medical expenses due to the
• Installing railings, support bars, or other modifica-home improvement; stop here.
tions to bathrooms.
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.
• Lowering or modifying kitchen cabinets and equip-
5.Subtract line 4 from line 1. These arement.
your medical expenses due to the home
• Moving or modifying electrical outlets and fixtures.improvement..................... 5.
• Installing porch lifts and other forms of lifts (but ele-
vators generally add value to the house). Example. You have a heart ailment. On your doctor’s
• Modifying fire alarms, smoke detectors, and otheradvice, you install an elevator in your home so that you will
warning systems. not have to climb stairs. The elevator costs $8,000. An
appraisal shows that the elevator increases the value of• Modifying stairways. your home by $4,400. You figure your medical expense as
• Adding handrails or grab bars anywhere (whether orshown in the filled-in example of Worksheet A.
not in bathrooms).
• Modifying hardware on doors.
Page 6 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 7 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Special design.You can include in medical expenses theWorksheet A. Capital Expense
difference between the cost of a regular car and a carWorksheet—Illustrated
specially designed to hold a wheelchair.
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any,Cost of operation.You cannot deduct the cost of operat-of your medical expenses due to a home improvement. ing a specially equipped car, except as discussed under
Transportation, later.1.Enter the amount you paid for the home
improvement..................... 1. 8,000
Chiropractor2.Enter the value of your home
immediately after the You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to aimprovement............ 2. 124,400 chiropractor for medical care.
3.Enter the value of your home
immediately before the Christian Science Practitioner
improvement............ 3. 120,000
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to4.Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the Christian Science practitioners for medical care.increase in the value of your home due to
the improvement................... 4. 4,400
COBRA Continuation Health• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1,
Coverageyou have no medical expenses due to the
home improvement; stop here. See Insurance Premiums, later.
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.
Contact Lenses5.Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are
your medical expenses due to the home
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forimprovement..................... 5. 3,600
contact lenses needed for medical reasons. You can also
include the cost of equipment and materials required for
using contact lenses, such as saline solution and enzymeOperation and upkeep.Amounts you pay for operation
cleaner. See Eyeglasses and Eye Surgery, later.and upkeep of a capital asset qualify as medical expenses,
as long as the main reason for them is medical care. This
rule applies even if none or only part of the original cost of
Crutches
the capital asset qualified as a medical care expense.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
to buy or rent crutches.Example. If, in the previous example, the elevator in-
creased the value of your home by $8,000, you would have
no medical expense for the cost of the elevator. However,
Dental Treatment
the cost of electricity to operate the elevator and any costs
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you payto maintain it are medical expenses as long as the medical
for dental treatment. This includes fees paid to dentists forreason for the elevator exists.
X-rays, fillings, braces, extractions, dentures, etc. But see
Teeth Whitening under What Expenses Are Not Includible,Improvements to property rented by a person with a
later.disability.Amounts paid to buy and install special plumb-
ing fixtures for a person with a disability, mainly for medical
reasons, in a rented house are medical expenses.
Diagnostic Devices
You can include in medical expenses the cost of devicesExample. John has arthritis and a heart condition. He
used in diagnosing and treating illness and disease.cannot climb stairs or get into a bathtub. On his doctor’s
advice, he installs a bathroom with a shower stall on the
Example. You have diabetes and use a blood sugarfirst floor of his two-story rented house. The landlord did
test kit to monitor your blood sugar level. You can includenot pay any of the cost of buying and installing the specialthe cost of the blood sugar test kit in your medical ex-plumbing and did not lower the rent. John can include inpenses.medical expenses the entire amount he paid.
Disabled Dependent Care ExpensesCar
Some disabled dependent care expenses may qualify asYou can include in medical expenses the cost of specialeither:hand controls and other special equipment installed in a
car for the use of a person with a disability. • Medical expenses, or
Publication 502 (2006) Page 7

Page 8 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Work-related expenses for purposes of taking a or mental defect or illness of the individual receiving the
credit for dependent care. treatment.
You can choose to apply them either way as long as you do
Health Maintenancenot use the same expenses to claim both a credit and a
medical expense deduction. Organization (HMO)
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
Drug Addiction entitle you, or your spouse or a dependent to receive
medical care from a health maintenance organization.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forThese amounts are treated as medical insurance premi-
an inpatient’s treatment at a therapeutic center for drugums. See Insurance Premiums, later.
addiction. This includes meals and lodging at the center
during treatment.
Hearing Aids
Drugs You can include in medical expenses the cost of a hearing
aid and the batteries you buy to operate it.
See Medicines, later.
Home CareEyeglasses
See Nursing Services, later.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
eyeglasses and contact lenses needed for medical rea-Home Improvementssons. You can also include fees paid for eye examinations.
See Capital Expenses, earlier.
Eye Surgery
Hospital ServicesYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for eye surgery to treat defective vision, such as laser eyeYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forsurgery or radial keratotomy. the cost of inpatient care at a hospital or similar institution if
a principal reason for being there is to receive medical
Fertility Enhancement care. This includes amounts paid for meals and lodging.
Also see Lodging, later.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of the
following procedures to overcome an inability to have chil-
Insurance Premiumsdren.
You can include in medical expenses insurance premiums• Procedures such as in vitro fertilization (including
you pay for policies that cover medical care. Policies cantemporary storage of eggs or sperm).
provide payment for:
• Surgery, including an operation to reverse prior sur-• Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays, etc.,gery that prevented the person operated on from
having children. • Prescription drugs,
• Replacement of lost or damaged contact lenses,
• Membership in an association that gives cooperativeFounder’s Fee
or so-called “free-choice” medical service, or group
hospitalization and clinical care, orSee Lifetime Care—Advance Payments, later.
• Qualified long-term care insurance contracts (subject
Guide Dog or Other Animal to additional limitations). See Qualified Long-Term
Care Insurance Contracts under Long-Term Care,
You can include in medical expenses the costs of buying,later.
training, and maintaining a guide dog or other animal to
assist a visually-impaired or hearing-impaired person, or aIf you have a policy that provides more than one kind of
person with other physical disabilities. payment, you can include the premiums for the medical
care part of the policy if the charge for the medical part is
reasonable. The cost of the medical part must be sepa-
Health Institute
rately stated in the insurance contract or given to you in a
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay forseparate statement.
treatment at a health institute only if the treatment is pre-
scribed by a physician and the physician issues a state-
ment that the treatment is necessary to alleviate a physical
Page 8 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 9 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. When figuring the amount of insurance premiumsMedicare D
you can deduct on Schedule A, do not include any health
Medicare D is a voluntary prescription drug insurancecoverage tax credit advance payments shown in box 1 of
program for persons with Medicare A or B. You can includeForm 1099-H.
as a medical expense premiums you pay for Medicare D.
Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Plan
Prepaid Insurance Premiums
Do not include in your medical and dental expenses any
Premiums you pay before you are age 65 for insurance forinsurance premiums paid by an employer-sponsored
medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your dependentshealth insurance plan unless the premiums are included in
after you reach age 65 are medical care expenses in thebox 1 of your Form W-2. Also, do not include any other
year paid if they are:medical and dental expenses paid by the plan unless the
amount paid is included in box 1 of your Form W-2.1. Payable in equal yearly installments or more often,
andExample. You are a federal employee participating in
2. Payable for at least 10 years, or until you reach agethe premium conversion plan of the Federal Employee
65 (but not for less than 5 years).Health Benefits (FEHB) program. Your share of the FEHB
premium is paid by making a pre-tax reduction in your
salary. Because you are an employee whose insurance
premiums are paid with money that is never included in
Unused Sick Leave Used To Pay Premiums
your gross income, you cannot deduct the premiums paid
You must include in gross income cash payments youwith that money.
receive at the time of retirement for unused sick leave. You
also must include in gross income the value of unused sickLong-term care services.Contributions made by your
leave that, at your option, your employer applies to the costemployer to provide coverage for qualified long-term care
of your continuing participation in your employer’s healthservices under a flexible spending or similar arrangement
plan after you retire. You can include this cost of continuingmust be included in your income. This amount will be
participation in the health plan as a medical expense.reported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.
If you participate in a health plan where your employer
automatically applies the value of unused sick leave to theHealth reimbursement arrangement (HRA).If you have
cost of your continuing participation in the health plan (andmedical expenses that are reimbursed by a health reim-
you do not have the option to receive cash), do not includebursement arrangement, you cannot include those ex-
the value of the unused sick leave in gross income. Youpenses in your medical expenses. This is because an HRAcannot include this cost of continuing participation in thatis funded solely by the employer. health plan as a medical expense.
Medicare A Insurance Premiums You Cannot Include
If you are covered under social security (or if you are aYou cannot include premiums you pay for:government employee who paid Medicare tax), you are
enrolled in Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare A• Life insurance policies,
is not a medical expense. If you are not covered under• Policies providing payment for loss of earnings,social security (or were not a government employee who
paid Medicare tax), you can voluntarily enroll in Medicare• Policies for loss of life, limb, sight, etc.,
A. In this situation you can include the premiums you paid• Policies that pay you a guaranteed amount eachfor Medicare A as a medical expense. week for a stated number of weeks if you are hospi-
talized for sickness or injury, or
Medicare B • The part of your car insurance premiums that pro-
vides medical insurance coverage for all personsMedicare B is a supplemental medical insurance. Premi-injured in or by your car because the part of theums you pay for Medicare B are a medical expense. If youpremium for you, your spouse, and your dependentsapplied for it at age 65 or after you became disabled, youis not stated separately from the part of the premiumcan include in medical expenses the monthly premiums for medical care for others.you paid. If you were over age 65 or disabled when you first
enrolled, check the information you received from the So-Taxes imposed by any governmental unit, such as Medi-
cial Security Administration to find out your premium.care taxes, are not insurance premiums.
Publication 502 (2006) Page 9

Page 10 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Laboratory Fees Lodging
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals and
lodging at a hospital or similar institution if a principalfor laboratory fees that are part of medical care.
reason for being there is to receive medical care. See
Nursing Home, later.Lead-Based Paint Removal You may be able to include in medical expenses the
cost of lodging not provided in a hospital or similar institu-You can include in medical expenses the cost of removing
tion. You can include the cost of such lodging while awaylead-based paints from surfaces in your home to prevent a
from home if all of the following requirements are met.child who has or has had lead poisoning from eating the
paint. These surfaces must be in poor repair (peeling or1. The lodging is primarily for and essential to medicalcracking) or within the child’s reach. The cost of repaintingcare.the scraped area is not a medical expense.
2. The medical care is provided by a doctor in a li-If, instead of removing the paint, you cover the area with
censed hospital or in a medical care facility relatedwallboard or paneling, treat these items as capital ex-
to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital.penses. See Capital Expenses, earlier. Do not include the
cost of painting the wallboard as a medical expense.3. The lodging is not lavish or extravagant under the
circumstances.
Learning Disability 4. There is no significant element of personal pleasure,
recreation, or vacation in the travel away from home.See Special Education, later.
The amount you include in medical expenses for lodg-
ing cannot be more than $50 for each night for eachLegal Fees person. You can include lodging for a person traveling with
the person receiving the medical care. For example, if aYou can include in medical expenses legal fees you paid
parent is traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per nightthat are necessary to authorize treatment for mental ill-
can be included as a medical expense for lodging. Mealsness. However, you cannot include in medical expenses
are not included.fees for the management of a guardianship estate, fees for
Do not include the cost of lodging while away from homeconducting the affairs of the person being treated, or other
for medical treatment if that treatment is not received fromfees that are not necessary for medical care.
a doctor in a licensed hospital or in a medical care facility
related to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital or if that
Lifetime Care—Advance Payments lodging is not primarily for or essential to the medical care
received.You can include in medical expenses a part of a life-care
fee or “founder’s fee” you pay either monthly or as a lump
Long-Term Caresum under an agreement with a retirement home. The part
of the payment you include is the amount properly alloca-
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid forble to medical care. The agreement must require that you
qualified long-term care services and premiums paid forpay a specific fee as a condition for the home’s promise to
qualified long-term care insurance contracts.provide lifetime care that includes medical care. You can
use a statement from the retirement home to prove the
amount properly allocable to medical care. The statement
Qualified Long-Term Care Servicesmust be based either on the home’s prior experience or on
information from a comparable home. Qualified long-term care services are necessary diagnos-
tic, preventive, therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, re-
Dependents with disabilities.You can include in medi-habilitative services, and maintenance and personal care
cal expenses advance payments to a private institution forservices (defined later) that are:
lifetime care, treatment, and training of your physically or
1. Required by a chronically ill individual, andmentally impaired child upon your death or when you
become unable to provide care. The payments must be a2. Provided pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by a
condition for the institution’s future acceptance of yourlicensed health care practitioner.
child and must not be refundable.
Chronically ill individual.An individual is chronically ill if,Payments for future medical care.Generally, you can-within the previous 12 months, a licensed health carenot include in medical expenses current payments forpractitioner has certified that the individual meets either ofmedical care (including medical insurance) to be providedthe following descriptions.substantially beyond the end of the year. This rule does not
apply in situations where the future care is purchased in1. He or she is unable to perform at least two activities
connection with obtaining lifetime care of the type de-of daily living without substantial assistance from an-
scribed earlier. other individual for at least 90 days, due to a loss of
Page 10 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 11 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
functional capacity. Activities of daily living are eat-Mealsing, toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing, and con-
tinence. You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals at a
hospital or similar institution if a principal reason for being2. He or she requires substantial supervision to be pro-there is to get medical care.tected from threats to health and safety due to se-
vere cognitive impairment. You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
meals that are not part of inpatient care.
Maintenance and personal care services. Mainte-
nance or personal care services is care which has as itsMedical Conferencesprimary purpose the providing of a chronically ill individual
with needed assistance with his or her disabilities (includ-You can include in medical expenses amounts paid foring protection from threats to health and safety due toadmission and transportation to a medical conference ifsevere cognitive impairment). the medical conference concerns the chronic illness of
yourself, your spouse, or your dependent. The costs of the
medical conference must be primarily for and necessary to
Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance the medical care of you, your spouse, or your dependent.Contracts The majority of the time spent at the conference must be
spent attending sessions on medical information.A qualified long-term care insurance contract is an insur-
ance contract that provides only coverage of qualified The cost of meals and lodging while attending the
long-term care services. The contract must: conference is not deductible as a medical ex-
pense.
CAUTION
!
1. Be guaranteed renewable,
2. Not provide for a cash surrender value or other
Medical Information Planmoney that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or bor-
rowed, You can include in medical expenses amounts paid to a
3. Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the deathplan that keeps medical information in a computer data
of the insured or complete surrender or cancellationbank and retrieves and furnishes the information upon
of the contract, and dividends under the contractrequest to an attending physician.
must be used only to reduce future premiums or
increase future benefits, and Medical Services
4. Generally not pay or reimburse expenses incurred
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forfor services or items that would be reimbursed under
legal medical services provided by:Medicare, except where Medicare is a secondary
payer, or the contract makes per diem or other peri- • Physicians,odic payments without regard to expenses.
• Surgeons,The amount of qualified long-term care premiums you
• Specialists, orcan include is limited. You can include the following as
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040). • Other medical practitioners.
1. Qualified long-term care premiums up to the
amounts shown below.
Medicines
a. Age 40 or under – $280.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forb. Age 41 to 50 – $530. prescribed medicines and drugs. A prescribed drug is one
c. Age 51 to 60 – $1,060. that requires a prescription by a doctor for its use by an
individual. You can also include amounts you pay ford. Age 61 to 70 – $2,830. insulin. Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical
e. Age 71 or over – $3,530. expenses amounts you pay for a drug that is not pre-
scribed.
2. Unreimbursed expenses for qualified long-term care
services. Note. This rule applies only to the deduction for medical
expenses. It does not limit reimbursements of medicalNote. The limit on premiums is for each person. expenses by employer-sponsored health plans that reim-
burse the cost of both prescription and nonprescription
medicines.
Imported medicines and drugs. If you imported
medicines or drugs from other countries, see Medicines
Publication 502 (2006) Page 11

Page 12 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and Drugs From Other Countries, under What Expenses employment taxes you pay for a nurse, attendant, or other
Are Not Includible, later. person who provides medical care. If the attendant also
provides personal and household services, you can in-
clude as a medical expense only the amount of employ-
Mentally Retarded, ment taxes paid for medical services as explained earlierSpecial Home for under Nursing Services. For information on employment
tax responsibilities of household employers, see Publica-You can include in medical expenses the cost of keeping ation 926, Household Employer’s Tax Guide.mentally retarded person in a special home, not the home
of a relative, on the recommendation of a psychiatrist to
Operationshelp the person adjust from life in a mental hospital to
community living. You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
legal operations that are not for unnecessary cosmetic
Nursing Home surgery. See Cosmetic Surgery under What Expenses Are
Not Includible, later.You can include in medical expenses the cost of medical
care in a nursing home, home for the aged, or similar
Optometristinstitution, for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents.
This includes the cost of meals and lodging in the home if aSee Eyeglasses, earlier.principal reason for being there is to get medical care.
Do not include the cost of meals and lodging if the
reason for being in the home is personal. You can, how-
Organ Donors
ever, include in medical expenses the part of the cost that
See Transplants, later.is for medical or nursing care.
OsteopathNursing Services
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay toYou can include in medical expenses wages and other
an osteopath for medical care.amounts you pay for nursing services. The services need
not be performed by a nurse as long as the services are of
a kind generally performed by a nurse. This includes serv-
Oxygen
ices connected with caring for the patient’s condition, such
as giving medication or changing dressings, as well asYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
bathing and grooming the patient. These services can beoxygen and oxygen equipment to relieve breathing
provided in your home or another care facility. problems caused by a medical condition.
Generally, only the amount spent for nursing services is
a medical expense. If the attendant also provides personal
Prosthesisand household services, amounts paid to the attendant
must be divided between the time spent performing house-See Artificial Limb, earlier.
hold and personal services and the time spent for nursing
services. However, certain maintenance or personal care
Psychiatric Careservices provided for qualified long-term care can be in-
cluded in medical expenses. See Maintenance and per- You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forsonal care services under Qualified Long-Term Care psychiatric care. This includes the cost of supporting aServices, earlier. Additionally, certain expenses for house-mentally ill dependent at a specially equipped medicalhold services or for the care of a qualifying individualcenter where the dependent receives medical care. Seeincurred to allow you to work may qualify for the child andPsychoanalysis, next, and Transportation, later.dependent care credit. See Publication 503, Child and
Dependent Care Expenses.
PsychoanalysisYou can also include in medical expenses part of the
amount you pay for that attendant’s meals. Divide the foodYou can include in medical expenses payments for psy-expense among the household members to find the cost ofchoanalysis. However, you cannot include payments forthe attendant’s food. Then divide that cost in the samepsychoanalysis that is part of required training to be amanner as in the preceding paragraph. If you had to paypsychoanalyst.additional amounts for household upkeep because of the
attendant, you can include the extra amounts with your
Psychologistmedical expenses. This includes extra rent or utilities you
pay because you moved to a larger apartment to provideYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay tospace for the attendant. a psychologist for medical care.
Employment taxes. You can include as a medical ex-
pense social security tax, FUTA, Medicare tax, and state
Page 12 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 13 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
subtitles for hearing-impaired persons. This may be theSpecial Education
cost of an adapter that attaches to a regular set. It also may
be the part of the cost of a specially equipped televisionYou can include in medical expenses fees you pay on a
that exceeds the cost of the same model regular televisiondoctor’s recommendation for a child’s tutoring by a teacher
set.who is specially trained and qualified to work with children
who have learning disabilities caused by mental or physi-
cal impairments, including nervous system disorders.
Therapy
You can include in medical expenses the cost (tuition,
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay formeals, and lodging) of attending a school that furnishes
therapy received as medical treatment.special education to help a child to overcome learning
disabilities. A doctor must recommend that the child attend“Patterning” exercises.You can include in medicalthe school. Overcoming the learning disabilities must be aexpenses amounts you pay to an individual for givingprincipal reason for attending the school, and any ordinary“patterning” exercises to a mentally retarded child. Theseeducation received must be incidental to the special edu-exercises consist mainly of coordinated physical manipula-cation provided. Special education includes: tion of the child’s arms and legs to imitate crawling and
• Teaching Braille to a visually impaired person,other normal movements.
• Teaching lip reading to a hearing-impaired person,
Transplantsor
• Giving remedial language training to correct a condi-You can include any expenses you pay for medical care
tion caused by a birth defect. you receive because you are a donor or a possible donor of
a kidney or other organ. This includes transportation.You cannot include in medical expenses the cost ofYou can include any expenses you pay for the medicalsending a problem child to a school where the course ofcare of a donor in connection with the donating of an organ.study and the disciplinary methods have a beneficial effectThis includes transportation.on the child’s attitude if the availability of medical care in
the school is not a principal reason for sending the student
Transportationthere.
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid forSterilization transportation primarily for, and essential to, medical care.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a legalYou can include:sterilization (a legally performed operation to make a per-
son unable to have children). • Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares or ambulance service,
• Transportation expenses of a parent who must go
Stop-Smoking Programs with a child who needs medical care,
• Transportation expenses of a nurse or other personYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
who can give injections, medications, or other treat-a program to stop smoking. However, you cannot include
ment required by a patient who is traveling to getin medical expenses amounts you pay for drugs that do not
medical care and is unable to travel alone, andrequire a prescription, such as nicotine gum or patches,
that are designed to help stop smoking. • Transportation expenses for regular visits to see a
mentally ill dependent, if these visits are recom-
Surgery mended as a part of treatment.
See Operations, earlier.
Car expenses.You can include out-of-pocket expenses,
such as the cost of gas and oil, when you use a car forTelephone medical reasons. You cannot include depreciation, insur-
ance, general repair, or maintenance expenses.You can include in medical expenses the cost of special
If you do not want to use your actual expenses, for 2006telephone equipment that lets a hearing-impaired person
you can use a standard rate of 18 cents a mile for use of acommunicate over a regular telephone. This includes tele-
car for medical reasons.typewriter (TTY) and telecommunications device for the
deaf (TDD) equipment. You can also include the cost of You can also include parking fees and tolls. You can
repairing the equipment. add these fees and tolls to your medical expenses whether
you use actual expenses or use the standard mileage rate.
Television
Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for medical rea-
sons during the year. He spent $250 for gas, $5 for oil, andYou can include in medical expenses the cost of equip-
ment that displays the audio part of television programs as $50 for tolls and parking. He wants to figure the amount he
Publication 502 (2006) Page 13

Page 14 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can include in medical expenses both ways to see which heart disease). This includes fees you pay for membership
gives him the greater deduction. in a weight reduction group and attendance at periodic
meetings. You cannot include membership dues in a gym,He figures the actual expenses first. He adds the $250
for gas, the $5 for oil, and the $50 for tolls and parking for ahealth club, or spa as medical expenses, but you can
total of $305. include separate fees charged there for weight loss activi-
He then figures the standard mileage amount. He multi-ties.
plies the 2,800 miles by 18 cents a mile for a total of $504.You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages in
He then adds the $50 tolls and parking for a total of $554.medical expenses because the diet food and beverages
Bill includes the $554 of car expenses with his othersubstitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
medical expenses for the year because the $554 is moretional needs. You can include the cost of special food in
than the $305 he figured using actual expenses. medical expenses only if:
Transportation expenses you cannot include.You 1. The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs,
cannot include in medical expenses the cost of transporta-2. The food alleviates or treats an illness, andtion in the following situations.
3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physi-• Going to and from work, even if your condition re-cian.quires an unusual means of transportation.
The amount you can include in medical expenses is limited• Travel for purely personal reasons to another city forto the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-an operation or other medical care.
ceeds the cost of a normal diet. See also Weight-Loss
• Travel that is merely for the general improvement ofProgram under What Expenses Are Not Includible, later.
one’s health.
Wheelchair
Trips You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
an autoette or a wheelchair used mainly for the relief of
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forsickness or disability, and not just to provide transportation
transportation to another city if the trip is primarily for, andto and from work. The cost of operating and maintainingessential to, receiving medical services. You may be ablethe autoette or wheelchair is also a medical expense.to include up to $50 per night for lodging. See Lodging,
earlier.
WigYou cannot include in medical expenses a trip or vaca-
tion taken merely for a change in environment, improve-You can include in medical expenses the cost of a wigment of morale, or general improvement of health, even ifpurchased upon the advice of a physician for the mentalthe trip is made on the advice of a doctor. However, seehealth of a patient who has lost all of his or her hair fromMedical Conferences, earlier. disease.
Tuition X-ray
Under special circumstances, you can include charges forYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay fortuition in medical expenses. See Special Education, ear- X-rays for medical reasons.lier.
You can include charges for a health plan included in a
lump-sum tuition fee if the charges are separately stated or
What Expenses Are Notcan easily be obtained from the school.
Includible?Vasectomy
Following is a list of some items that you cannot include inYou can include in medical expenses the amount you payfiguring your medical expense deduction. The items arefor a vasectomy. listed in alphabetical order.
Vision Correction Surgery Baby Sitting, Childcare, and Nursing
See Eye Surgery, earlier. Services for a Normal, Healthy Baby
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you payWeight-Loss Program
for the care of children, even if the expenses enable you,
your spouse, or your dependent to get medical or dentalYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
treatment. Also, any expense allowed as a childcare creditlose weight if it is a treatment for a specific disease diag-
cannot be treated as an expense paid for medical care.nosed by a physician (such as obesity, hypertension, or
Page 14 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 15 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Controlled Substances Future Medical Care
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses current
for controlled substances (such as marijuana, laetrile, payments for medical care (including medical insurance)
etc.), in violation of federal law. to be provided substantially beyond the end of the year.
This rule does not apply in situations where the future care
is purchased in connection with obtaining lifetime care or
Cosmetic Surgery long-term care of the type described under Lifetime Care
or Long-Term Care, earlier.Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses the
amount you pay for unnecessary cosmetic surgery. This
includes any procedure that is directed at improving the
Hair Transplant
patient’s appearance and does not meaningfully promote
the proper function of the body or prevent or treat illness or See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
disease. You generally cannot include in medical ex-
penses the amount you pay for procedures such as face
Health Club Dueslifts, hair transplants, hair removal (electrolysis), and li-
posuction. You cannot include in medical expenses health club dues,
You can include in medical expenses the amount youor amounts paid to improve one’s general health or to
pay for cosmetic surgery if it is necessary to improve arelieve physical or mental discomfort not related to a partic-
deformity arising from, or directly related to, a congenitalular medical condition.
abnormality, a personal injury resulting from an accident orYou cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
trauma, or a disfiguring disease. membership in any club organized for business, pleasure,
recreation, or other social purpose.
Example. An individual undergoes surgery that
removes a breast as part of treatment for cancer. She pays
Health Coverage Tax Credita surgeon to reconstruct the breast. The surgery to recon-
struct the breast corrects a deformity directly related to theYou cannot include in medical expenses amounts you paydisease. The cost of the surgery is includible in her medicalfor health insurance that you use in figuring your healthexpenses. coverage tax credit. For more information, see Health
Coverage Tax Credit, later.
Dancing Lessons
Health Savings AccountsYou cannot include the cost of dancing lessons, swimming
lessons, etc., even if they are recommended by a doctor, ifYou cannot include in medical expenses any payment orthey are only for the improvement of general health.distribution for medical expenses out of a health savings
account. Contributions to health savings accounts are de-
ducted separately. See Publication 969.
Diaper Service
You cannot include in medical expenses the amount youHousehold Helppay for diapers or diaper services, unless they are needed
to relieve the effects of a particular disease. You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of house-
hold help, even if such help is recommended by a doctor.
This is a personal expense that is not deductible. However,
Electrolysis or Hair Removal
you may be able to include certain expenses paid to a
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier. person providing nursing-type services. For more informa-
tion, see Nursing Services, earlier. Also, certain mainte-
nance or personal care services provided for qualifiedFlexible Spending Account
long-term care can be included in medical expenses. For
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts for more information, see Qualified Long-Term Care Services,
which you are fully reimbursed by your flexible spending earlier.
account if you contribute a part of your income on a pre-tax
basis to pay for the qualified benefit.
Illegal Operations and Treatments
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you payFuneral Expenses
for illegal operations, treatments, or controlled substances
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay whether rendered or prescribed by licensed or unlicensed
for funerals. practitioners.
Publication 502 (2006) Page 15

Page 16 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
toothbrush and toothpaste is a nondeductible personalInsurance Premiums expense.
See Insurance Premiums under What Medical Expenses Where an item purchased in a special form primarily to
Are Includible, earlier. alleviate a physical defect is one that in normal form is
ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposes, the
excess of the cost of the special form over the cost of the
Maternity Clothes
normal form is a medical expense (see Braille Books and
Magazines under What Medical Expenses Are Includible,You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
earlier).for maternity clothes.
Swimming LessonsMedical Savings Account (MSA)
See Dancing Lessons, earlier.You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you
contribute to an Archer MSA. You cannot include medical
expenses you pay for with a tax-free distribution from your
Teeth Whitening
Archer MSA. You also cannot use other funds equal to the
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts paid toamount of the distribution and include the expenses. For
whiten teeth. See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.more information on Archer MSAs, see Publication 969.
Veterinary FeesMedicines and Drugs From Other
Countries You, generally, cannot include veterinary fees in your med-
ical expenses, but see Guide Dog or Other Animal earlier.In general, you cannot include in your medical expenses
the cost of a prescribed drug brought in (or ordered
Weight-Loss Programshipped) from another country, because you can only
include the cost of a drug that was imported legally. (YouYou cannot include in medical expenses the cost of acan include the cost of a prescribed drug the Food andweight-loss program if the purpose of the weight loss is theDrug Administration announces can be legally imported byimprovement of appearance, general health, or sense ofindividuals.) However, you can include the cost of a pre-well-being. You cannot include amounts you pay to losescribed drug you purchase and consume in another coun-weight unless the weight loss is a treatment for a specific
try if the drug is legal in both the other country and thedisease diagnosed by a physician (such as obesity, hyper-
United States. tension, or heart disease). This includes fees you pay for
membership in a weight reduction group and attendance at
periodic meetings. Also, you cannot include membership
Nonprescription Drugs and Medicines
dues in a gym, health club, or spa.
Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical expensesYou cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages in
amounts you pay for a drug that is not prescribed.medical expenses because the diet food and beverages
substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
Example. Your doctor recommends that you take aspi-tional needs. You cannot include the cost of special food in
rin. Because aspirin is a drug that does not require amedical expenses unless all three of the following require-
physician’s prescription, you cannot include its cost in yourments are met.
medical expenses. But, see Note under Medicines, earlier.
1. The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs.
2. The food alleviates or treats an illness.Nutritional Supplements
3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physi-You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of nutri-cian.tional supplements, vitamins, herbal supplements, “natural
medicines,” etc. unless they are recommended by a medi-The amount you can include in medical expenses is limited
cal practitioner as treatment for a specific medical condi-to the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-
tion diagnosed by a physician. Otherwise, these items areceeds the cost of a normal diet.
taken to maintain your ordinary good health, and are not
for medical care.
How Do You TreatPersonal Use Items
Reimbursements?
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of an
item ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposesYou can include in medical expenses only those amounts
unless it is used primarily to prevent or alleviate a physicalpaid during the tax year for which you received no insur-
or mental defect or illness. For example, the cost of a ance or other reimbursement.
Page 16 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 17 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Insurance Reimbursement
You must reduce your total medical expenses for the year
by all reimbursements for medical expenses that you re-
ceive from insurance or other sources during the year. This
includes payments from Medicare.
Even if a policy provides reimbursement only for certain
specific medical expenses, you must use amounts you
receive from that policy to reduce your total medical ex-
penses, including those it does not provide reimbursement
for.
Example. You have insurance policies which cover
your hospital and doctors’ bills but not your nursing bills.
The insurance you receive for the hospital and doctors’
bills is more than their charges. In figuring your medical
deduction, you must reduce the total amount you spent for
medical care by the total amount of insurance you received
even if the policies do not cover some of your medical
expenses.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).A health
reimbursement arrangement is an employer-funded plan
that reimburses employees for medical care expenses and
allows unused amounts to be carried forward. An HRA is
funded solely by the employer and the reimbursements for
medical expenses, up to a maximum dollar amount for a
coverage period, are not included in your income.
Other reimbursements.Generally, you do not reduce
medical expenses by payments you receive for:
• Permanent loss or loss of use of a member or func-
tion of the body (loss of limb, sight, hearing, etc.) or
disfigurement to the extent the payment is based on
the nature of the injury without regard to the amount
of time lost from work, or
Figure 1.
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this publication.
Was any part of
your premiums
paid by your
employer?
Were your
employer’s
contributions to
your premiums
included in your
income?
Did you pay any
part of the
premiums?
NONE of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Is Your Excess Medical
Reimbursement Taxable?
• Loss of earnings. Premiums paid by you.If you pay the entire premium for
your medical insurance or all the costs of a plan similar to
You must, however, reduce your medical expenses bymedical insurance, and your insurance payments or other
any part of these payments that is designated for medicalreimbursements are more than your total medical ex-
costs. See How Do You Figure and Report the Deductionpenses for the year, you have excess reimbursement.
on Your Tax Return, later. Generally, you do not include the excess reimbursement in
For how to treat damages received for personal injury oryour gross income. However, gross income does include
sickness, see Damages for Personal Injuries, later. total payments in excess of $250 a day ($91,250 for 2006)
for qualified long-term care services.
Premiums paid by you and your employer.If both youWhat If Your Insurance Reimbursement Is
and your employer contribute to your medical insuranceMore Than Your Medical Expenses?
plan and your employer’s contributions are not included in
If you are reimbursed more than your medical expenses, your gross income, you must include in your gross income
you may have to include the excess in income. You may the part of your excess reimbursement that is from your
want to use Figure 1 to help you decide if any of your employer’s contribution.
reimbursement is taxable. You can figure the amount of the excess reimbursement
you must include in gross income using Worksheet B.
Publication 502 (2006) Page 17

Page 18 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must include in your gross income 30% (.30) ofWorksheet B. Excess Reimbursement
$500, or $150, of the excess reimbursement you receivedIncludible in Income When
for medical expenses under the policy.You Have Only One Policy
Premiums paid by your employer.If your employer orInstructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount ofyour former employer pays the total cost of your medicalexcess reimbursement you must include in income when bothinsurance plan and your employer’s contributions are notyou and your employer contributed to your medical insurance
included in your income, you must report all of your excessand your employer’s contributions are not included in your
reimbursement as other income.gross income.
More than one policy.If you are covered under more1. Enter the amount contributed to your than one policy, the cost of at least one of which is paid bymedical insurance for the year by both you and your employer, you must first divide theyour employer................. 1. medical expenses among the policies to figure the excess
2. Enter the total annual cost of the reimbursement from each policy. Then divide the policy
policy....................... 2. costs to figure the part of any excess reimbursement that is
from your employer’s contribution. Any excess reimburse-3. Divide line 1 by line 2........... 3. ment that is due to your employer’s contributions is includi-
4. Enter the amount of excess ble in your income.
reimbursement................ 4. You can figure the part of the excess reimbursement
that is from your employer’s contribution by using Work-5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the sheet C. Use Worksheet C only if both you and youramount of the excess reimburse- employer paid part of the cost of at least one policy. If youment you must include as other
had more than one policy, but you did not share in the costincome on Form 1040, line 21..... 5.
of at least one policy, do not use Worksheet C.
Worksheet C. Excess ReimbursementExample. You are covered by your employer’s medical
insurance policy. The annual premium is $2,000. Your Includible in Income When
employer pays $600 of that amount, which is not included You Have More Than One
in your gross income, and the balance of $1,400 is taken Policy
out of your wages. You receive $500 excess reimburse-
ment for your medical expenses. The part of the excess
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of
excess reimbursement you must include as income on yourreimbursement you receive under the policy that is from
tax return when a) you are reimbursed under two or moreyour employer’s contributions is figured as follows.
health insurance policies, b) at least one of which is paid for
by both you and your employer, and c) your employer’s
Worksheet B. Excess Reimbursement contributions are not included in your gross income. If you
Includible in Income When and your employer did not share in the cost of at least one
policy, do not use this worksheet.You Have Only One Policy—
Illustrated 1. Enter the reimbursement from your
employer’s policy................ 1.Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of
excess reimbursement you must include in income when both2. Enter the reimbursement from youryou and your employer contributed to your medical insuranceown policy..................... 2.and your employer’s contributions are not included in your
gross income. 3. Add lines 1 and 2................ 3.
4. Divide line 1 by line 3............. 4.1.Enter the amount contributed to your
medical insurance for the year by 5. Enter the total medical expenses youyour employer................. 1. 600 paid during the year. If this amount is
at least as much as the amount on line2.Enter the total annual cost of the
3, stop here because there is nopolicy....................... 2. 2,000
excess reimbursement............ 5.3.Divide line 1 by line 2........... 3. .30
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5............ 6.4.Enter the amount of excess
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1......... 7.reimbursement................ 4. 500
8. Enter employer’s contribution to the5.Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the
annual cost of the employer’s policy . .8.amount of the excess reimburse-
ment you must include as other
income on Form 1040, line 21..... 5. 150
Page 18 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 19 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet C. Excess Reimbursement9. Enter total annual cost of the
Includible in Income Whenemployer’s policy................ 9.
You Have More Than One10.Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the Policy—Illustratedpercentage of your total excess
reimbursement you must report as Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount ofother income................... 10. excess reimbursement you must include as income on your
tax return when a) you are reimbursed under two or more11.Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the
health insurance policies, b) at least one of which is paid foramount of your total excess by both you and your employer, and c) your employer’sreimbursement you must report as contributions are not included in your gross income. If youother income on Form 1040, line 21 . .11. and your employer did not share in the cost of at least one
policy, do not use this worksheet.
Example. You are covered by your employer’s health1. Enter the reimbursement from your
insurance policy. The annual premium is $1,200. Your employer’s policy................. 1. 2,400
employer pays $300 and the balance of $900 is deducted
2. Enter the reimbursement from your ownfrom your wages. You also paid the entire premium ($250)policy.......................... 2. 1,600for a personal health insurance policy.
During the year, you paid medical expenses of $3,600.3. Add lines 1 and 2................. 3. 4,000
In the same year, you were reimbursed $2,400 under your
4. Divide line 1 by line 3.............. 4. .60employer’s policy and $1,600 under your own personal
policy. The amount you must report as other income is5. Enter the total medical expenses you
figured as follows. paid during the year. If this amount is at
least as much as the amount on line 3,
stop here because there is no excess
reimbursement................... 5. 3,600
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5............. 6. 2,160
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1.......... 7. 240
8. Enter employer’s contribution to the
annual cost of the employer’s policy . . .8. 300
9. Enter total annual cost of the
employer’s policy................. 9. 1,200
10.Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the
percentage of your total excess
reimbursement you must report as
other income.................... 10. .25
11.Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the
amount of your total excess
reimbursement you must report as
other income on Form 1040, line 21 . . .11. 60
What If You Receive Insurance
Reimbursement in a Later Year?
If you are reimbursed in a later year for medical expenses
you deducted in an earlier year, you generally must report
the reimbursement as income up to the amount you previ-
ously deducted as medical expenses.
However, you do not report as income the amount of
reimbursement you received up to the amount of your
medical deductions that did not reduce your tax for the
earlier year.
For more information about the recovery of an amount
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier
year, see Recoveries in Publication 525, Taxable and
Nontaxable Income.
Publication 502 (2006) Page 19

Page 20 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 2.Enter your adjusted gross income from FormWhat If You Are Reimbursed for Medical
1040, line 38.Expenses You Did Not Deduct?
Line 3.Multiply the amount on line 2 (adjusted grossIf you did not deduct a medical expense in the year you
income) by 7.5% (.075) and enter the result.paid it because your medical expenses were not more than
7.5% of your adjusted gross income, or because you didLine 4.If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-. Otherwise,not itemize deductions, do not include the reimbursement,subtract the amount on line 3 from the amount on line 1.up to the amount of the expense, in income. However, ifThis is your deduction for medical and dental expenses.the reimbursement is more than the expense, see What If
Your Insurance Reimbursement Is More Than Your Medi-Example. Bill and Helen Jones belong to a group medi-cal Expenses, earlier. cal plan and part of their insurance is paid by Bill’s em-
ployer. They file a joint return, and their adjusted grossExample. Last year, you had $500 of medical ex-
income is $33,004. The following list shows the netpenses. You cannot deduct the $500 because it is less
amounts, after insurance reimbursements, that Bill andthan 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. If, in a later year,
Helen paid this year for medical expenses.you are reimbursed for any of the $500 of medical ex-
penses, you do not include that amount in your gross1. For themselves, Bill and Helen paid $375 for pre-income. scription medicines and drugs, $337 for hospital bills,
$439 for doctor bills, $295 for hospitalization insur-
ance, $380 for medical and surgical insurance, and
How Do You Figure and Report $33 for transportation for medical treatment, which
totals $1,859.
the Deduction on Your Tax
2. For Grace Taylor (Helen’s dependent mother), they
Return? paid $300 for doctors, $300 for insulin, and $175 for
eyeglasses, which totals $775.
Once you have determined which medical care expenses3. For Betty Jones (Bill’s dependent sister), they paidyou can include, figure and report the deduction on your$450 for doctors and $350 for prescription medicinestax return. and drugs, which totals $800.
Bill and Helen add all their medical and dental expenses
What Tax Form Do You Use?
together ($1,859 + $775 + $800 = $3,434). They figure
their deduction on the medical and dental expenses part ofYou report your medical expense deduction on Schedule
Schedule A, Form 1040, as shown.A, Form 1040. You cannot claim medical expenses on
Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. An example of a filled-in Recordkeeping. For each medical expense, youmedical and dental expense part of Schedule A is shown. should keep a record of:
RECORDS
How Do You Figure Your Deduction?
• The name and address of each person you paid,
To figure your medical and dental expense deduction, and
complete lines 1 through 4 of Schedule A, Form 1040, as
• The amount and date of each payment.follows:
Line 1.Enter the amount you paid for medical expenses
after reducing the amount by payments you received from
You can keep a record like the following.insurance and other sources.
000 00 0000
3,434
2,475
33,004
959
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-2)1
22
3Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38
(99) /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A&B (Form 1040).
2006
Bill and Helen Jones
Page 20 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 21 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Record of medical expenses
Name of each person Address of each Amount paid Date paid Transportation
you paid person you paid (mileage, taxi, etc.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
You should also keep a statement or itemized invoice
showing the following. Sale of Medical Equipment or
• What medical care was received. Property
• Who received the care.
If you deduct the cost of medical equipment or property in• The nature and purpose of any other medical ex-one year and sell it in a later year, you may have a taxablepenses. gain. The taxable gain is the amount of the selling price
that is more than the adjusted basis of the equipment or• Who the other medical expenses were for.
property.• The amount of the other medical expenses and theThe adjusted basis is the portion of the cost of thedate of payment. equipment or property that you could not deduct because
of the 7.5% limit used to compute the medical deduction.Do not send these records with your return.
Use Worksheet D, later, to figure the adjusted basis of the
equipment or property.
Publication 502 (2006) Page 21

Page 22 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical Worksheet E. Gain or Loss On the Sale of
Equipment or Property Sold Medical Equipment or
Property
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of
medical equipment or property in one year and sold the Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure total gainequipment or property in a later year. This worksheet will giveor loss on the sale of medical equipment or property that youyou the adjusted basis of the equipment or property you sold.deducted in an earlier year.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment 1.Enter the amount that the medicalor property................. 1. equipment or property sold for...... 1.
2. Enter your total includible medical 2.Enter your selling expenses....... 2.expenses for the year you
3.Subtract line 2 from line 1......... 3.included the cost in your medical
expenses.................. 2. 4.Enter the adjusted basis of the
equipment or property from line 5 or3. Divide line 1 by line 2......... 3.
Worksheet D, line 12............. 4.4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the
5.Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is theyear the cost was included in your
total gain or loss from the sale of themedical expenses........... 4.
medical equipment or property...... 5.5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your
allowable itemized deductions for If you have a loss, it is not deductible. If you have a gain,the year you purchased the it is includible in your income. The part of the gain that is aequipment or property were not recovery of an amount you previously deducted is taxablemore than your AGI for that year, as ordinary income. Enter it on Form 1040, line 21. Anystop here. This is the adjusted part of the gain that is more than the recovery of an amountbasis of the equipment or you previously deducted is taxable as a capital gain. Enterproperty. If your allowable it on Schedule D (Form 1040).itemized deductions for the year
For more information about the recovery of an amountyou purchased the equipment or
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlierproperty were more than your
year, see Recoveries in Publication 525.AGI for that year, complete lines
6 through 11............... 5.
Example. You have a heart condition and difficulty6. Subtract line 5 from line 1...... 6. breathing. Your doctor prescribed oxygen equipment to
help you breathe. Last year, you bought the oxygen equip-7. Enter your total allowable
ment for $3,000. You itemized deductions and included ititemized deductions for the year
in your medical expense deduction.the cost was included in your
medical expenses........... 7. Last year you also paid $10,750 for deductible medical
services and $6,400 for other itemized deductions. Your8. Divide line 6 by line 7......... 8. adjusted gross income (AGI) was $15,000.
9. Enter your AGI for the year the Taking into account the 7.5% limit on medical expenses,
cost was included in your medical your allowable itemized deductions totaled $19,025, fig-
expenses.................. 9. ured as follows:
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7...... 10. Oxygen equipment..................... 3,000
11. Multiply line 8 by line 10....... 11. Medical services....................... 10,750
Total medical expenses................. 13,75012. Add line 5 to line 11. If your 7.5% of AGI (.075 × $15,000)............. −1,125allowable itemized deductions for Allowable medical expense deduction....... 12,625the year you purchased the Other itemized deductions............... 6,400equipment or property were more
than your AGI for that year, this is Allowable itemized deductions............ 19,025the adjusted basis of the
equipment or property........ 12.
Next, use Worksheet E to figure the total gain or loss on You figure your adjusted basis as shown on the filled-in
the sale of the medical equipment or property. Worksheet D.
Page 22 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 23 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical Worksheet E. Gain or Loss On the Sale of
Equipment or Property Medical Equipment or
Sold—Illustrated Property—Illustrated
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost ofInstructions: Use the following worksheet to figure gain or
medical equipment or property in one year and sold the loss on the sale of medical equipment or property that you
equipment or property in a later year. This worksheet will give deducted in an earlier year.
you the adjusted basis of the equipment or property you sold.
1. Enter the amount that the medical
1. Enter the cost of the equipment equipment or property sold for..... 1. 2,025
or property................. 1. 3,000 2. Enter your selling expenses....... 2. 25
2. Enter your total includible 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1......... 3. 2,000medical expenses for the year
you included the cost in your 4. Enter the adjusted basis of themedical expenses........... 2. 13,750 equipment or property from line 5 or
Worksheet D, line 12............ 4. 8293. Divide line 1 by line 2......... 3. .218
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the total gain or loss from the sale of theyear the cost was included in medical equipment or property...... 5. 1,171your medical expenses....... 4. 1,125
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your Determining gain.The taxable gain is the amount ofallowable itemized deductions for
the selling price that is more than the equipment’s adjustedthe year you purchased the
basis. You realized a gain of $1,171. In this case, the entireequipment or property were not
amount represents the recovery of an amount previouslymore than your AGI for that year,
deducted for federal income tax purposes and is taxable asstop here. This is the adjusted
ordinary income.basis of the equipment or
property. If your allowable
itemized deductions for the year
you purchased the equipment or
Damages for Personal Injuriesproperty were more than your
AGI for that year, complete lines If you receive an amount in settlement of a personal injury6 through 11............... 5. 245 suit, part of that award may be for medical expenses that
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1...... 6. 2,755 you deducted in an earlier year. If it is, you must include
that part in your income in the year you receive it to the7. Enter your total allowable extent it reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.itemized deductions for the year See What If You Receive Insurance Reimbursement in athe cost was included in your Later Year, discussed earlier.medical expenses........... 7. 19,025
8. Divide line 6 by line 7......... 8. .145 Example. You sued this year for injuries you suffered in
an accident last year. You sought $10,000 for your injuries9. Enter your AGI for the year the and did not itemize your damages. Last year, you paidcost was included in your
$500 for medical expenses for your injuries. You deductedmedical expenses........... 9. 15,000
those expenses on last year’s tax return. This year you
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7...... 10. 4,025 settled your lawsuit for $2,000. Your settlement did not
itemize or allocate the damages. The $2,000 is first pre-11. Multiply line 8 by line 10....... 11. 584
sumed to be for the medical expenses that you deducted.
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your The $500 is includible in your income this year because the
allowable itemized deductions for entire $500 was allowed as a medical expense deduction
the year you purchased the last year.equipment or property were more
than your AGI for that year, this Future medical expenses.If you receive an amount inis the adjusted basis of the settlement of a damage suit for personal injuries, part ofequipment or property......... 12. 829 that award may be for future medical expenses. If it is, you
must reduce any future medical expenses for these injuriesThis year you sold the oxygen equipment for $2,025 and
until the amount you received has been completely used.you had selling expenses of $25. You must report on this
year’s tax return part of the $2,000 as ordinary income. To
Example. You were injured in an accident. You suedcompute the part of the sales price that is taxable, you
and sought a judgment of $50,000 for your injuries. Youmust determine the gain by subtracting the total adjusted
settled the suit for $45,000. The settlement provided thatbasis from the selling price.
$10,000 of the $45,000 was for future medical expenses
Publication 502 (2006) Page 23

Page 24 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for your injuries. You cannot include the first $10,000 that working hours at your place of work and outside your
you pay for medical expenses for those injuries. regular working hours away from your place of work. The
reader’s services are only for your work. You can deduct
Workers’ compensation.If you received workers’ com-your expenses for the reader as business expenses.
pensation and you deducted medical expenses related to
that injury, you must include the workers’ compensation in
income up to the amount you deducted. If you receivedHealth Insurance Costs forworkers’ compensation, but did not deduct medical ex-
penses related to that injury, no workers’ compensation is
Self-Employed Personsincludible in your income.
If you were self-employed and had a net profit for the year,
were a general partner (or a limited partner receiving
guaranteed payments), or received wages from an S cor-Impairment-Related Work
poration in which you were a more than 2% shareholder
Expenses (who is treated as a partner), you may be able to deduct, as
an adjustment to income, all of the amount paid for medical
If you are disabled, you can take a business deduction forand qualified long-term care insurance on behalf of your-
expenses that are necessary for you to be able to work. Ifself, your spouse, and dependents.
you take a business deduction for these impair- The insurance plan must be established under yourment-related work expenses, they are not subject to thetrade or business, and you cannot take this deduction to7.5% limit that applies to medical expenses. the extent that the amount of the deduction is more than
You are disabled if you have: your earned income from that trade or business.
You cannot take this deduction for any month in which
• A physical or mental disability (for example, blind-
you were eligible to participate in any subsidized healthness or deafness) that functionally limits your being
plan maintained by your employer or your spouse’s em-employed, or
ployer. This rule is applied separately to plans that provide• A physical or mental impairment (for example, along-term care insurance and plans that do not providesight or hearing impairment) that substantially limitslong-term care insurance.one or more of your major life activities, such asIf you qualify to take the deduction, use theperforming manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet ining, learning, or working. the Form 1040 instructions to figure the amount you can
deduct. But if any of the following applies, do not use the
Impairment-related expenses defined. Impair- worksheet.
ment-related expenses are those ordinary and necessary
• You had more than one source of income subject tobusiness expenses that are:
self-employment tax.
• Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily,
• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or
• For goods and services not required or used, otherForm 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.
than incidentally, in your personal activities, and
• You are using amounts paid for qualified long-term
• Not specifically covered under other income tax care insurance to figure the deduction.laws.
If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-
tions, use the worksheet in Publication 535, BusinessWhere to report.If you are self-employed, deduct theExpenses, to figure your deduction.business expenses on the appropriate form (Schedule C,
C-EZ, E, or F) used to report your business income and
Note. When figuring the amount you can deduct forexpenses.
insurance premiums, do not include any advance pay-If you are an employee, complete Form 2106, Employeements shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H, Health CoverageBusiness Expenses, or Form 2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Em-Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance Payments. Also, if you areployee Business Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form
claiming the health coverage tax credit, subtract the1040), line 27, that part of the amount on Form 2106, line
amount shown on Form 8885, line 4 from the total insur-10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is related to your impair-
ance premiums you paid.ment. Enter the amount that is unrelated to your impair-
ment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. Your
Where to report.You take this deduction on Form 1040,impairment-related work expenses are not subject to the
line 29. If you itemize your deductions and do not claim2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies to other
100% of your self-employed health insurance on line 29,employee business expenses.
include any remaining premiums with all other medical
care expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to theExample. You are blind. You must use a reader to do
7.5% limit.your work. You use the reader both during your regular
Page 24 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 25 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You received benefits under an alternative
trade adjustment assistance program for older workers forHealth Coverage Tax Credit
October 2006. The program was established by the De-
partment of Labor. You were an eligible alternative TAAThe health coverage tax credit is available to certain indi-
recipient on the first day of October and November.viduals who receive a pension benefit from the Pension
Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) or are eligible trade
Alternative TAA workers.If you are an eligible alterna-adjustment assistance (TAA) recipients or eligible alterna-
tive TAA recipient, you are eligible for this credit for ative trade adjustment assistance (alternative TAA) recipi-
period up to 2 years if you:ents.
1. Are covered by a qualifying certification,
Who Can Take This Credit?
2. Are reemployed not more than 26 weeks after the
date of separation from the adversely affected em-You can take this credit for any month in which all of the
ployment,following were true on the first day of the month.
3. Are at least 50 years of age,1. You were an eligible:
4. Do not earn more than $50,000 a year in wages froma. Trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, reemployment,
b. Alternative TAA recipient, or 5. Are employed on a full-time basis, and
c. Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) 6. Do not return to the employment from which youpension recipient. were separated.
2. You paid the premium for qualified health insurance
coverage for yourself. See Qualified Health Insur- PBGC Pension Recipientance, later.
You were an eligible PBGC pension recipient on the first3. You were not imprisoned under federal, state, or
day of the month, if both of the following apply.local authority.
4. You did not have other specified coverage. See1. You were age 55 or older on the first day of the
Other Specified Coverage, later. month.
2. You received a benefit for that month that was paid
No credit if exemption claimed by another taxpayer. by the PBGC under title IV of the Employee Retire-
You cannot take this credit if you can be claimed as anment Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA).
exemption on someone else’s tax return.
Lump-sum payment. Item (2) above will also apply if you
TAA Recipient received a lump-sum payment from the PBGC after August
5, 2002, for any month that you would have received a
You were an eligible TAA recipient on the first day of thePBGC benefit if you had not received a lump-sum pay-
month if, for any day in that month or the prior month, you:ment.
• Received a trade readjustment allowance, or
Qualifying Family Member• Would have been entitled to receive such an allow-
ance except that you had not exhausted all rights toYou can include the premiums you pay for qualified healthany unemployment insurance (except additional insurance for qualifying family members in figuring yourcompensation that is funded by a state and is notcredit. A qualifying family member is:reimbursed from any federal funds) to which you
• Your spouse (but see Married persons filing sepa-were entitled (or would be entitled if you applied).
rate returns below), or
• Anyone whom you can claim as a dependent onExample. You received a trade readjustment allow-
your tax return. (For children whose parents are di-ance for January 2006. You were an eligible TAA recipient
vorced, see Children of divorced parents, later.)on the first day of January and February.
However, if any otherwise qualifying family member has
other specified coverage (defined later), then that person isAlternative TAA Recipient
not a qualifying family member.
You were an eligible alternative TAA recipient on the first
Married persons filing separate returns.Your spouse isday of the month if, for that month or the prior month, you
not treated as a qualifying family member if your filingreceived benefits under an alternative trade adjustment
status is married filing separately and either (1) or (2)assistance program for older workers established by the
below applies.Department of Labor.
Publication 502 (2006) Page 25

Page 26 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Your spouse was an eligible TAA recipient, alterna- The noncustodial parent is the parent with whom the
tive TAA recipient, or PBGC pension recipient during child lived for the lesser portion of the year.
the year. If this exception applies, the other parent cannot treat
the child as a qualifying family member for purposes of the2. All of the following apply: HCTC, even though that parent claims the child as a
dependent.a. You lived apart from your spouse during the last 6
If you can treat the child as a qualifying family membermonths of the year.
for purposes of the HCTC, even though you do not claimb. A qualifying family member (other than yourthe child as your dependent, the child must also meet all ofspouse) lived in your home for more than half thethe other conditions of a qualifying family member.year.
c. You provided over half the cost of keeping up
Qualified Health Insurance
your home.
The following health insurance qualifies for the credit.
Married and living apart.For purposes of this credit,• COBRA continuation coverage. (This is coverage
you are not considered married on the last day of the year if that employers with 20 or more employees must
all of the following apply. offer to employees or former employees and their
beneficiaries who have lost coverage because of
• You file a separate return. certain events.)
• Your home is the home for more than half the year• Coverage under a group health plan that is availableof a dependent under age 13 or a dependent who isthrough the employment of your spouse. (But seephysically or mentally not able to care for himself orOther Specified Coverage, later.)herself.
• Coverage under an individual health insurance pol-• You pay more than half the cost of keeping up youricy if you were covered during the entire 30-dayhome for the year. period that ends on the date you separated from the
• Your spouse does not live in your home for the last 6employment which qualified you for the allowance or
months of the year. benefit as an eligible individual (defined earlier). For
this purpose, coverage under an individual health
Legally separated.You are not considered married if insurance policy includes medical insurance offered
you are legally separated from your spouse under a decreeto individuals and their families, but does not include
of divorce or separate maintenance. You can claim thecoverage under a federal, state, or other group
credit on a separate return. health insurance policy.
Children of divorced parents.You may be able to take
the credit based on amounts paid for qualified health insur-State-qualified health insurance.The following health
ance expenses of your child even if the child is not yourinsurance qualifies for the credit to the extent the sponsor-
dependent. If your child is not your dependent, he or she ising state elects to have it apply.
a qualifying family member only if all of the following apply.• State-based continuation coverage provided by the
• The parents are divorced or legally separated or state under a state law that requires such coverage.
lived apart at all times during the last 6 months of the• Coverage offered through a qualified state high-riskyear. pool.
• The child received over half of his or her support for• Coverage under a health insurance program offeredthe year from the parents (without regard to the rulesto state employees or a similar state-based healthon multiple support agreements). See Support insurance program.claimed under a multiple support agreement earlier.
• Coverage through an arrangement entered into by• The child is in custody of one or both of the parentsthe state and a group health plan, an issuer of healthfor more than half of the year. insurance coverage, an administrator, or an em-
• A decree of divorce or separate maintenance or writ-ployer.
ten separation agreement that applies to 2006 pro-• Coverage offered through a state arrangement withvides that (a) the noncustodial parent can claim thea private sector health care coverage purchasingexemption for the child, or (b) the custodial parentpool.will sign a written declaration that he or she will not
claim the child as a dependent for 2006. If the di-• Coverage under a state-operated health plan that
vorce or separation agreement went into effect does not receive any federal financial participation.
before 1985, this requirement is met if the noncus-
todial parent provides at least $600 for the support of To find out which plans are qualified for your state, you
the child for the year. can:
Page 26 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 27 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Visit the website, www.irs.gov, type “hctc: list of • The amount stated in the contract or furnished by
the insurance company is not unreasonably large instate-qualified health plans” in the search box, click
relation to the total charges under the contract.on “search,” and then, click on HCTC: List of
State-Qualified Health Plans, or
• You can call 1-866-628-4282 (tollfree) (or TDD/TTY
Eligible Coverage Month1-866-626-4282) between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
central time, Monday through Friday. Eligibility for the credit is determined on a monthly basis.
An eligible coverage month is any month in which, as of the
first day of the month, you:
Nonqualified Health Insurance
1. Are an eligible TAA recipient, eligible alternative TAA
The following health insurance does not qualify for therecipient, or eligible PBGC recipient (see TAA Recip-
credit. ient, Alternative TAA Recipient, or PBGC Pension
Recipient earlier),1. Medicare supplemental (Medigap) insurance, Tricare
2. Are covered by qualified health insurance (definedsupplemental insurance, or similar supplemental in-
earlier) that you pay for,surance to an employer-sponsored group health
plan. 3. Do not have other specified coverage (defined later),
and2. Any insurance if substantially all of the coverage is:
4. Are not imprisoned under federal, state, or local au-a. Coverage for on-site medical clinics, thority.
b. Hospital indemnity or other fixed indemnity insur-If you file a joint return, only one spouse has to satisfy theance, requirements.
c. Accident or disability income insurance (or a com-
bination of the two), Other Specified Coverage
d. Liability insurance,
Even if you are otherwise eligible, you are not eligible fore. A supplement to liability insurance, the credit for a month if, as of the first day of the month, you
have other specified coverage. Other specified coverage isf. Workers’ compensation or similar insurance,
coverage under the following.g. Automobile medical payment insurance,
1. Any insurance which constitutes medical care (un-h. Credit-only insurance,
less substantially all of that insurance is for benefits
i. Limited scope dental or vision benefits, listed earlier under (1) or (2) under Nonqualified
Health Insurance) if at least 50% of the cost of thej. Benefits for long-term care, nursing home care,
coverage is paid by an employer (or former em-home health care, community-based care (or any
ployer) of you or your spouse.combination), or
2. Any of the following government health programs:k. Coverage for only a specified disease or illness.
a. Medicare Part A or Part B,3. Coverage under a flexible spending or similar ar-
b. Medicaid, or the State Children’s Health Insur-rangement.
ance Program (SCHIP),
c. The Federal Employees Health Benefit PlanInsurance that covers other individuals.If you have
(FEHBP), orqualified health insurance that covers anyone besides
yourself and your qualifying family member(s), (definedd. Tricare, the medical and dental care program forearlier), you may not be able to take into account all of yourmembers and certain former members of the uni-payments. You cannot treat an amount as paid for insur-formed services and their dependents.ance for yourself and qualifying family members unless all
of the following requirements are met.
Benefits from the Veterans Administration.Entitle-• The charge for insurance for yourself and qualifying
ment to or receipt of benefits from the Veterans Adminis-family members is either separately stated in the
tration is not other specified coverage.contract or furnished to you by the insurance com-
pany in a separate statement. Two important points here are that you are not
entitled to the credit for a month, if on the first day• The amount you paid for insurance for yourself and
of that month, you are either:qualifying family members is not more than the
CAUTION
!
charge that is stated in the contract or furnished by
the insurance company. 1. Covered by Medicare, or
Publication 502 (2006) Page 27

Page 28 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Covered by a group health plan available through• A letter or other document from your former em-
ployer or your unemployment office that shows theyour or your spouse’s employer and the employer
date you left your job.contributes 50% or more of the premium.
• A document from your health plan that shows your
first date of coverage. Your first day of coverage in aHow To Report non-group (individual) health plan must have been at
least 30 days before you left your job.To claim the credit, complete Form 8885, Health Coverage
Tax Credit, and attach it to your Form 1040, Form 1040NR,
Coverage through your spouse’s employer. YouForm 1040-SS, or Form 1040-PR. You cannot claim the
must include the information listed above under All healthcredit on Form 1040A, Form 1040EZ, or Form
plans and the following documents.1040NR-EZ.
• Copies of paycheck stubs showing the health cover-
Required documents.You must attach to your tax returnage deductions for the qualified months.
the documents listed below. • A letter or other statement from your spouse’s em-
All health plans.For all health plans you must includeployer that states the employer contributed less than
both of the following. 50% of the cost of the coverage.
1. A copy of your health insurance bills or COBRA pay-E-filed return. If you e-file, you must attach a copy ofment coupons. The bills must have: the required documents to Form 8453, U.S. Individual
Income Tax Declaration for an IRS e-file Return, or Forma. Your name, 8453-OL, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declaration for an
b. The name of your health plan, IRS e-file Online Return.
c. Your monthly premium amount, No double benefit.If you claim this credit, you cannot
d. Dates of coverage, and take the same expenses that you use to figure your health
coverage tax credit into account in determining your:e. Your health plan identification number.
• Medical and dental expenses on Schedule A (Form
2. Proof of payment, such as: 1040), or
• Self-employed health insurance deduction.a. Canceled checks,
b. Bank statements, or You cannot use payments out of the following distribu-
tions to figure the credit:c. Credit card statements.
• Health Savings Accounts (HSAs), or
COBRA coverage. You must include the information • Archer Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs).listed above under All health plans and one of the following
documents.
Refundable Credit1. A copy of your completed and signed COBRA Elec-
tion Letter. It may also be called a COBRA Enroll-
The HCTC credit is refundable. You may claim the fullment Form, Application Form, Enrollment Application
credit even if you do not owe any taxes or earn any income.for Continuing Coverage, or Election Agreement.To get the credit, you must:
2. A letter from your former employer or COBRA admin-
1. Qualify for the credit, andistrator saying you have COBRA coverage. The letter
must have: 2. File a tax return, even if you:
a. The COBRA coverage start and end dates, a. Do not owe any tax,
b. Name of the health plan, b. Did not earn enough money to file a return, or
c. Your home address, and c. Did not have income taxes withheld from your
pay.d. Covered family members, their dates of birth, their
relationship to you, and their social security num-
See How To Report earlier for instructions on how tobers.
claim this credit.
3. A copy of “Notice of Rights to Continue Coverage.”
Advance Payments
Non-group (individual) health plans.You must in-
clude the information listed above under All health plansYou can either take this credit on your tax return or have it
and both of the following documents. paid on your behalf in advance to your insurance company.
Page 28 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 29 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your payments and any payments paid on your behalf in• Check the status of your 2006 refund. Click on
advance are treated as having been made on the first dayWhere’s My Refund. Wait at least 6 weeks from the
of the month for which they are made. date you filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-
tronically). Have your 2006 tax return available be-You can get your credit in advance by calling the HCTC
cause you will need to know your social securitycustomer contact center at 1-866-628-4282 (tollfree) (or
number, your filing status, and the exact whole dollarTDD/TTY 1-866-626-4282) between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
amount of your refund.p.m. central time, Monday through Friday, to register. The
Treasury Department will pay your insurer 65% of your• Download forms, instructions, and publications.
health insurance premiums as you pay the remaining 35%.
• Order IRS products online.
• Research your tax questions online.
How To Get Tax Help • Search publications online by topic or keyword.
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published inYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
the last few years.publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa-
tion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method• Figure your withholding allowances using our with-
that is best for you, you will have quick and easy access toholding calculator.
tax help.
• Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
email.Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.The Taxpayer
• Get information on starting and operating a smallAdvocate Service is an independent organization within
business.the IRS whose employees assist taxpayers who are exper-
iencing economic harm, who are seeking help in resolving
tax problems that have not been resolved through normal
channels, or who believe that an IRS system or procedure Phone. Many services are available by phone.
is not working as it should.
You can contact the Taxpayer Advocate Service by
calling toll-free 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligible for assistance.
1-800-829-3676 to order current-year forms, instruc-You can also call or write to your local taxpayer advocate,
tions, and publications, and prior-year forms and in-whose phone number and address are listed in your local
structions. You should receive your order within 10telephone directory and in Publication 1546, The Taxpayer
days.Advocate Service of the IRS - How To Get Help With
Unresolved Tax Problems. You can file Form 911, Applica-• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your taxtion for Taxpayer Assistance Order, or ask an IRS em-questions at 1-800-829-1040.ployee to complete it on your behalf. For more information,
• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face helpgo to www.irs.gov/advocate.
solving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax-Low income tax clinics (LITCs).LITCs are indepen- payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explaindent organizations that provide low income taxpayers withIRS letters, request adjustments to your account, orrepresentation in federal tax controversies with the IRS forhelp you set up a payment plan. Call your localfree or for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide taxTaxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. Toeducation and outreach for taxpayers with limited Englishfind the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts orproficiency or who speak English as a second language.look in the phone book under United States Govern-Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List, pro-ment, Internal Revenue Service.vides information on clinics in your area. It is available at
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/www.irs.gov or at your local IRS office.
TDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax
questions or to order forms and publications.Free tax services.To find out what services are avail-
able, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Services.• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to
It contains a list of free tax publications and describes otherpre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
free tax information services, including tax education and• Refund information. To check the status of yourassistance programs and a list of TeleTax topics. 2006 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for
Internet. You can access the IRS website at automated refund information or call
www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to: 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6 weeks
from the date you filed your return (3 weeks if you
• E-file your return. Find out about commercial tax
preparation and e-file services available free to eligi-
ble taxpayers.
Publication 502 (2006) Page 29

Page 30 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
filed electronically). Have your 2006 tax return avail-CD for tax products. You can order Publication
1796, IRS Tax Products CD, and obtain:able because you will need to know your social se-
curity number, your filing status, and the exact whole
dollar amount of your refund.
• A CD that is released twice so you have the latest
products. The first release ships in January and theEvaluating the quality of our telephone services. To final release ships in March.ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, and
• Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.professional answers, we use several methods to evaluate
the quality of our telephone services. One method is for a• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.second IRS representative to listen in on or record random
• Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD - Ships with thetelephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to complete
final release.a short survey at the end of the call.
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.
Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-• Tax law frequently asked questions.able on a walk-in basis.
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys-
tem.• Products. You can walk in to many post offices,
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.
instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-• Internal Revenue Bulletins.braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county
government offices, credit unions, and office supply• Toll-free and email technical support.
stores have a collection of products available to print
from a CD or photocopy from reproducible proofs.Buy the CD from National Technical Information Service
Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter-(NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $25 (no handling fee)
nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenueor call 1-877-CDFORMS (1-877-233-6767) toll free to buy
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re-the CD for $25 (plus a $5 handling fee). Price is subject to
search purposes. change.
• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer CD for small businesses. Publication 3207, The
Assistance Center every business day for personal, Small Business Resource Guide CD for 2006, is a
face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRS must for every small business owner or any tax-
letters, request adjustments to your tax account, orpayer about to start a business. This year’s CD includes:
help you set up a payment plan. If you need to
• Helpful information, such as how to prepare a busi-resolve a tax problem, have questions about how the
ness plan, find financing for your business, andtax law applies to your individual tax return, or you’re
much more.more comfortable talking with someone in person,
visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Center where• All the business tax forms, instructions, and publica-
you can spread out your records and talk with an tions needed to successfully manage a business.
IRS representative face-to-face. No appointment is• Tax law changes for 2006.necessary, but if you prefer, you can call your local
Center and leave a message requesting an appoint-• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.
ment to resolve a tax account issue. A representa-• Web links to various government agencies, businesstive will call you back within 2 business days toassociations, and IRS organizations.schedule an in-person appointment at your conve-
nience. To find the number, go to www.irs.gov/local- • “Rate the Product” survey—your opportunity to sug-
contacts or look in the phone book under United gest changes for future editions.
States Government, Internal Revenue Service. • A site map of the CD to help you navigate the pages
of the CD with ease.Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
• An interactive “Teens in Biz” module that gives prac-tions, and publications to the address below. You
tical tips for teens about starting their own business,should receive a response within 10 business
creating a business plan, and filing taxes.days after your request is received.
An updated version of this CD is available each year inNational Distribution Center
early April. You can get a free copy by callingP.O. Box 8903
1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.gov/smallbiz.Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
Page 30 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 31 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Christian ScienceAE
practitioners.................... 7Abortion........................... 5 Education, special............... 1 3
Chronically ill persons.......... 1 0Acupuncture ...................... 5 Electrolysis...................... 1 5
COBRA Continuation HealthAdopted child’s medical Employer-sponsored health
Coverage ....................... 7expenses ....................... 4 insurance plans................ 9
Comments on publication........ 2AGI limitation...................2 ,  3 Employment taxes ............... 1 2
Community property states...... 3Alcoholism........................ 5 Equipment  (See Medical equipment
Computer data banks to track or property)Alternative trade adjustment
medical information........... 1 1assistance recipient: Excess reimbursements  (See
Contact lenses.................... 7Reimbursements)Health coverage tax credit...... 2 5
Controlled substances.......... 1 5Excluded expenses:Ambulances ...................... 5
Cosmetic surgery................ 1 5Insurance premiums............. 9Archer MSAs:
Credit (See Health coverage taxHealth coverage tax credit...... 2 8 Eye surgery....................... 8
credit)Medical expenses paid for Eyeglasses........................ 8
Crutches .......................... 7decedent from................. 5
Artificial limbs.................... 5 FArtificial teeth..................... 5D Fertility enhancement............ 8Aspirin........................... 1 6Damages, personal injury....... 2 3Figuring the deduction.......20-21Assistance (See Tax help) Dancing lessons................. 1 5Final return for decedent:Assisted living homes........... 1 2Decedents: Medical expenses paid.......... 5Athletic club dues............... 1 5Medical and dental expenses.... 5 Flexible spending account...... 1 5Autoettes......................... 1 4Deductible amount............... 3Food  (See Weight-loss programs)Automobiles (See Cars) Deductible expenses..........3-14 Form 1040:
Definition of medical Health coverage tax credit...... 2 8expenses ....................... 2B Self-employed persons, healthDental treatment.................. 7Baby sitting...................... 1 4 insurance costs.............. 2 4Artificial teeth.................... 5Bandages ......................... 5 Form 1040, Schedule A:Teeth whitening................. 1 6Basis: Impairment-related workDentures .......................... 5Medical equipment or property expenses..................... 2 4Dependents:(Worksheet D)................ 2 2 Medical and dentalAdopted child.................... 4Birth control pills................. 5 expenses.................. 2 ,  2 0Claimed as a dependent onBraille books and magazines.... 6 Self-employed persons, healthsomeone else’s return......... 3Breast reconstruction insurance costs.............. 2 4Disabled dependent care.... 7 ,  1 0surgery ......................... 5 Form 1040, Schedule C:Medical expenses............... 3Impairment-related workMultiple support agreement...... 4 expenses..................... 2 4C Qualifying child.................. 3Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:Calculation of deduction........ 2 0 Qualifying relative............... 3Impairment-related workCapital expenses................. 6Diagnostic devices............... 7 expenses..................... 2 4Improvements to property rentedDiaper services.................. 1 5Form 1040, Schedule E:by disabled persons........... 7Disabilities, persons with: Impairment-related workOperation and upkeep........... 7 Dependent care expenses.......7 , expenses..................... 2 4Worksheet A..................... 6 10 Form 1040, Schedule F:Cars ............................... 7Improvements to property rented
Impairment-related workOut-of-pocket expenses........ 1 3 b y ............................. 7
expenses..................... 2 4Special education............... 1 3Child care........................ 1 4
Form 1040NR:Divorced taxpayers:Children’s medical expenses:
Health coverage tax credit...... 2 8Health coverage tax credit forAdopted child.................... 4
Form 1040X:children....................... 2 6Dependents ..................... 3
Amended individual return....... 3Medical expenses of child....... 4Health coverage tax credit...... 2 6
Drug addiction.................... 8Deceased taxpayer.............. 5Children, missing:
Drugs (See Medicines) Form 1099-H:Photographs of, included in IRS
publications................... 1Dues: Self-employed persons, health
Health club..................... 1 5insurance costs.............. 2 4Chiropractors..................... 7
Publication 502 (2006) Page 31

Page 32 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2106: TAA recipient................... 2 5Lifetime care:
Impairment-related work Advance payments for .......... 1 0Health institutes.................. 8
expenses..................... 2 4 Lodging: (See also Travel andHealth insurance:
Form 2106-EZ: transportation expenses)...... 1 0 ,Credit (See Health coverage tax
Impairment-related work 13credit)
expenses..................... 2 4Employer-sponsored plan....... 9Long-term care.................. 1 0
Form 2555: Premiums: Chronically ill individuals ........ 1 0
Self-employed persons, health Deductible ..................... 8 Maintenance and personal care
insurance costs.............. 2 4 Nondeductible................. 9 services...................... 1 1
Paid by employer............. 1 8Qualified insuranceForm 2555-EZ:
Paid by employer and you.... 1 7 contracts..................... 1 1Self-employed persons, health
Paid by you.................. 1 7Qualified services............... 1 0insurance costs.............. 2 4
Prepaid........................ 9Form 8453:
Unused sick leave used toHealth coverage tax credit...... 2 8 Mp a y.......................... 9Form 8885: Maintenance and personal careReimbursements (SeeHealth coverage tax credit...... 2 8 services........................ 1 1Reimbursements)Self-employed persons, health Maternity clothes................ 1 6Self-employed persons......... 2 4insurance costs.............. 2 4 Meals: (See also Weight-lossHealth maintenance organizationsFounder’s fee (See Lifetime care, programs)..................11, 14(HMOs) .......................... 8advance payments) Medical conferences............ 1 1Health reimbursementFree tax services................ 2 9 Medical equipment or property:arrangements (HRAs)......... 1 7Funeral expenses................ 1 5 Adjusted basis (WorksheetHealth Savings Accounts (HSAs):Future medical care.........10, 15 D ) ............................ 2 2Payments from................. 1 5Gain or loss (Worksheet E)..... 2 3Hearing aids...................... 8Sale of.......................... 2 1G Hearing-impaired persons: Medical expense records........ 2 0Glasses ........................... 8Guide dog or other animal for.... 8 Medical information plans....... 1 1Guide dog or other animal....... 8Help (See Tax help) Medical savings accountsHMOs (Health maintenance (MSAs) ......................... 1 6organizations).................. 8H Medicare:Home care (See Nursing services)Hair: Medicare A, deductibleHome improvements  (See CapitalRemoval ........................ 1 5 expense ....................... 9expenses)Transplants..................... 1 5 Medicare B, deductibleW i g s............................ 1 4Hospital services................. 8 expense ....................... 9
Health club dues................. 1 5Hotels ............................ 1 0Medicines ........................ 1 1
Health coverage tax credit..... 1 5 ,Household help.................. 1 5Imported....................11, 16
25 HRAs (Health reimbursement Nonprescription drugs and
Advance payments............. 2 8arrangements)................. 1 7medicines.................... 1 6
Alternative TAA recipient....... 2 5 Mentally retarded persons:Alternative TAA workers........ 2 5 Special homes for.............. 1 2IArcher MSAs ................... 2 8 Mileage rates...................... 1Illegal operations andChildren of divorced parents.... 2 6 Missing children:treatments..................... 1 5Eligible coverage month........ 2 7 Photographs of, included in IRSIllegal substances............... 1 5Insurance that covers other publications................... 1Impairment-related workindividuals.................... 2 7 More information (See Tax help)expenses ...................... 2 4Legally separated............... 2 6 Multiple support agreements.... 4Definition....................... 2 4Married persons filing separate
Reporting of.................... 2 4returns....................... 2 5
In vitro fertilization............... 8Nonqualified health N
Insulin............................ 1 6insurance..................... 2 7 Nondeductible expenses.....14-16
Other specified coverage: Insurance (See Health insurance) Nonprescription drugs and
Benefits from the Veterans medicines...................... 1 6
Administration.............. 2 7 Nursing homes .................. 1 2LPBGC pension recipient........ 2 5 Nursing services.............12, 14Laboratory fees.................. 1 0Lump-sum payment .......... 2 5 Chronically ill individuals........ 1 0Laser eye surgery................ 8Qualified health insurance...... 2 6 Nutritional supplements......... 1 6Lead-based paint removal....... 1 0Qualifying family member....... 2 5
Learning disabilities............. 1 3Refundable credit............... 2 8
Legal fees........................ 1 0OReporting....................... 2 8
State-qualified health Lessons, dancing and Operations ....................... 1 2
insurance..................... 2 6swimming ...................... 1 5Cosmetic surgery............... 1 5
Page 32 Publication 502 (2006)

Page 33 of 33 of Publication 502 8:04 - 17-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Operations (Cont.) Self-employed persons, health Whitening ....................... 1 6
Eye surgery...................... 8 insurance costs.............. 2 4Telephone ........................ 1 3
Illegal operations and Television........................ 1 3
treatments.................... 1 5 Therapy .......................... 1 3S
Optometrist services............. 8 Transplants...................... 1 3Sale of medical equipment or
Organ donors .................... 1 3property.....................21-23 Travel and transportation
Osteopaths....................... 1 2Adjusted basis (Worksheet expenses ...................... 1 3
Oxygen ........................... 1 2D ) ............................ 2 2Car expenses................... 1 3
Gain or loss (Worksheet E)..... 2 3 Includible expenses.........13, 14
Parking fees and tolls........... 1 3Schedules (See Form 1040)P
Standard mileage rate for car useSeeing-eye dogs.................. 8Paint removal, for
for medical.................... 1Self-employed persons:lead-based..................... 1 0
Trips.............................. 1 4Health coverage tax credit...... 2 8Parking fees and tolls........... 1 3
TTY/TDD information............ 2 9Health insurance costs......... 2 4Patterning exercises............. 1 3
Tuition............................ 1 4Senior housing.................. 1 2Personal injury damages........ 2 3
Separate returns:Personal use items.............. 1 6
Community property states...... 3 VPhysical therapy................. 1 3Medical and dental expenses.... 3 Vasectomy ....................... 1 4Plastic surgery................... 1 5Separated taxpayers: Veterinary fees................... 1 6Premiums  (See Health insurance) Health coverage tax credit...... 2 6Vision correction surgery........ 8Prepaid insurance premiums.... 9 Medical expenses of child....... 4Visually-impaired persons:Prosthesis........................ 5Sick leave: Guide dog or other animal for.... 8Psychiatric care................. 1 2Used to pay health insurancePsychoanalysis.................. 1 2premiums ..................... 9WPsychologists.................... 1 2Special education................ 1 3Weight-loss programs.......14, 16Publications (See Tax help) Spouse’s medical expenses..... 3 What’s new:Deceased spouse ............... 5Medicare Part D................. 1R Standard mileage rates: Standard mileage rate........... 1Radial keratotomy................ 8Medical reasons for use of Wheelchairs...................... 1 4c a r ............................ 1Recordkeeping................... 2 0 Wigs .............................. 1 4Sterilization...................... 1 3Rehabilitation facilities.......... 1 2 Work expenses:Stop-smoking programs ........ 1 3Reimbursements .............16-20 Disabled dependent care........ 7Excess includible in income: Suggestions for publication..... 2 Impairment-related............. 2 4When more than one policy Surgery (See Operations) Workers’ compensation......... 2 4(Worksheet C)............. 1 9Swimming lessons .............. 1 5Worksheets:When one policy (Worksheet
Capital expenses (WorksheetB ) .......................... 1 8T A ) ............................. 6Excess may be taxable (Figure Tables and figures: Medical equipment or property:1 )............................. 1 7Medical equipment or property: Adjusted basis (WorksheetHealth Reimbursement Adjusted basis (Worksheet D ) .......................... 2 2Arrangement (HRA).......... 1 7 D ) .......................... 2 2Gain or loss (WorksheetInsurance....................... 1 7Gain or loss (Worksheet E ) .......................... 2 3Medical expenses not E ) .......................... 2 3Reimbursements, excess includiblededucted..................... 1 9Reimbursements, excess includible in income:More than one policy........... 1 8 in income: When more than one policyReceived in later year.......... 2 0 When more than one policy (Worksheet C)............. 1 9Rental property: (Worksheet C)............. 1 9 When one policy (WorksheetImprovements to................. 7 When one policy (Worksheet B ) .......................... 1 8Reporting: B ) .......................... 1 8Health coverage tax credit...... 2 8 Reimbursements, excess may be XImpairment-related work taxable (Figure 1)............ 1 7X-rays ............................ 1 4expenses..................... 2 4Tax help.......................... 2 9Medical and dental Taxpayer Advocate.............. 2 9 ■expenses..................... 2 0Teeth:Medical deduction (See Form Artificial.......................... 51040, Schedule A) Dental treatment................. 7
Publication 502 (2006) Page 33